The Project Gutenberg eBook of The String of Pearls; Or, The Barber of Fleet Street. A Domestic Romance.
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The String of Pearls; Or, The Barber of Fleet Street. A Domestic Romance.

Author: James Malcolm Rymer
        Thomas Peckett Prest


        
Release date: June 28, 2019 [eBook #59828]
                Most recently updated: January 11, 2023

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/59828

Credits: deaurider, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
        (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
        Internet Archive (https://archive.org)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRING OF PEARLS; OR, THE BARBER OF FLEET STREET. A DOMESTIC ROMANCE. ***

Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the 88 original illustrations.
      See 59828-h.htm or 59828-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/59828/pg59828-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/59828/59828-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/stringofpearlsor00ryme


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





THE STRING OF PEARLS;

Or,
The Barber of Fleet Street.

A Domestic Romance.






London:
Published by E. Lloyd, Salisbury Square, Fleet Street.

MDCCCL


[Illustration: From A Rare Old Painting By Reading, In The British
Museum.]




                                PREFACE.


THE ROMANCE OF THE STRING OF PEARLS having excited in the Literary world
an almost unprecedented interest, it behoves the author to say a few
words to his readers upon the completion of his labours.

In answer to the many inquiries that have been, from time to time, made
regarding the fact of whether there ever was such a person as Sweeney
Todd in existence, we can unhesitatingly say, that there certainly was
such a man; and the record of his crimes is still to be found in the
chronicles of criminality of this country.

The house in Fleet Street, which was the scene of Todd's crimes, is no
more. A fire, which destroyed some half-dozen buildings on that side of
the way, involved Todd's in destruction; but the secret passage,
although, no doubt, partially blocked up with the re-building of St.
Dunstan's Church, connecting the vaults of that edifice with the cellars
of what was Todd's house in Fleet Street, still remains.

From the great patronage which this work has received from the reading
public, the author has to express his deep and earnest thanks; and he
begs to state, that if anything more than another could stimulate him to
renewed exertion to please his numerous patrons, it is their kind and
liberal appreciation of his past labours.

_London_, 1850.




                         The String of Pearls;

                         or, The Sailor's Gift.

                    A Romance of Peculiar Interest.


"And now, Tobias, listen to me, and treasure up every word I say." "Yes,
sir." "I'll cut your throat from ear to ear, if you repeat one word of
what passes in this shop, or dare to make any supposition, or draw any
conclusion from anything you may see, or hear, or fancy you see or
hear."

[Illustration: The Barber's lesson To His Apprentice.]




                               CHAPTER I.
                THE STRANGE CUSTOMER AT SWEENEY TODD'S.


Before Fleet-street had reached its present importance, and when George
the Third was young, and the two figures who used to strike the chimes
at old St. Dunstan's church were in all their glory--being a great
impediment to errand-boys on their progress, and a matter of gaping
curiosity to country people--there stood close to the sacred edifice a
small barber's shop, which was kept by a man of the name of Sweeney
Todd.

How it was that he came by the name of Sweeney, as a Christian
appellation, we are at a loss to conceive, but such was his name, as
might be seen in extremely corpulent yellow letters over his shop
window, by any who chose there to look for it.

Barbers by that time in Fleet-street had not become fashionable, and no
more dreamt of calling themselves artists than of taking the tower by
storm; moreover they were not, as they are now, constantly slaughtering
fine fat bears, and yet, somehow people had hair on their heads just the
same as they have at present, without the aid of that unctuous
auxiliary. Moreover, Sweeney Todd, in common with those really primitive
sort of times, did not think it at all necessary to have any waxen
effigies of humanity in his window. There was no languishing young lady
looking over the left shoulder in order that a profusion of auburn
tresses might repose upon her lily neck, and great conquerors and great
statesmen were not then, as they are now, held up to public ridicule
with dabs of rouge upon their cheeks, a quantity of gunpowder scattered
in for beard, and some bristles sticking on end for eyebrows.

No. Sweeney Todd was a barber of the old school, and he never thought of
glorifying himself on account of any extraneous circumstance. If he had
lived in Henry the Eighth's palace, it would be all the same as Henry
the Eighth's dog-kennel, and he would scarcely have believed human
nature to be so green as to pay an extra sixpence to be shaven and shorn
in any particular locality.

A long pole painted white, with a red stripe curling spirally round it,
projected into the street from his doorway, and on one of the pains of
glass in his window, was presented the following couplet:--

    "Easy shaving for a penny,
    As good as you will find any."

We do not put these lines forth as a specimen of the poetry of the age;
they may have been the production of some young Templar; but if they
were a little wanting in poetic fire, that was amply made up by the
clear and precise manner in which they set forth what they intended.

The barber himself, was a long, low-jointed, ill-put-together sort of
fellow, with an immense mouth, and such huge hands and feet, that he
was, in his way, quite a natural curiosity; and, what was more
wonderful, considering his trade, there never was seen such a head of
hair as Sweeney Todd's. We know not what to compare it to; probably it
came nearest to what one might suppose to be the appearance of a
thick-set hedge, in which a quantity of small wire had got entangled. In
truth, it was a most terrific head of hair; and as Sweeney Todd kept all
his combs in it--some people said his scissors likewise--when he put his
head out of the shop-door to see what sort of weather it was, he might
have been mistaken for an Indian warrior with a very remarkable
head-dress.

He had a short disagreeable kind of unmirthful laugh, which came in at
all sorts of odd times when nobody else saw anything to laugh at at all,
and which sometimes made people start again, especially when they were
being shaved, and Sweeney Todd would stop short in that operation to
indulge in one of those cachinatory effusions. It was evident that the
remembrance of some very strange and out-of-the-way joke must
occasionally flit across him, and then he gave his hyena-like laugh, but
it was so short, so sudden, striking upon the ear for a moment, and then
gone, that people have been known to look up to the ceiling, and on the
floor, and all round them, to know from whence it had come, scarcely
supposing it possible that it proceeded from mortal lips.

Mr. Todd squinted a little, to add to his charms; and so we think that
by this time the reader may, in his mind's eye, see the individual whom
we wish to present to him. Some thought him a careless enough, harmless
fellow, with not much sense in him, and at times they almost considered
he was a little cracked; but there were others who shook their heads
when they spoke of him; and while they could say nothing to his
prejudice, except that they certainly considered he was odd, yet, when
they came to consider what a great crime and misdemeanour it really is
in this world, to be odd, we shall not be surprised at the ill-odour in
which Sweeney Todd was held.

But for all that he did a most thriving business, and considered by his
neighbours to be a very well-to-do sort of man, and decidedly, in city
phraseology, warm.

It was so handy for the young students in the Temple to pop over to
Sweeney Todd's to get their chins new rasped; so that from morning to
night he drove a good business, and was evidently a thriving man.

There was only one thing that seemed in any way to detract from the
great prudence of Sweeney Todd's character, and that was that he rented
a large house, of which he occupied nothing but the shop and parlour,
leaving the upper part entirely useless, and obstinately refusing to let
it on any terms whatever.

Such was the state of things, A.D. 1785, as regarded Sweeney Todd.

The day is drawing to a close, and a small drizzling kind of rain is
falling, so that there are not many passengers in the streets, and
Sweeney Todd is sitting in his shop looking keenly in the face of a boy,
who stands in an attitude of trembling subjection before him.

"You will remember," said Sweeney Todd, and he gave his countenance a
most horrible twist as he spoke, "you will remember Tobias Ragg, that
you are now my apprentice, that you have of me had board, washing, and
lodging, with the exception that you don't sleep here, that you take
your meals at home, and that your mother, Mrs. Ragg, does your washing,
which she may very well do, being a laundress in the Temple, and making
no end of money; as for lodging, you lodge here, you know, very
comfortably in the shop all day. Now, are you not a happy dog?"

"Yes, sir," said the boy timidly.

"You will acquire a first-rate profession, quite as good as the law,
which your mother tells me she would have put you to, only that a little
weakness of the head-piece unqualified you. And now, Tobias, listen to
me, and treasure up every word I say."

"Yes, sir."

"I'll cut your throat from ear to ear, if you repeat one word of what
passes in this shop, or dare to make any supposition, or draw any
conclusion from anything you may see, or hear, or fancy you see or hear.
Now you understand me,--I'll cut your throat from ear to ear,--do you
understand me?"

"Yes, sir, I won't say nothing. I wish, sir, as I may be made into veal
pies at Lovett's in Bell-yard if I as much as says a word."

Sweeney Todd rose from his seat; and opening his huge mouth, he looked
at the boy for a minute or two in silence, as if he fully intended
swallowing him, but had not quite made up his mind where to begin.

"Very good," at length he said, "I am satisfied, I am quite satisfied;
and mark me--the shop, and the shop only, is your place."

"Yes, sir."

"And if any customer gives you a penny, you can keep it, so that if you
get enough of them you will become a rich man; only I will take care of
them for you, and when I think you want them I will let you have them.
Run out and see what's o'clock by St Dunstan's."

There was a small crowd collected opposite the church, for the figures
were about to strike three-quarters past six; and among that crowd was
one man who gazed with as much curiosity as anybody at the exhibition.

"Now for it!" he said, "they are going to begin; well, that is
ingenious. Look at the fellow lifting up his club, and down it comes
bang upon the old bell."

The three-quarters were struck by the figures; and then the people who
had loitered to see it done, many of whom had day by day looked at the
same exhibition for years past, walked away, with the exception of the
man who seemed so deeply interested.

He remained, and crouching at his feet was a noble-looking dog, who
looked likewise up at the figures; and who, observing his master's
attention to be closely fixed upon them, endeavoured to show as great an
appearance of interest as he possibly could.

"What do you think of that, Hector?" said the man.

The dog gave a short low whine, and then his master proceeded,--

"There is a barber's shop opposite, so before I go any farther, as I
have got to see the ladies, although it's on a very melancholy errand,
for I have got to tell them that poor Mark Ingestrie is no more, and
Heaven knows what poor Johanna will say--I think I should know her by
his description of her, poor fellow! It grieves me to think how he used
to talk about her in the long night-watches, when all was still, and not
a breath of air touched a curl upon his cheek. I could almost think I
saw her sometimes, as he used to tell me of her soft beaming eyes, her
little gentle pouting lips, and the dimples that played about her mouth.
Well, well, it's of no use grieving; he is dead and gone, poor fellow,
and the salt water washes over as brave a heart as ever beat. His
sweetheart, Johanna, though, shall have the string of pearls for all
that; and if she cannot be Mark Ingestrie's wife in this world, she
shall be rich and happy, poor young thing, while she stays in it, that
is to say as happy as she can be; and she must just look forward to
meeting him aloft, where there are no squalls or tempests.--And so I'll
go and get shaved at once."

He crossed the road towards Sweeney Todd's shop, and, stepping down the
low doorway, he stood face to face with the odd-looking barber.

The dog gave a low growl and sniffed the air.

"Why Hector," said his master, "what's the matter? Down, sir, down!"

"I have a mortal fear of dogs," said Sweeney Todd. "Would you mind him,
sir, sitting outside the door and waiting for you, if it's all the same?
Only look at him, he is going to fly at me!"

"Then you are the first person he ever touched without provocation,"
said the man; "but I suppose he don't like your looks, and I must
confess I aint much surprised at that. I have seen a few rum-looking
guys in my time, but hang me if ever I saw such a figure-head as yours.
What the devil noise was that?"

"It was only me," said Sweeney Todd; "I laughed."

"Laughed! do you call that a laugh? I suppose you caught it of somebody
who died of it. If that's your way of laughing, I beg you won't do it
any more."

"Stop the dog! stop the dog! I can't have dogs running into my back
parlour."

"Here, Hector, here!" cried his master; "get out!"

Most unwillingly the dog left the shop, and crouched down close to the
outer door, which the barber took care to close, muttering something
about a draught of air coming in, and then, turning to the apprentice
boy, who was screwed up in a corner, he said,--

"Tobias, my lad, go to Leadenhall-street, and bring a small bag of the
thick biscuits from Mr. Peterson's; say they are for me. Now, sir, I
suppose you want to be shaved, and it is well you have come here, for
there aint a shaving-shop, although I say it, in the city of London that
ever thinks of polishing anybody off as I do."

"I tell you what it is, master barber: if you come that laugh again, I
will get up and go. I don't like it, and there is an end of it."

"Very good," said Sweeney Todd, as he mixed up a lather. "Who are you?
where did you come from? and where are you going?"

"That's cool, at all events. Damn it! what do you mean by putting the
brush in my mouth? Now, don't laugh; and since you are so fond of asking
questions, just answer me one."

"Oh, yes, of course: what is it, sir?"

"Do you know a Mr. Oakley, who lives somewhere in London, and is a
spectacle-maker?"

"Yes, to be sure I do--John Oakley, the spectacle-maker, in Fore-street,
and he has got a daughter named Johanna, that the young bloods call the
Flower of Fore-street."

"Ah, poor thing! do they? Now, confound you! what are you laughing at
now? What do you mean by it?"

"Didn't you say, 'Ah, poor thing?' Just turn your head a little a one
side; that will do. You have been to sea, sir?"

"Yes, I have, and have only now lately come up the river from an Indian
voyage."

"Indeed! where can my strop be? I had it this minute; I must have laid
it down somewhere. What an odd thing that I can't see it! It's very
extraordinary; what can have become of it? Oh, I recollect, I took it
into the parlour. Sit still, sir, I shall not be gone a moment; sit
still, sir, if you please. By the by, you can amuse yourself with the
_Courier_, sir, for a moment."

Sweeney Todd walked into the back parlour and closed the door.

There was a strange sound suddenly, compounded of a rushing noise and
then a heavy blow, immediately after which Sweeney Todd emerged from his
parlour, and folding his arms, he looked upon _the vacant chair_ where
his customer had been seated, but the customer was _gone_, leaving not
the slightest trace of his presence behind except his hat, and that
Sweeney Todd immediately seized and thrust into a cupboard that was at
one corner of the shop.

"What's that?" he said, "what's that? I thought I heard a noise."

"If you please, sir, I have forgot the money, and have run all the way
back from St. Paul's churchyard."

In two strides Todd reached him, and clutching him by the arm he dragged
him into the farther corner of the shop, and then he stood opposite to
him, glaring him full in the face with such a demoniac expression that
the boy was frightfully terrified.

"Speak!" cried Todd, "speak! and speak the truth, or your last hour has
come. How long were you peeping through the door before you came in?"

"Peeping, sir?"

"Yes, peeping; don't repeat my words, but answer me at once, you will
find it better for you in the end."

"I wasn't peeping, sir, at all."

Sweeney Todd drew a long breath as he then said, in a strange, shrieking
sort of manner, which he intended, no doubt, should be jocose,--

"Well, well, very well; if you did peep, what then? it's no matter; I
only wanted to know, that's all; it was quite a joke, wasn't it--quite
funny, though rather odd, eh? Why don't you laugh, you dog? Come, now,
there is no harm done. Tell me what you thought about it at once, and we
will be merry over it--very merry."

"I don't know what you mean, sir," said the boy, who was quite as much
alarmed at Mr. Todd's mirth as he was at his anger. "I don't know what
you mean, sir; I only just come back because I hadn't any money to pay
for the biscuits at Peterson's."

"I mean nothing at all," said Todd, suddenly turning upon his heel;
"what's that scratching at the door?"

Tobias opened the shop-door, and there stood the dog, who looked
wistfully round the place, and then gave a howl which seriously alarmed
the barber.

"It's the gentleman's dog, sir," said Tobias, "its the gentleman's dog,
sir, that was looking at old St. Dunstan's clock, and came in here to be
shaved. It's funny, aint it, sir, that the dog didn't go away with his
master?"

"Why don't you laugh if it's funny? Turn out the dog, Tobias; we'll have
no dogs here; I hate the sight of them; turn him out--turn him out."

"I would, sir, in a minute; but I'm afraid he wouldn't let me, somehow.
Only look, sir--look; see what he is at now! did you ever see such a
violent fellow, sir? why he will have down the cupboard door."

"Stop him--stop him! the devil is in the animal! stop him I say!"

The dog was certainly getting the door open, when Sweeney Todd rushed
forward to stop him! but that he was soon admonished of the danger of
doing, for the dog gave him a grip of the leg, which made him give such
a howl, that he precipitately retreated, and left the animal to do its
pleasure. This consisted in forcing open the cupboard door, and seizing
upon the hat which Sweeney Todd had thrust therein, and dashing out of
the shop with it in triumph.

"The devil's in the beast," muttered Todd, "he's off! Tobias, you said
you saw the man who owned that fiend of a cur looking at St. Dunstan's
church."

"Yes, sir, I did see him there. If you recollect, you sent me to see the
time, and the figures were just going to strike three quarters past six;
and before I came away, I heard him say that Mark Ingestrie was dead,
and Johanna should have the string of pearls. Then I came in, and then,
if you recollect, sir, he came in, and the odd thing, you know, to me,
sir, is that he didn't take his dog with him, because you know, sir--"

"Because what?" shouted Todd.

"Because people generally do take their dogs with them, you know, sir;
and may I be made into one of Lovett's pies, if I don't--"

"Hush, some one comes; it's old Mr. Grant, from the Temple. How do you
do, Mr. Grant? glad to see you looking so well, sir. It does one's heart
good to see a gentlemen of your years looking so fresh and hearty. Sit
down, sir; a little this way, if you please. Shaved, I suppose?"

"Yes, Todd, yes. Any news?"

"No, sir, nothing stirring. Everything very quiet, sir, except the high
wind. They say it blew the king's hat off yesterday, sir, and he
borrowed Lord North's. Trade is dull too, sir. I suppose people won't
come out to be cleaned and dressed in a mizling rain. We haven't had
anybody in the shop for an hour and a half."

"Lor' sir," said Tobias, "you forget the sea-faring gentleman with the
dog, you know, sir."

"Ah! so I do," said Todd. "He went away, and I saw him get into some
disturbance, I think, just at the corner of the market."

"I wonder I didn't meet him, sir," said Tobias, "for I came that way;
and then it's so very odd leaving his dog behind him."

"Yes, very," said Todd. "Will you excuse me a moment, Mr. Grant? Tobias,
my lad, I just want you to lend me a hand in the parlour."

Tobias followed Todd very unsuspectingly into the parlour; but when they
got there and the door was closed, the barber sprang upon him like an
enraged tiger, and, grappling him by the throat, he gave his head such a
succession of knocks against the wainscot, that Mr. Grant must have
thought that some carpenter was at work. Then he tore a handful of his
hair out, after which he twisted him round, and dealt him such a kick,
that he was flung sprawling into a corner of the room, and then, without
a word, the barber walked out again to his customer, and bolted his
parlour door on the outside, leaving Tobias to digest the usage he had
received at his leisure, and in the best way he could.

When he came back to Mr. Grant, he apologised for keeping him waiting,
by saying,--

"It became necessary, sir, to teach my new apprentice a little bit of
his business. I have left him studying it now. There is nothing like
teaching young folks at once."

"Ah!" said Mr. Grant, with a sigh, "I know what it is to let young folks
grow wild; for although I have neither chick nor child of my own, I had
a sister's son to look to--a handsome, wild, harum-scarum sort of
fellow, as like me as one pea is like another. I tried to make a lawyer
of him, but it wouldn't do, and it's now more than two years ago he left
me altogether; and yet there were some good traits about Mark."

"Mark, sir! Did you say Mark?"

"Yes, that was his name, Mark Ingestrie. God knows what's become of
him."

"Oh!" said Sweeney Todd; he went on lathering the chin of Mr. Grant.




                               CHAPTER II
                    THE SPECTACLE-MAKER'S DAUGHTER.


"Johanna, Johanna, my dear, do you know what time it is? Johanna, I say,
my dear, are you going to get up? Here's your mother has trotted out to
Parson Lupin's, and you know I have got to go to Alderman Judd's house,
in Cripplegate, the first thing, and I haven't had a morsel of breakfast
yet. Johanna, my dear, do you hear me?"

These observations were made by Mr. Oakley, the spectacle-maker, at the
door of his daughter Johanna's chamber, on the morning after the events
we have just recorded at Sweeney Todd's; and presently, a soft sweet
voice answered him, saying,--

"I am coming, father, I am coming: in a moment, father, I shall be
down."

"Don't hurry yourself, my darling, I can wait."

The little old spectacle-maker descended the staircase again, and sat
down in the parlour at the back of the shop, where, in a few moments, he
was joined by Johanna, his only and his much-loved child.

She was indeed a creature of the rarest grace and beauty. Her age was
eighteen, but she looked rather younger, and upon her face she had that
sweetness and intelligence of expression which almost bids defiance to
the march of time. Her hair was of a glossy blackness, and what was rare
in conjunction with such a feature, her eyes were of a deep and heavenly
blue. There was nothing of the commanding or of the severe style of
beauty about her, but the expression of her face was all grace and
sweetness. It was one of those countenances which one could look at for
a long summer's day, as upon the pages of some deeply interesting
volume, which furnished the most abundant food for pleasant and
delightful reflection.

There was a touch of sadness about her voice, which, perhaps, only
tended to make it the more musical, although mournfully so, and which
seemed to indicate that at the bottom of her heart there lay some grief
which had not yet been spoken--some cherished aspiration of her pure
soul, which looked hopeless as regards completion--some remembrance of a
former joy, which had been turned to bitterness and grief; it was the
cloud in the sunny sky--the shadow through which there still gleamed
bright and beautiful sunshine, but which still proclaimed its presence.

"I have kept you waiting, father," she said, as she flung her arms about
the old man's neck, "I have kept you waiting."

"Never mind, my dear, never mind. Your mother is so taken up with Mr.
Lupin, that you know, this being Wednesday morning, she is off to his
prayer meeting, and so I have had no breakfast; and really I think I
must discharge Sam."

"Indeed, father! what has he done?"

"Nothing at all, and that's the very reason. I had to take down the
shutters myself this morning, and what do you think for? He had the
coolness to tell me he couldn't take down the shutters this morning, or
sweep out the shop, because his aunt had the toothache."

"A poor excuse, father," said Johanna, as she bustled about and got the
breakfast ready; "a very poor excuse."

"Poor indeed! but his month is up to-day, and I must get rid of him. But
I suppose I shall have no end of bother with your mother, because his
aunt belongs to Mr. Lupin's congregation; but as sure as this is the
20th day of August--"

"It is the 20th day of August," said Johanna, as she sunk into a chair
and burst into tears. "It is, it is! I thought I could have controlled
this, but I cannot, father, I cannot. It was that which made me late. I
knew mother was out; I knew that I ought to be down attending upon you,
and I was praying to Heaven for strength to do so because this was the
20th of August."

Johanna spoke these words incoherently, and amidst sobs, and when she
had finished them, she leant her sweet face upon her small hands, and
wept like a child.

The astonishment, not unmingled with positive dismay, of the old
spectacle-maker, was vividly depicted on his countenance, and for some
minutes he sat perfectly aghast, with his hands resting on his knees,
and looking in the face of his beautiful child--that is to say, as much
as he could see of it between those little taper fingers that were
spread upon it--as if he were newly awakened from some dream.

"Good God, Johanna!" he said at length, "what is this? My dear child,
what has happened? Tell me, my dear, unless you wish to kill me with
grief."

"You shall know, father," she said. "I did not think to say a word about
it, but considered I had strength enough of mind to keep my sorrows in
my own breast, but the effort has been too much for me, and I have been
compelled to yield. If you had not looked so kindly on me--if I did not
know that you loved me as you do, I should easily have kept my secret,
but, knowing that much, I cannot."

"My darling," said the old man, "you are right, there; I do love you.
What would the world be to me without you? There was a time, twenty
years ago, when your mother made up much of my happiness, but of late,
what with Mr. Lupin, and psalm-singing, and tea-drinking, I see very
little of her, and what little I do see is not very satisfactory. Tell
me, my darling, what it is that vexes you, and I'll soon put it to
rights. I don't belong to the city trainbands for nothing."

"Father, I know that your affection would do all for me that it is
possible to do, but you cannot recall the dead to life; and if this day
passes over and I see him not, nor hear from him, I know that, instead
of finding a home for me whom he loved, he has in the effort to do so
found a grave for himself. He said he would, he said he would."

Here she wrung her hands, and wept again, and with such a bitterness of
anguish that the old spectacle-maker was at his wit's end, and knew not
what on earth to do or say.

"My dear, my dear," he cried, "who is he? I hope you don't mean--"

"Hush, father, hush! I know the name that is hovering on your lips, but
something seems even now to whisper to me he is no more, and, being so,
speak nothing of him, father, but that which is good."

"You mean Mark Ingestrie."

"I do, and if he had a thousand faults, he at least loved me; he loved
me truly and most sincerely."

"My dear," said the old spectacle-maker, "you know that I wouldn't for
all the world say anything to vex you, nor will I; but tell me what it
is that makes this day more than any other so gloomy to you."

"I will, father; you shall hear. It was on this day two years ago that
we last met; it was in the Temple-garden, and he had just had a stormy
interview with his uncle, Mr. Grant, and you will understand, father,
that Mark Ingestrie was not to blame, because--"

"Well, well, my dear, you needn't say anything more upon that point.
Girls very seldom admit their lovers are to blame, but there are two
ways, you know, Johanna, of telling a story."

"Yes; but, father, why should Mr. Grant seek to force him to the study
of a profession he so much disliked?"

"My dear, one would have thought that if Mark Ingestrie really loved
you, and found that he might make you his wife, and acquire an
honourable subsistence for you and himself--it seems a very wonderful
thing to me that he did not do so. You see, my dear, he should have
liked you well enough to do something else that he did not like."

"Yes, but father, you know it is hard, when disagreements once arise,
for a young ardent spirit to give in entirely; and so from one word,
poor Mark, in his disputes with his uncle, got to another, when perhaps
one touch of kindness or conciliation from Mr. Grant would have made him
quite pliant in his hands."

"Yes, that's the way," said Mr. Oakley; "there is no end of excuses: but
go on, my dear, go on, and tell me exactly how this affair now stands."

"I will, father. It was this day two years ago then that we met, and he
told me that he and his uncle had at last quarrelled irreconcilably, and
that nothing could possibly now patch up the difference between them. We
had a long talk."

"Ah! no doubt of that."

"And at length he told me that he must go and seek his fortune--that
fortune which he hoped to share with me. He said that he had an
opportunity of undertaking a voyage to India, and that if he were
successful he should have sufficient to return with, and commence some
pursuit in London more congenial to his thoughts and habits than the
law."

"Ah, well! what next?"

"He told me that he loved me."

"And you believed him."

"Father, you would have believed him had you heard him speak. His tones
were those of such deep sincerity that no actor who ever charmed an
audience with an unreal existence could have reached them. There are
times and seasons when we know that we are listening to the majestic
voice of truth, and there are tones which sink at once into the heart,
carrying with them a conviction of their sincerity, which neither time
nor circumstance can alter; and such were the tones in which Mark
Ingestrie spoke to me."

"And so you suppose, Johanna, that it is easy for a young man who has
not patience or energy enough to be respectable at home, to go abroad
and make his fortune. Is idleness so much in request in other countries,
that it receives such a rich reward, my dear?"

"You judge him harshly, father; you do not know him."

"Heaven forbid that I should judge any one harshly! and I will freely
admit that you may know more of his real character than I can, who of
course have only seen its surface; but go on, my dear, and tell me all."

"We made an agreement, father, that on that day two years he was to come
to me or send me some news of his whereabouts; if I heard nothing of him
I was to conclude he was no more, and I cannot help so concluding now."

"But the day has not yet passed."

"I know it has not, and yet I rest upon but a slender hope, father. Do
you believe that dreams ever really shadow forth coming events?"

"I cannot say, my child; I am not disposed to yield credence to any
supposed fact because I have dreamt it, but I must confess to having
heard some strange instances where these visions of the night have come
strictly true."

"Heaven knows but this may be one of them! I had a dream last night. I
thought that I was sitting upon the sea-shore, and that all before me
was nothing but a fathomless waste of waters. I heard the roar and the
dash of the waves distinctly, and each moment the wind grew more furious
and fierce, and I saw in the distance a ship--it was battling with the
waves, which at one moment lifted it mountains high, and at another
plunged it far down into such an abyss, that not a vestige of it could
be seen but the topmost spars of the tall mast. And still the storm
increased each moment in its fury, and ever and anon there came a
strange sullen sound across the waters, and I saw a flash of fire, and
knew that those in the ill-fated vessel were thus endeavouring to
attract attention and some friendly aid. Father, from the first to the
last I knew that Mark Ingestrie was there--my heart told me so: I was
certain he was there, and I was helpless--utterly helpless, utterly and
entirely unable to lend the slightest aid. I could only gaze upon what
was going forward as a silent and terrified spectator of the scene. And
at last I heard a cry come over the deep--a strange, loud, wailing
cry--which proclaimed to me the fate of the vessel. I saw its mass
shiver for a moment in the blackened air, and then all was still for a
few seconds, until there arose a strange, wild shriek, that I knew was
the despairing cry of those who sank, never to rise again, in that
vessel. Oh! that was a frightful sound--it was a sound to linger on the
ears, and haunt the memory of sleep--it was a sound never to be
forgotten when once heard, but such as might again and again be
remembered with horror and affright."

"And all this was in your dream?"

"It was, father, it was."

"And you were helpless?"

"I was--utterly and entirely helpless."

"It was very sad."

"It was, as you shall hear. The ship went down, and that cry that I had
heard was the last despairing one given by those who clung to the wreck
with scarce a hope, and yet because it was their only refuge, for where
else had they to look for the smallest ray of consolation? where else,
save in the surging waters, were they to turn for safety? Nowhere! all
was lost! all was despair! I tried to scream--I tried to cry aloud to
Heaven to have mercy upon those brave and gallant souls who had trusted
their dearest possession--life itself--to the mercy of the deep; and
while I so tried to render so inefficient succour, I saw a small speck
in the sea, and my straining eyes perceived that it was a man floating
and clinging to a piece of the wreck, and I knew it was Mark Ingestrie."

"But, my dear, surely you are not annoyed at a dream?"

"It saddened me. I stretched out my arms to save him--I heard him
pronounce my name, and call upon me for help. 'Twas all in vain; he
battled with the waves as long as human nature could battle with them.
He could do no more, and I saw him disappear before my anxious eyes."

"Don't say you saw him, my dear, say you fancy you saw him."

"It was such a fancy as I shall not lose the remembrance of for many a
day."

"Well, well, after all, my dear, it's only a dream; and it seems to me,
without at all adverting to anything that should give you pain as
regards Mark Ingestrie, that you made a very foolish bargain; for only
consider how many difficulties might arise in the way of his keeping
faith with you. You know I have your happiness so much at heart that, if
Mark had been a worthy man and an industrious one, I should not have
opposed myself to your union; but, believe me, my dear Johanna, that a
young man with great facilities for spending money, and none whatever
for earning any, is just about the worst husband you could choose, and
such a man was Mark Ingestrie. But come, we will say nothing of this to
your mother; let the secret, if we may call it such, rest with me; and
if you can inform me in what capacity and in what vessel he left
England, I will not carry my prejudice so far against him as to hesitate
about making what inquiry I can concerning his fate."

"I know nothing more, father; we parted, and never met again."

"Well, well! dry your eyes, Johanna, and, as I go to Alderman Judd's,
I'll think over the matter, which, after all, may not be so bad as you
think. The lad is a good-enough looking lad, and has, I believe, a good
ability, if he would put it to some useful purpose; but if he goes
scampering about the world in an unsettled manner, you are well rid of
him, and as for his being dead, you must not conclude that by any means
for somehow or another, like a bad penny, these fellows always come
back."

There was more consolation in the kindly tone of the spectacle-maker
than in the words he used; but, upon the whole, Johanna was well enough
pleased that she had communicated the secret to her father, for now, at
all events, she had some one to whom she could mention the name of Mark
Ingestrie, without the necessity of concealing the sentiment with which
she did so; and when her father had gone, she felt that, by the mere
relation of it to him, some of the terrors of her dream had vanished.

She sat for some time in a pleasing reverie, till she was interrupted by
Sam, the shop-boy, who came into the parlour and said,--

"Please, Miss Johanna, suppose I was to go down to the docks and try and
find out for you Mr. Mark Ingestrie. I say, suppose I was to do that. I
heard it all, and if I do find him I'll soon settle him."

"What do you mean?"

"I means that I won't stand it; didn't I tell you, more than three weeks
ago, as you was the object of my infections? Didn't I tell you that when
aunt died, I should come in for the soap and candle business, and make
you my missus?"

The only reply which Johanna gave to this was to rise and leave the
room, for her heart was too full of grief and sad speculation to enable
her to do now as she had often been in the habit of doing--viz., laugh
at Sam's protestations of affection, so he was left to chew the cud of
sweet and bitter fancy by himself.

"A thousand d----s!" said he, when he entered the shop: "I always
suspected there was some other fellow, and now I know it I am ready to
gnaw my head off that ever I consented to come here. Confound him! I
hope he is at the bottom of the sea, and eat up by this time. Oh! I
should like to smash everybody. If I had my way now I'd just walk into
society at large, as they calls it, and let it know what one, two,
three, slap in the eye, is--and down it would go."

Mr. Sam, in his rage, did upset a case of spectacles, which went down
with a tremendous crash, and which, however good imitation of the manner
in which society at large was to be knocked down, was not likely to be
at all pleasing to Mr. Oakley.

"I have done it now," he said; "but never mind; I'll try the old dodge
whenever I break anything; that is, I'll place it in old Oakley's way,
and swear he did it. I never knew such an old goose; you may persuade
him into anything; the idea, now, of his pulling down all the shutters
this morning because I told him my aunt had the tooth-ache; that was a
go, to be sure. But I'll be revenged of that fellow who has took away, I
consider, Johanna from me; I'll let him know what a blighted heart is
capable of. He won't live long enough to want a pair spectacles, I'll be
bound, or else my name ain't Sam Bolt."




                              CHAPTER III.
                             A MAN IS LOST.


The earliest dawn of morning was glistening upon the masts, the cordage,
and the sails of a fleet of vessels lying below Sheerness.

The crews were rousing themselves from their night's repose, and to make
their appearance on the decks of the vessels, from which the night-watch
had just been relieved.

A man-of-war, which had been the convoy of the fleet of merchantmen
through the channel, fired a gun as the first glimpse of the morning sun
fell upon her tapering masts. Then from a battery in the neighbourhood
came another booming report, and that was answered by another farther
off, and then another, until the whole chain of batteries that girded
the coast, for it was a time of war, had proclaimed the dawn of another
day.

The effect was very fine, in the stillness of the early morn, of this
succession of reports; and as they died away in the distance like mimic
thunder, some order was given on board the man-of-war, and, in a moment,
the masts and cordage seemed perfectly alive with human beings clinging
to them in various directions. Then, as if by magic, or as if the ship
had been a living thing itself, and had possessed wings, which at the
mere instigation of a wish, could be spread far and wide, there
fluttered out such sheets of canvas as was wonderful to see; and, as
they caught the morning light, and the ship moved from the slight breeze
that sprang up from the shore, she looked, indeed, as if she

    "Walked the waters like a thing of life".

The various crews of the merchantmen stood upon the decks of their
respective vessels, gazing after the ship-of-war, as she proceeded upon
another mission similar to the one she had just performed in protecting
the commerce of the country.

As she passed one vessel, which had been, in point of fact, actually
rescued from the enemy, the crew, who had been saved from a foreign
prison, cheered lustily.

There wanted but such an impulse as this, and then every merchant-vessel
that the man-of-war passed took up the gladsome shout, and the crew of
the huge vessel were not slow in their answer, for three deafening
cheers--such as had frequently struck terror into the hearts of
England's enemies--awakened many an echo from the shore.

It was a proud and a delightful sight--such a sight as none but an
Englishman can thoroughly enjoy--to see that vessel so proudly stemming
the waste of waters. We say none but an Englishman can enjoy it, because
no other nation has ever attempted to achieve a great maritime existence
without being most signally defeated, and leaving us still, as we shall
ever be, masters of the seas.

These proceedings were amply sufficient to arouse the crews of all the
vessels, and over the taffrail of one in particular, a large-sized
merchantman, which had been trading in the Indian seas, two men were
leaning. One of them was the captain of the vessel, and the other a
passenger, who intended leaving that morning. They were engaged in
earnest conversation, and the captain, as he shaded his eyes with his
hand, and looked along the surface of the river, said, in reply to some
observation from his companion,--

"I'll order my boat the moment Lieutenant Thornhill comes on board; I
call him Lieutenant, although I have no right to do so, because he has
held that rank in the king's service, but when quite a young man was
cashiered for fighting a duel with his superior officer."

"The service has lost a good officer," said the other.

"It has, indeed, a braver man never stepped, nor a better officer; but
you see they have certain rules in the service, and everything is
sacrificed to maintain them. I can't think what keeps him; he went last
night and said he would pull up to the Temple stairs, because he wanted
to call upon somebody by the water-side, and after that he was going to
the city to transact some business of his own, and that would have
brought him nearer here, you see; and there are plenty of things coming
down the river."

"He's coming," cried the other; "don't be impatient; you will see him in
a few minutes."

"What makes you think that?"

"Because I see his dog--there, don't you see, swimming in the water, and
coming towards the ship."

"I cannot imagine--I can see the dog, certainly; but I can't see
Thornhill, nor is there any boat at hand. I know not what to make of it.
Do you know my mind misgives me that something has happened amiss? The
dog seem exhausted. Lend a hand there to Mr. Thornhill's dog, some of
you. Why, it's a hat he has in his mouth."

The dog made towards the vessel; but without the assistance of the
seamen--with the whole of whom he was an immense favourite--he certainly
could not have boarded the vessel; and when he reached the deck, he sank
down upon it in a state of complete exhaustion, with the hat still in
his grasp.

As the animal lay, panting, upon the deck, the sailors looked at each
other in amazement, and there was but one opinion among them all now,
and that was that something very serious had unquestionably happened to
Mr. Thornhill.

"I dread," said the captain, "an explanation of this occurrence. What on
earth can it mean? That's Thornhill's hat, and here is Hector. Give the
dog some meat and drink directly--he seems thoroughly exhausted."

The dog ate sparingly of some food that was put before him; and then,
seizing the hat again in his mouth, he stood by the side of the ship and
howled piteously; then he put down the hat for a moment, and, walking up
to the captain, he pulled him by the skirt of the coat.

"You understand him," said the captain to the passenger; "something has
happened to Thornhill, I'll be bound; and you see the object of the dog
is to get me to follow him to see what it's about."

"Think you so? It is a warning, if it be such at all, that I should not
be inclined to neglect; and if you will follow the dog, I will accompany
you; there may be more in it than we think of, and we ought not to allow
Mr. Thornhill to be in want of any assistance that we can render him,
when we consider what great assistance he has been to us. Look how
anxious the poor beast is."

The captain ordered a boat to be launched at once, and manned by four
stout rowers. He then sprang into it, followed by the passenger, who was
a Colonel Jeffery, of the Indian army, and the dog immediately followed
them, testifying by his manner great pleasure at the expedition they
were undertaking, and carrying the hat with him, which he evidently
showed an immense disinclination to part with.

The captain had ordered the boat to proceed up the river towards the
Temple stairs, where Hector's master had expressed his intention of
proceeding, and, when the faithful animal saw the direction in which
they were going, he lay down in the bottom of the boat perfectly
satisfied, and gave himself up to that repose, of which he was evidently
so much in need.

It cannot be said that Colonel Jeffery suspected that anything of a very
serious nature had happened; indeed, their principal anticipation, when
they came to talk it over, consisted in the probability that Thornhill
had, with an impetuosity of character they knew very well he possessed,
interfered to redress what he considered some street grievance, and had
got himself into the custody of the civil power in consequence.

"Of course," said the captain, "Master Hector would view that as a very
serious affair, and finding himself denied access to his master, you see
he has come off to us, which was certainly the most prudent thing he
could do, and I should not be at all surprised if he takes us to the
door of some watch-house, where we shall find our friend snug enough."

The tide was running up; and that Thornhill had not saved the turn of
it, by dropping down earlier to the vessel, was one of the things that
surprised the captain. However, they got up quickly, and as at that hour
there was not much on the river to impede their progress, and as at that
time the Thames was not a thoroughfare for little stinking steam-boats,
they soon reached the ancient Temple stairs.

The dog, who had until then seemed to be asleep, suddenly sprung up, and
seizing the hat again in his mouth, rushed again on shore, and was
closely followed by the captain and colonel.

He led them through the temple with great rapidity, pursuing with
admirable tact the precise path that his master had taken towards the
entrance to the Temple, in Fleet-street, opposite Chancery-lane. Darting
across the road then, he stopped with a low growl at the shop of Sweeney
Todd--a proceeding which very much surprised those who followed him, and
caused them to pause to hold a consultation ere they proceeded further.
While this was proceeding, Todd suddenly opened the door, and aimed a
blow at the dog with an iron bar, but the latter dexterously avoided it,
and, but that the door was suddenly closed again, he would have made
Sweeney Todd regret such an interference.

"We must inquire into this," said the captain; "there seems to be mutual
ill-will between that man and the dog."

They both tried to enter the barber's shop, but it was fast on the
inside; and, after repeated knockings, Todd called from within,
saying,--

"I won't open the door while that dog is there. He is mad, or has a
spite against me--I don't know nor care which--it's a fact, that's all I
am aware of."

"I will undertake," said the captain, "that the dog shall do you no
harm; but open the door, for in we must come, and will."

"I will take your promise," said Sweeney Todd; "but mind you keep it, or
I shall protect myself, and take the creature's life; so if you value
it, you had better hold it fast."

The captain pacified Hector as well as he could, and likewise tied one
end of a silk handkerchief round his neck, and held the other firmly in
his grasp, after which Todd, who seemed to have some means from within
of seeing what was going on, opened the door, and admitted his visitors.

"Well, gentlemen, shaved, or cut, or dressed, I am at your service;
which shall I begin with?"

[Illustration: The captain, the colonel, and Sweeney.]

The dog never took his eyes off Todd, but kept up a low growl from the
first moment of his entrance.

"It's rather a remarkable circumstance," said the captain, "but this is
a very sagacious dog, you see, and he belongs to a friend of ours, who
has most unaccountably disappeared."

"Has he really?" said Todd. "Tobias! Tobias!"

"Yes, sir."

"Run to Mr. Phillips's, in Cateaton-street, and get me six-pennyworth of
figs, and don't say that I don't give you the money this time when you
go a message. I think I did before, but you swallowed it; and when you
come back, just please to remember the insight into business I gave you
yesterday."

"Yes," said the boy, with a shudder, for he had a great horror of
Sweeney Todd, as well he might, after the severe discipline he had
received at his hands, and away he went.

"Well, gentlemen," said Todd, "what is it you require of me?"

"We want to know if any one having the appearance of an officer in the
navy came to your house?"

"Yes--a rather good-looking man, weather-beaten, with a bright blue eye,
and rather fair hair."

"Yes, yes! the same."

"Oh! to be sure, he came here, and I shaved him and polished him off."

"What do you mean by polishing him off?"

"Brushing him up a bit, and making him tidy; he said he had got
somewhere to go in the city, and asked me the address of a Mr. Oakley, a
spectacle-maker. I gave it him, and then he went away; but as I was
standing at my door about five minutes afterwards, it seemed to me, as
well as I could see the distance, that he got into some row near the
market."

"Did this dog come with him?"

"A dog came with him, but whether it was that dog or not I don't know."

"And that's all you know of him?"

"You never spoke a truer word in your life," said Sweeney Todd, as he
diligently stropped a razor upon his great horny hand.

This seemed something like a complete fix; and the captain looked at
Colonel Jeffery, and the colonel at the captain, for some moments, in
complete silence. At length the latter said,--

"It's a very extraordinary thing that the dog should come here if he
missed his master somewhere else. I never heard of such a thing."

"Nor I either," said Ford. "It is extraordinary; so extraordinary that
if I had not seen it, I would not have believed. I dare say you will
find him in the next watch-house."

The dog had watched the countenance of all parties during this brief
dialogue, and twice or thrice he had interrupted it by a strange howling
cry.

"I'll tell you what it is," said the barber; "if that beast stays here,
I'll be the death of him. I hate dogs--detest them; and I tell you, as I
told you before, if you value him at all, keep him away from me."

"You say you directed the person you describe to us where to find a
spectacle maker named Oakley. We happen to know that he was going in
search of such a person, and as he had property of value about him, we
will go there and ascertain if he reached his destination."

"It is in Fore-street--a little shop with two windows; you cannot miss
it."

The dog when he saw they were about to leave, grew furious; and it was
with the greatest difficulty they succeeded, by main force, in getting
him out of the shop, and dragging him some short distance with them, but
then he contrived to get free of the handkerchief that held him, and
darting back, he sat down at Sweeney Todd's door, howling most
piteously.

They had no resource but to leave him, intending fully to call as they
came back from Mr. Oakley's; and, as they looked behind them, they saw
that Hector was collecting a crowd round the barber's door, and it was a
singular thing to see a number of persons surrounding the dog, while he
to all appearance, appeared to be making efforts to explain something to
the assemblage. They walked on until they reached the spectacle-maker's,
there they paused; for they all of a sudden recollected that the mission
that Mr. Thornhill had to execute there was of a very delicate nature,
and one by no means to be lightly executed, or even so much as
mentioned, probably, in the hearing of Mr. Oakley himself.

"We must not be so hasty," said the colonel.

"But what am I to do? I sail to-night; at least I have to go round to
Liverpool with my vessel."

"Do not then call at Mr. Oakley's at all at present; but leave me to
ascertain the fact quietly and secretly."

"My anxiety for Thornhill will scarcely permit me to do so; but I
suppose I must, and if you write me a letter to the Royal Oak Hotel, at
Liverpool, it will be sure to reach me, that is to say, unless you find
Mr. Thornhill himself, in which case I need not by any means give you so
much trouble."

"You may depend upon me. My friendship for Mr. Thornhill, and gratitude,
as you know, for the great service he has rendered to us all, will
induce me to do my utmost to discover him; and, but that I know he set
his heart upon performing the message he had to deliver accurately and
well, I should recommend that we at once go into this house of Mr.
Oakley's, only that the fear of compromising the young lady--who is in
the case, and who will have quite enough to bear, poor thing, of her own
grief--restrains me."

After some more conversation of a similar nature, they decided that this
should be the plan adopted. They made an unavailing call at the
watch-house of the district, being informed there that no such person,
nor any one answering the description of Mr. Thornhill had been engaged
in any disturbance, or apprehended by any of the constables; and this
only involved the thing in greater mystery than ever, so they went back
to try and recover the dog, but that was a matter easier to be desired
and determined upon than executed, for threats and persuasions were
alike ineffectual.

Hector would not stir an inch from the barber's door. There he sat with
the hat by his side, a most melancholy and strange-looking spectacle,
and a most efficient guard was he for that hat, and it was evident, that
while he chose to exhibit the formidable row of teeth he did
occasionally, when anybody showed a disposition to touch it, it would
remain sacred. Some people, too, had thrown a few copper coins into the
hat, so that Hector, if his mind had been that way inclined, was making
a very good thing of it; but who shall describe the anger of Sweeney
Todd, when he found that he was so likely to be so beleaguered?

He doubted, if, upon the arrival of the first customer to his shop, the
dog might dart in and take him by storm; but that apprehension went off
at last, when a young gallant came from the Temple to have his hair
dressed, and the dog allowed him to pass in and out unmolested, without
making any attempt to follow him. This was something, at all events; but
whether or not it insured Sweeney Todd's personal safety, when he
himself should come out, was quite another matter.

It was an experiment, however, which he must try. It was quite out of
the question that he should remain a prisoner much longer in his own
place, so, after a time, he thought he might try the experiment, and
that it would be best done when there were plenty of people there,
because if the dog assaulted him, he would have an excuse for any amount
of violence he might think proper to use upon the occasion.

It took some time, however, to screw his courage to the sticking-place;
but at length, muttering deep curses between his clenched teeth, he made
his way to the door, and carried in his hand a long knife, which he
thought a more efficient weapon against the dog's teeth than the iron
bludgeon he had formerly used.

"I hope he will attack me," said Todd, to himself as he thought; but
Tobias, who had come back from the place where they sold the preserved
figs, heard him, and after devoutly in his own mind wishing that the dog
would actually devour Sweeney, said aloud--

"Oh dear, sir; you don't wish that, I'm sure!"

"Who told you what I wished, or what I did not? Remember, Tobias, and
keep your own counsel, or it will be the worse for you, and your mother
too--remember that."

The boy shrunk back. How had Sweeney Todd terrified the boy about his
mother! He must have done so, or Tobias would never have shrunk as he
did.

Then that rascally barber, who we begin to suspect of more crimes than
fall ordinarily to the share of man, went cautiously out of his shop
door: we cannot pretend to account for why it was so, but, as faithful
recorders of facts, we have to state that Hector did not fly at him, but
with a melancholy and subdued expression of countenance he looked up in
the face of Sweeney Todd; then he whined piteously, as if he would have
said, "Give me my master, and I will forgive you all that you have done;
give me back my beloved master, and you shall see that I am neither
revengeful nor ferocious."

This kind of expression was as legibly written in the poor creature's
countenance as if he had actually been endowed with speech, and uttered
the words themselves.

This was what Sweeney Todd certainly did not expect, and, to tell the
truth, it staggered and astonished him a little. He would have been glad
of an excuse to commit some act of violence, but he had now none, and as
he looked in the faces of the people who were around, he felt quite
convinced that it would not be the most prudent thing in the world to
interfere with the dog in any way that savoured of violence.

"Where's the dog's master?" said one.

"Ah, where indeed?" said Todd; "I should not wonder if he had come to
some foul end!"

"But I say, old soap-suds," cried a boy; "the dog says you did it."

There was a general laugh, but the barber was by no means disconcerted,
and he shortly replied.

"Does he? he is wrong then."

Sweeney Todd had no desire to enter into anything like a controversy
with the people, so he turned again and entered his own shop, in a
distant corner of which he sat down, and folding his great gaunt-looking
arms over his chest, he gave himself up to thought, and if we may judge
from the expression of his countenance, those thoughts were of a
pleasant anticipatory character, for now and then he gave such a grim
sort of smile as might well have sat upon the features of some ogre.

And now we will turn to another scene, of a widely different character.




                              CHAPTER IV.
                        THE PIE-SHOP, BELL-YARD.


Hark! twelve o'clock at mid-day is cheerily proclaimed by St. Dunstan's
church, and scarcely have the sounds done echoing throughout the
neighbourhood, and scarce has the clock of Lincoln's-inn done chiming in
with its announcement of the same hour, when Bell-yard, Temple-bar,
becomes a scene of commotion.

What a scampering of feet is there, what a laughing and talking, what a
jostling to be first; and what an immense number of manoeuvres are
resorted to by some of the throng to distance others!

And mostly from Lincoln's-inn do these persons, young and old, but most
certainly a majority of the former, come bustling and striving, although
from the neighbouring legal establishments likewise there came not a
few; the Temple contributes its numbers, and from the more distant
Gray's-inn there came a goodly lot.

Now Bell-yard is almost choked up, and a stranger would wonder what
could be the matter, and most probably stand in some doorway until the
commotion was over.

Is it a fire? is it a fight? or anything else sufficiently alarming and
extraordinary to excite the junior members of the legal profession to
such a species of madness? No, it is none of these, nor is there a fat
cause to be run for, which, in the hands of some clever practitioner,
might become quite a vested interest. No, the enjoyment is purely one of
a physical character, and all the pacing and racing--all this turmoil
and trouble--all this pushing, jostling, laughing, and shouting, is to
see who will get first to Lovett's pie-shop.

Yes, on the left-hand side of Bell-yard, going down from Carey-street,
was at the time we write of, one of the most celebrated shops for the
sale of veal and pork pies that ever London produced. High and low, rich
and poor, resorted to it; its fame had spread far and wide; it was
because the first batch of these pies came up at twelve o'clock that
there was such a rush of the legal profession to obtain them.

Their fame had spread even to great distances, and many persons carried
them to the suburbs of the city as quite a treat to friends and
relations there residing. And well did they deserve their reputation,
those delicious pies! there was about them a flavour never surpassed,
and rarely equalled; the paste was of the most delicate construction,
and impregnated with the aroma of a delicious gravy that defies
description. Then the small portions of meat which they contained were
so tender, and the fat and the lean so artistically mixed up, that to
eat one of Lovett's pies was such a provocative to eat another, that
many persons who came to lunch stayed to dine, wasting more than an
hour, perhaps, of precious time, and endangering--who knows to the
contrary?--the success of some law-suit thereby.

The counter in Lovett's shop was in the shape of a horseshoe, and it was
the custom of the young bloods from the Temple and Lincoln's-inn to set
in a row upon its edge while they partook of the delicious pies, and
chatted gaily about one concern and another.

Many an appointment for the evening was made at Lovett's pie shop, and
many a piece of gossiping scandal was there first circulated. The din of
tongues was prodigious. The ringing laugh of the boy who looked upon the
quarter of an hour he spent at Lovett's as the brightest of the whole
twenty-four, mingled gaily with the more boisterous mirth of his
seniors; and, oh! with what rapidity the pies disappeared.

They were brought up on large trays, each of which contained about a
hundred, and from these trays they were so speedily transferred to the
mouths of Mrs. Lovett's customers that it looked quite like a work of
magic.

And now we have let out some portion of the secret. There was a Mistress
Lovett; but possibly our reader guessed as much, for what but a female
hand, and that female buxom, young, and good-looking, could have
ventured upon the production of those pies. Yes, Mrs. Lovett was all
that; and every enamoured young scion of the law, as he devoured his
pie, pleased himself with the idea that the charming Mrs. Lovett had
made that pie especially for him, and that fate or predestination had
placed it in his hands.

And it was astonishing to see with what impartiality and with what tact
the fair pastry-cook bestowed her smiles upon her admirers, so that none
could say he was neglected, while it was extremely difficult for any one
to say he was preferred.

This was pleasant, but at the same time it was provoking to all except
Mrs. Lovett, in whose favour it got up a kind of excitement that paid
extraordinarily well, because some of the young fellows thought, that he
who consumed the most pies, would be in the most likely way to receive
the greatest number of smiles from the lady.

Acting upon this supposition, some of her more enthusiastic admirers
went on consuming the pies until they were almost ready to burst. But
there were others, again, of a more philosophic turn of mind, who went
for the pies only, and did not care one jot for Mrs. Lovett.

These declared that her smile was cold and uncomfortable--that it was
upon her lips, but had no place in her heart--that it was the set smile
of a ballet-dancer, which is about one of the most unmirthful things in
existence.

Then there were some who went even beyond this, and, while they admitted
the excellence of the pies, and went every day to partake of them, swore
that Mrs. Lovett had quite a sinister aspect, and that they could see
what a merely superficial affair her blandishments were, and that there
was

    "A lurking devil in her eye,"

that, if once roused, would be capable of achieving some serious things,
and might not be so easily quelled again.

By five minutes past twelve Mrs. Lovett's counter was full, and the
savoury steam of the hot pies went out in fragrant clouds into
Bell-yard, being sniffed up by many a poor wretch passing by who lacked
the means of making one in the throng that were devouring the dainty
morsels within.

"Why, Tobias Ragg," said a young man, with his mouth full of pie, "where
have you been since you left Mr. Snow's in Paper-buildings? I have not
seen you for some days."

"No," said Tobias, "I have gone into another line; instead of being a
lawyer, and helping to shave the clients, I am going to shave the
lawyers now. A twopenny pork, if you please, Mrs. Lovett. Ah! who would
be an emperor, if he couldn't get pies like these?--eh, Master Clift?"

"Well, they are good; of course we know that, Tobias; but do you mean to
say you are going to be a barber?"

"Yes, I am with Sweeney Todd, the barber of Fleet-street, close to St.
Dunstan's."

"The deuce you are! well, I am going to a party to-night, and I'll drop
in and get dressed and shaved, and patronise your master."

Tobias put his mouth close to the ear of the young lawyer, and in a
fearful sort of whisper said the one word--"Don't."

"Don't! what for?"

Tobias made no answer; and, throwing down his twopence, scampered out of
the shop as fast as he could. He had only sent a message by Sweeney Todd
in the neighbourhood; but, as he heard the clock strike twelve, and two
penny pieces were lying at the bottom of his pocket, it was not in human
nature to resist running into Lovett's and converting them into a pork
pie.

"What an odd thing!" thought the young lawyer. "I'll just drop in at
Sweeney Todd's now on purpose, and ask Tobias what he means. I quite
forgot, too, while he was here, to ask him what all that riot was about
a dog at Todd's door."

"A veal!" said a young man, rushing in; "a twopenny veal, Mrs. Lovett."
When he got it he consumed it with voracity, and then noticing an
acquaintance in the shop, he whispered to him,--

"I can't stand it any more. I have cut the spectacle-maker--Johanna is
faithless, and I know not what to do."

"Have another pie."

"But what's a pie to Johanna Oakley? You know, Dilki, that I only went
there to be near the charmer. Damn the shutters and curse the
spectacles! She loves another, and I'm a desperate individual! I should
like to do some horrible and desperate act. Oh, Johanna, Johanna! you
have driven me to the verge of what do you call it--I'll take another
veal, if you please, Mrs. Lovett."

"Well, I was wondering how you got on," said his friend Dilki, "and
thinking of calling upon you."

"Oh! it was all right--it was all right at first; she smiled upon me."

"You are quite sure she didn't laugh at you?"

"Sir! Mr. Dilki!"

"I say, are you sure that instead of smiling upon you she was not
laughing at you!"

"Am I sure? Do you wish to insult me, Mr. Dilki? I look upon you as a
puppy, sir--a horrid puppy."

"Very good; now I am convinced that the girl has been having a bit of
fun at your expense.--Are you not aware, Sam, that your nose turns up so
much that it's enough to pitch you head over heels. How do you suppose
that any girl under forty-five would waste a word upon you? Mind, I
don't say this to offend you in any way, but just quietly, by way of
asking a question."

Sam looked daggers, and probably he might have attempted some desperate
act in the pie-shop, if at the moment he had not caught the eye of Mrs.
Lovett, and he saw by the expression of that lady's face, that anything
in the shape of a riot would be speedily suppressed, so he darted out of
the place at once to carry his sorrows and his bitterness elsewhere.

It was only between twelve and one o'clock that such a tremendous rush
and influx of visitors came to the pie-shop, for although there was a
good custom the whole day, and the concern was a money-making one from
morning till night, it was at that hour principally that the great
consumption of pies took place.

Tobias knew from experience that Sweeney Todd was a skilful calculator
of the time it ought to take to go to different places, and accordingly
since he had occupied some portion of that most valuable of all
commodities at Mrs. Lovett's, he arrived quite breathless at his
master's shop.

There sat the mysterious dog with the hat, and Tobias lingered for a
moment to speak to the animal. Dogs are great physiognomists; and as the
creature looked into Tobias's face he seemed to draw a favourable
conclusion regarding him, for he submitted to a caress.

"Poor fellow!" said Tobias. "I wish I knew what had become of your
master, but it made me shake like a leaf to wake up last night and ask
myself the question. You shan't starve, though, if I can help it. I
haven't much for myself, but you shall have some of it."

As he spoke, Tobias took from his pocket some not very tempting cold
meat, which was intended for his own dinner, and which he had wrapped up
in not the cleanest of cloths. He gave a piece to the dog, who took it
with a dejected air, and then crouched down at Sweeney Todd's door
again.

Just then, as Tobias was about to enter the shop, he thought he heard
from within, a strange shrieking sort of sound. On the impulse of the
moment he recoiled a step or two, and then, from some other impulse, he
dashed forward at once, and entered the shop.

The first object that presented itself to his attention, lying upon a
side table, was a hat with a handsome gold-headed walking cane lying
across it.

The arm-chair in which customers usually sat to be shaved was vacant,
and Sweeney Todd's face was just projected into the shop from the back
parlour, and wearing a most singular and hideous expression.

"Well, Tobias," he said, as he advanced, rubbing his great hands
together, "well, Tobias! so you could not resist the pie-shop?"

"How does he know?" thought Tobias. "Yes, sir, I have been to the
pie-shop, but I didn't stay a minute."

"Hark ye, Tobias! the only thing I can excuse in the way of delay upon
an errand is, for you to get one of Mrs. Lovett's pies; that I can look
over, so think no more about it. Are they not delicious, Tobias?"

"Yes, sir, they are; but some gentleman seems to have left his hat and
stick."

"Yes," said Sweeney Todd, "he has;" and lifting the stick he struck
Tobias a blow with it that felled him to the ground. "Lesson the second
to Tobias Ragg, which teaches him to make no remarks about what does not
concern him. You may think what you like, Tobias Ragg, but you shall say
only what I like."

"I won't endure it," cried the boy; "I won't be knocked about in this
way, I tell you, Sweeney Todd, I won't."

"You won't! have you forgotten your mother?"

"You say you have a power over my mother; but I don't know what it is,
and I cannot and will not believe it; I'll leave you, and, come of it
what may, I'll go to sea or anywhere rather than stay in such a place as
this."

"Oh, you will, will you? Then, Tobias, you and I must come to some
explanation. I'll tell you what power I have over your mother, and then
perhaps you will be satisfied. Last winter, when the frost had continued
eighteen weeks, and you and your mother were starving, she was employed
to clean out the chambers of a Mr. King, in the Temple, a cold-hearted,
severe man, who never forgave anything in all his life, and never will."

"I remember," said Tobias; "we were starving and owed a whole guinea for
rent; but mother borrowed it and paid it, and after that got a situation
where she now is."

"Ah, you think so. The rent was paid; but, Tobias, my boy, a word in
your ear--she took a silver candlestick from Mr. King's chambers to pay
it. I know it. I can prove it. Think of that, Tobias, and be discreet."

"Have mercy upon us," said the boy; "they would take her life!"

"Her life!" screamed Sweeney Todd; "ay, to be sure they would; they
would hang her--hang her, I say; and now mind, if you force me by any
conduct of your own, to mention this thing, you are your mother's
executioner. I had better go and be deputy hangman at once, and turn her
off."

"Horrible, horrible!"

"Oh, you don't like that? Indeed, that don't suit you, Master Tobias? Be
discreet then, and you have nothing to fear. Do not force me to show a
power which will be as complete as it is terrific."

"I will say nothing--I will think nothing."

"'Tis well; now go and put that hat and stick in yonder cupboard. I
shall be absent for a short time; and if any one comes, tell them I am
called out, and shall not return for an hour or perhaps longer, and mind
you take good care of the shop."

Sweeney Todd took off his apron, and put on an immense coat with huge
lapels, and then, clapping a three-cornered hat on his head, and casting
a strange withering kind of look at Tobias, he sallied forth into the
street.




                               CHAPTER V
                       THE MEETING IN THE TEMPLE.


Alas! poor Johanna Oakley--thy day has passed away and brought with it
no tidings of him you love; and oh! what a weary day, full of fearful
doubts and anxieties, has it been!

Tortured by doubts, hopes, and fears, that day was one of the most
wretched that poor Johanna had ever passed. Not even two years before,
when she had parted with her lover, had she felt such an exquisite pang
of anguish as now filled her heart, when she saw the day gliding away
and the evening creeping on apace, without word or token from Mark
Ingestrie.

She did not herself know, until all the agony of disappointment had come
across her, how much she had counted upon hearing something from him on
that occasion; and when the evening deepened into night, and hope grew
so slender that she could no longer rely upon it for the least support,
she was compelled to proceed to her own chamber, and, feigning
indisposition to avoid her mother's questions--for Mrs. Oakley was at
home, and making herself and everybody else as uncomfortable as
possible--she flung herself on her humble couch and gave way to a
perfect passion of tears.

"Oh, Mark, Mark!" she said, "why do you thus desert me, when I have
relied so abundantly upon your true affection? Oh, why have you not sent
me some token of your existence, and of your continued love? the merest
slightest word would have been sufficient, and I should have been
happy."

She wept then such bitter tears as only such a heart as her's can know,
when it feels the deep and bitter anguish of desertion, and when the
rock, upon which it supposed it had built its fondest hopes, resolves
itself to a mere quicksand, in which becomes engulphed all of good that
this world can afford to the just and the beautiful.

Oh, it is heartrending to think that such a one as she, Johanna Oakley,
a being so full of all those holy and gentle emotions which should
constitute the truest felicity, should thus feel that life to her had
lost its greatest charms, and that nothing but despair remained.

"I will wait until midnight," she said; "and even then it will be a
mockery to seek repose, and to-morrow I must myself make some exertion
to discover some tidings of him."

Then she began to ask herself what that exertion could be, and in what
manner a young and inexperienced girl, such as she was, could hope to
succeed in her inquiries. And the midnight hour came at last, telling
her that, giving the utmost latitude to the word day, it had gone at
last, and she was left despairing.

She lay the whole of that night sobbing, and only at times dropping into
an unquiet slumber, during which painful images were presented to her,
all, however, having the same tendency, and pointing towards the
presumed fact that Mark Ingestrie was no more.

But the weariest night to the weariest waker will pass away, and at
length the soft and beautiful dawn stole into the chamber of Johanna
Oakley, chasing away some of the more horrible visions of the night, but
having little effect in subduing the sadness that had taken possession
of her.

She felt that it would be better for her to make her appearance below,
than to hazard the remarks and conjectures that her not doing so would
give rise to, so all unfitted as she was to engage in the most ordinary
intercourse, she crept down to the breakfast-parlour, looking more like
the ghost of her former self than the bright and beautiful being we have
represented her to the reader.

Her father understood what it was that robbed her cheeks of their bloom;
and although he saw it with much distress, yet he fortified himself with
what he considered were some substantial reasons for future hopefulness.

It had become part of his philosophy--it generally is a part of the
philosophy of the old--to consider that those sensations of the mind
that arise from disappointed affection are of the most evanescent
character; and that, although for a time they exhibit themselves with
violence, they, like grief for the dead, soon pass away, scarcely
leaving a trace behind of their former existence.

And perhaps he was right as regards the greater number of those
passions; but he was certainly wrong when he applied that sort of
worldly-wise knowledge to his daughter Johanna. She was one of those
rare beings whose hearts are not won by every gaudy flutterer who may
buz the accents of admiration in their ears. No; she was qualified,
eminently qualified, to love once, but only once; and, like the
passion-flower, that blooms into abundant beauty once, and never
afterwards puts forth a blossom, she allowed her heart to expand to the
soft influence of affection, which, when crushed by adversity, was gone
for ever.

"Really, Johanna," said Mrs. Oakley, in the true conventicle twang, "you
look so pale and ill that I must positively speak to Mr. Lupin about
you."

"Mr. Lupin, my dear," said the spectacle-maker, "may be all very well in
his way, as a parson; but I don't see what he can have to do with
Johanna looking pale."

"A pious man, Mr. Oakley, has to do with everything and everybody."

"Then he must be the most intolerable bore in existence; and I don't
wonder at his being kicked out of some people's houses, as I have heard
Mr. Lupin has been."

"And if he has, Mr. Oakley, I can tell you he glories in it. Mr. Lupin
likes to suffer for the faith; and if he were to be made a martyr of
to-morrow, I am quite certain it would give him a deal of pleasure."

"My dear, I am quite sure it would not give him half the pleasure it
would me."

"I understand your insinuation, Mr. Oakley: you would like to have him
murdered on account of his holiness; but, though you can say these kind
of things at your own breakfast-table, you won't say as much to him when
he comes to tea this afternoon."

"To tea, Mrs. Oakley! haven't I told you over and over again, that I
will not have that man in my house?"

"And haven't I told you, Mr. Oakley, twice that number of times that he
shall come to tea? and I have asked him now, and it can't be altered."

"But, Mrs. Oakley--"

"It's of no use, Mr. Oakley, your talking. Mr. Lupin is coming to tea,
and come he shall; and if you don't like it, you can go out. There now,
I am sure you can't complain, now you have actually the liberty of going
out; but you are like the dog in the manger, Mr. Oakley, I know that
well enough, and nothing will please you."

"A fine liberty, indeed, the liberty of going out of my own house to let
somebody else into it that I don't like!"

"Johanna, my dear," said Mrs. Oakley, "I think my old complaint is
coming on, of the beating of the heart, and the hysterics. I know what
produces it--it's your father's brutality; and, just because Dr. Fungus
said over and over again that I was to be perfectly quiet, your father
seizes upon the opportunity like a wild beast, or a raving maniac, to
try and make me ill."

Mr. Oakley jumped up, stamped his feet upon the floor and uttering
something about the probability of his becoming a maniac in a very short
time, rushed into his shop, and set to polishing the spectacles as if he
were doing it for a wager.

This little affair between her father and mother, certainly had had the
effect, for a time, of diverting attention from Johanna, and she was
able to assume a cheerfulness she did not feel; but she had something of
her father's spirit in her as regarded Mr. Lupin, and most decidedly
objected to sitting down to any meal whatever with that individual, so
that Mrs. Oakley was left in a minority of one upon the occasion, which
perhaps, as she fully expected it, was no great matter after all.

Johanna went up stairs to her own room, which commanded a view of the
street. It was an old-fashioned house, with a balcony in front, and as
she looked listlessly out into Fore-street, which was far then from
being the thoroughfare it is now, she saw standing in a doorway on the
opposite side of the way a stranger, who was looking intently at the
house, and who, when he caught her eye, walked instantly across to it,
and cast something into the balcony of the first floor. Then he touched
his cap, and walked rapidly from the street.

The thought immediately occurred to Johanna that this might possibly be
some messenger from him concerning whose existence and welfare she was
so deeply anxious. It was not to be wondered at, therefore, that with
the name of Mark Ingestrie upon her lips she should rush down to the
balcony in intense anxiety to hear, and see if such was really the case.

When she reached the balcony she found lying in it a scrap of paper, in
which a stone was wrapped up, in order to give it weight, so that it
might be cast with a certainty into the balcony. With trembling
eagerness she opened the paper, and read upon it the following words:--

"For news of Mark Ingestrie, come to the Temple-gardens one hour before
sunset, and do not fear addressing a man who will be holding a white
rose in his hand."

"He lives! he lives!" she cried. "He lives, and joy again becomes the
inhabitant of my bosom! Oh, it is daylight now and sunshine compared to
the black midnight of despair. Mark Ingestrie lives, and I shall be
happy yet."

She placed the little scrap of paper carefully in her bosom, and then,
with clasped hands and a delighted expression of countenance, she
repeated the brief and expressive words it contained, adding,--

"Yes, yes, I will be there; the white rose is an emblem of his purity
and affection, his spotless love, and that is why his messenger carries
it. I will be there. One hour ay, two hours before sunset, I will be
there. Joy, joy! he lives, he lives! Mark Ingestrie lives! Perchance,
too, successful in his object, he returns to tell me that he can make me
his, and that no obstacle can now interfere to frustrate our union.
Time, time, float onwards on your fleetest pinions!"

She went to her own apartment, but it was not, as she had last gone to
it, to weep; on the contrary, it was to smile at her former fears, and
to admit the philosophy of the assertion that we suffer much more from a
dread of those things that never happen than we do for actual calamities
which occur in their full force to us.

"Oh, that this messenger," she said, "had come but yesterday! What hours
of anguish I should have been spared! But I will not complain; it shall
not be said that I repine at present joy because it did not come before.
I will be happy when I can; and, in the consciousness that I shall soon
hear blissful tidings of Mark Ingestrie, I will banish every fear."

The impatience which she now felt brought its pains and its penalties
with it, and yet it was quite a different description of feeling to any
she had formerly endured, and certainly far more desirable than the
absolute anguish that had taken possession of her upon hearing nothing
of Mark Ingestrie.

It was strange, very strange, that the thought never crossed her that
the tidings she had to hear in the Temple Gardens from the stranger
might be evil ones, but certainly such a thought did not occur to her,
and she looked forward with joy and satisfaction to a meeting which she
certainly had no evidence to know, might not be of the most disastrous
character.

She asked herself over and over again if she should tell her father what
had occurred, but as often as she thought of doing so she shrank from
carrying out the mental suggestion, and all the natural disposition
again to keep to herself the secret of her happiness returned to her in
full force.

But yet she was not so unjust as not to feel that it was treating her
father but slightingly to throw all her sorrows into his lap, as it
were, and then to keep from him everything of joy appertaining to the
same circumstances.

This was a thing that she was not likely to continue doing, and so she
made up her mind to relieve her conscience from the pang it would
otherwise have had, by determining to tell him, after the interview in
the Temple Gardens, what was its result; but she could not make up her
mind to do so beforehand; it was so pleasant and so delicious to keep
the secret all to herself, and to feel that she alone knew that her
lover had so closely kept faith with her as to be only one day behind
his time in sending to her, and that day, perhaps, far from being his
fault.

And so she reasoned to herself and tried to wile away the anxious hours,
sometimes succeeding in forgetting how long it was still to sunset, and
at others feeling as if each minute was perversely swelling itself out
into ten times its usual proportion of time in order to become wearisome
to her.

She had said that she would be at the Temple Gardens two hours before
sunset instead of one, and she kept her word, for, looking happier than
she had done for weeks, she tripped down the stairs of her father's
house, and was about to leave it by the private staircase, when a
strange gaunt-looking figure attracted her attention.

This was no other than the Rev. Mr. Lupin: he was a long strange-looking
man, and upon this occasion he came upon what he called horseback, that
is to say, he was mounted upon a very small pony, which seemed quite
unequal to support his weight, and was so short that, if the reverend
gentleman had not poked his legs out at an angle, they must inevitably
have touched the ground.

"Praise the Lord!" he said: "I have intercepted the evil one. Maiden, I
have come here at thy mother's bidding, and thou shalt remain and
partake of the mixture called tea."

Johanna scarcely condescended to glance at him, but drawing her mantle
close around her, which he actually had the impertinence to endeavour to
lay hold of, she walked on, so that the reverend gentleman was left to
make the best he could of the matter.

"Stop," he cried, "stop! I can well perceive that the devil has a strong
hold of you: I can well perceive--the lord have mercy upon me! this
animal hath some design against me as sure as fate."

This last ejaculation arose from the fact that the pony had flung up his
heels behind in a most mysterious manner.

"I am afraid, sir," said a lad who was no more than our old
acquaintance, Sam--"I am afraid, sir, that there is something the matter
with the pony."

Up went the pony's heels again in the same unaccountable manner.

"God bless me!" said the reverend gentleman; "he never did such a thing
before. I--there he goes again--murder! Young man, I pray you to help me
to get down; I think I know you; you are the nephew of the goodly Mrs.
Pump--truly this animal wishes to be the death of me."

At this moment the pony gave such a vigorous kick up behind, that Mr.
Lupin was fairly pitched upon his head, and made a complete summerset,
alighting with his heels in the spectacle-maker's passage; and it
unfortunately happened that Mrs. Oakley at that moment, hearing the
altercation, came rushing out, and the first thing she did was to fall
sprawling over Mr. Lupin's feet.

Sam now felt it time to go; and as we dislike useless mysteries, we may
as well explain that these extraordinary circumstances arose from the
fact that Sam had brought from the haberdasher's opposite a
halfpenny-worth of pins, and had amused himself by making a pincushion
of the hind quarters of the Reverend Mr. Lupin's pony, which, not being
accustomed to that sort of thing, had kicked out vigorously in
opposition to the same, and produced the results we have recorded.

Johanna Oakley was some distance upon her road before the reverend
gentleman was pitched into her father's house in the manner we have
described, so that she knew nothing of it, nor would she have cared if
she had, for her mind was wholly bent upon the expedition she was
proceeding on.

As she walked upon that side of the way of Fleet-street where Sweeney
Todd's house and shop were situated, a feeling of curiosity prompted her
to stop for a moment and look at the melancholy-looking dog that stood
watching a hat at his door.

The appearance of grief upon the creature's face could not be mistaken,
and, as she gazed, she saw the shop-door gently opened and a piece of
meat thrown out.

"These are kind people," she said, "be they whom they may;" but when she
saw the dog turn away with loathing, and herself observed that there was
a white powder upon it, the idea that it was poisoned, and only intended
for the poor creature's destruction, came instantly across her mind.

And when she saw the horrible-looking face of Sweeney Todd glaring at
her from the partially-opened door, she could not doubt any further the
fact, for that face was quite enough to give a warrant for any amount of
villany whatever.

She passed on with a shudder, little suspecting, however, that that dog
had anything to do with her fate, or the circumstances which made up the
sum of her destiny.

It wanted a full hour to the appointed time of meeting when she reached
the Temple-gardens, and partly blaming herself that she was so soon,
while at the same time she would not for worlds have been away, she sat
down on one of the garden-seats to think over the past, and to recall to
her memory with all the vivid freshness of young Love's devotion, the
many gentle words which from time to time had been spoken to her two
summers since by him whose faith she had never doubted, and whose image
was enshrined at the bottom of her heart.




                              CHAPTER VI.
        THE CONFERENCE, AND THE FEARFUL NARRATION IN THE GARDEN.


The Temple clock struck the hour of meeting, and Johanna looked
anxiously around her for any one who should seem to her to bear the
appearance of being such a person as she might suppose Mark Ingestrie
would choose for his messenger.

She turned her eyes towards the gate, for she thought she heard it
close, and then she saw a gentlemanly-looking man, attired in a cloak,
and who was looking around him, apparently in search of some one.

When his eye fell upon her he immediately produced from beneath his
cloak a white rose, and in another minute they met.

"I have the honour," he said, "of speaking to Miss Johanna Oakley?"

"Yes, sir; and you are Mark Ingestrie's messenger?"

"I am; that is to say, I am he who comes to bring you news of Mark
Ingestrie, although I grieve to say I am not the messenger that was
expressly deputed by him so to do."

"Oh! sir, your looks are sad and serious; you seem as if you would
announce that some misfortune had occurred. Tell me that it is not so;
speak to me at once, or my heart will break!"

"Compose yourself, lady, I pray you."

"I cannot--dare not do so, unless you tell me he lives. Tell me that
Mark Ingestrie lives, and then I shall be all patience: tell me that,
and you shall not hear a murmur from me. Speak the word at once--at
once! It is cruel, believe me, it is cruel to keep me in this suspense."

"This is one of the saddest errands I ever came upon," said the
stranger, as he led Johanna to a seat. "Recollect, lady, what creatures
of accident and chance we are--recollect how the slightest circumstances
will affect us, in driving us to the confines of despair, and remember
by how frail a tenure the best of us hold existence."

"No more--no more!" shrieked Johanna, as she clasped her hands--"I know
all now, and am desolate."

She let her face drop upon her hands, and shook as with a convulsion of
grief.

"Mark, Mark!" she cried, "you have gone from me! I thought not this--I
thought not this. Oh, Heaven! why have I lived so long as to have the
capacity to listen to such fearful tidings? Lost--lost--all lost! God of
Heaven! what a wilderness the world is now to me!"

"Let me pray you, lady, to subdue this passion of grief, and listen
truly to what I shall unfold to you. There is much to hear and much to
speculate upon; and if, from all that I have learnt, I cannot, dare not
tell you that Mark Ingestrie lives, I likewise shrink from telling you
he is no more."

"Speak again--say those words again! There is hope, then--oh, there is a
hope!"

"There is a hope; and better is it that your mind should receive the
first shock of the probability of the death of him whom you have so
anxiously expected, and then afterwards, from what I shall relate to
you, gather hope that it may not be so, than that from the first you
should expect too much, and then have those expectations rudely
destroyed."

"It is so--it is so; this is kind of you, and if I cannot thank you as I
ought, you will know that it is because I am in a state of too great
affliction so to do, and not from want of will; you will understand
that--I am sure you will understand that."

"Make no excuses to me. Believe me, I can fully appreciate all that you
would say, and all that you must feel. I ought to tell you who I am,
that you may have confidence in what I have to relate to you. My name is
Jeffery, and I am a colonel in the Indian army."

"I am much beholden to you, sir; but you bring with you a passport to my
confidence, in the name of Mark Ingestrie, which is at once sufficient.
I live again in the hope that you have given me of his continued
existence, and in that hope I will maintain a cheerful resignation that
shall enable me to bear up against all you have to tell me, be it what
it may, and with a feeling that through much suffering there may come
joy at last. You shall find me very patient, ay, extremely patient--so
patient that you shall scarcely see the havoc that grief has already
made here."

She pressed her hands upon her breast as she spoke, and looked in his
face with such an expression of tearful melancholy that it was quite
heartrending to witness it; and he, although not used to the melting
mood, was compelled to pause for a few moments ere he could proceed in
the task he had set himself.

"I will be as brief," he said, "as possible, consistent with stating all
that is requisite for me to state, and I must commence by asking you if
you are aware under what circumstances it was that Mark Ingestrie was
abroad?"

"I am aware of so much, that a quarrel with his uncle, Mr. Grant, was
the great cause, and that his main endeavour was to better his fortunes,
so that we might be happy, and independent of those who looked not with
an eye of favour upon our projected union."

"Yes, but, what I meant was, were you aware of the sort of adventure he
embarked in to the Indian seas?"

"No, I know nothing further; we met here on this spot, we parted at
yonder gate, and we have never met again."

"Then I have something to tell you, in order to make the narrative clear
and explicit."

They both sat upon the garden seat; and while Johanna fixed her eyes
upon her companion's face, expressive as it was of the most generous
emotions and noble feelings, he commenced relating to her the incidents
which never left her memory, and in which she took so deep an interest.

"You must know," he said, "that what it was which so much inflamed the
imagination of Mark Ingestrie, consisted in this. There came to London a
man with a well-authenticated and extremely well put together report,
that there had been discovered, in one of the small islands near the
Indian seas, a river which deposited an enormous quantity of gold-dust
in its progress to the ocean. He told his story so well, and seemed to
be such a perfect master of all the circumstances connected with it,
that there was scarcely room for a doubt upon the subject. The thing was
kept quiet and secret; and a meeting was held of some influential
men--influential on account of the money they possessed, among whom was
one who had towards Mark Ingestrie most friendly feelings; so Mark
attended the meeting with this friend of his, although he felt his utter
incapacity, from want of resources, to take any part in the affair. But
he was not aware of what his friend's generous intentions were in the
matter until they were explained to him, and they consisted in
this:--He, the friend, was to provide the necessary means for embarking
in the adventure, so far as regarded taking a share in it, and he told
Mark Ingestrie that, if he would go personally on the expedition, he
should share in the proceeds with him, be they what they might. Now, to
a young man like Ingestrie, totally destitute of personal resources, but
of ardent and enthusiastic temperament, you can imagine how extremely
tempting such an offer was likely to be. He embraced it at once with the
greatest pleasure, and from that moment he took an interest in the
affair of the closest and most powerful description. It seized
completely hold of his imagination, presenting itself to him in the most
tempting colours; and from the description that has been given me of his
enthusiastic disposition, I can well imagine with what kindness and
impetuosity he would enter into such an affair."

"You know him well?" said Johanna, gently.

"No, I never saw him. All that I say concerning him is from the
description of another who did know him well, and who sailed with him in
the vessel that ultimately left the port of London on the vague and wild
adventure I have mentioned."

"That one, be he who he may, must have known Mark Ingestrie well, and
have enjoyed much of his confidence to be able to describe him so
accurately."

"I believe that such was the case; and it is from the lips of that one,
instead of from mine, that you ought to have heard what I am now
relating. That gentleman, whose name was Thornhill, ought to have made
to you this communication; but by some strange accident it seems he has
been prevented, or you would not be here listening to me upon a subject
which would have come better from his lips."

"And was he to have come yesterday to me?"

"He was."

"Then Mark Ingestrie kept his word; and but for the adverse
circumstances which delayed his messenger, I should yesterday have heard
what you are now relating to me. I pray you go on, sir, and pardon this
interruption."

"I need not trouble you with all the negotiations, the trouble, and the
difficulty that arose before the expedition could be started
fairly--suffice it to say, that at length, after much annoyance and
trouble, it was started, and a vessel was duly chartered and manned for
the purpose of proceeding to the Indian seas in search of the treasure,
which was reported to be there for the first adventurer who had the
boldness to seek it."

"It was a gallant vessel. I saw it many a mile from England ere it sunk
beneath the waves, never to rise again."

"Sunk!"

"Yes; it was an ill-fated ship, and it did sink; but I must not
anticipated--let me proceed in my narrative with regularity. The ship
was called the Star; and if those who went with it looked upon it as the
star of their destiny, they were correct enough, and it might be
considered an evil star for them, inasmuch as nothing but disappointment
and bitterness became their ultimate portion. And Mark Ingestrie, I am
told, was the most hopeful man on board. Already in imagination he could
fancy himself homeward-bound with the vessel, ballasted and crammed with
the rich produce of that shining river. Already he fancied what he could
do with his abundant wealth, and I have not a doubt but that, in common
with many who went on that adventure, he enjoyed to the full the
spending of the wealth he should obtain in imagination--perhaps, indeed,
more than if he had obtained it in reality. Among the adventurers was
one Thornhill, who had been a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and between
him and young Ingestrie there arose a remarkable friendship--a
friendship so strong and powerful, that there can be no doubt that they
communicated to each other all their hopes and fears; and if anything
could materially tend to beguile the tedium of such a weary voyage as
those adventurers had undertaken, it certainly would be the free
communication and confidential intercourse between two such kindred
spirits as Thornhill and Mark Ingestrie. You will bear in mind, Miss
Oakley, that in making this communication to you, I am putting together
what I myself heard at different times, so as to make it for you a
distinct narrative, which you can have no difficulty in comprehending,
because, as I before stated, I never saw Mark Ingestrie, and it was only
once, for about five minutes, that I saw the vessel in which he went
upon his perilous adventure--for perilous it turned out to be--to the
Indian seas. It was from Thornhill I got my information during the many
weary and monotonous hours consumed in a home-bound voyage from India.
It appears that without accident or cross of any description the Star
reached the Indian ocean, and the supposed immediate locality of the
spot where the treasure was to be found, and there she was spoken with
by a vessel homeward-bound from India, called the Neptune. It was
evening, and the sun had sunk in the horizon with some appearances that
betokened a storm. I was on board that Indian vessel; we did not expect
anything serious, although we made every preparation for rough weather,
and as it turned out, it was well indeed we did, for never within the
memory of the oldest seamen, had such a storm ravished the coast. A
furious gale, which it was impossible to withstand, drove us southward;
and but for the utmost precautions, aided by courage and temerity on the
part of the seamen, such as I had never before witnessed in the
merchant-service, we escaped with trifling damage, but we were driven at
least 200 miles out of our course; and instead of getting, as we ought
to have done, to the Cape by a certain time, we were an immense distance
eastward of it. It was just as the storm, which lasted three nights and
two days, began to abate, that towards the horizon we saw a dull red
light; and as it was not in a quarter of the sky where any such
appearance might be imagined, nor were we in a latitude where
electro-phenomena might be expected, we steered toward it, surmising
what turned out afterwards to be fully correct."

"It was a ship on fire!" said Johanna.

"It was."

"Alas! alas! I guessed it. A frightful suspicion from the first crossed
my mind. It was a ship on fire, and that ship was--"

The Star was bound upon its adventurous course, although driven far out
of it by adverse winds and waves. After about half an hour's sailing we
came within sight distinctly of a blazing vessel. We could hear the roar
of the flames, and through our glasses we could see them curling up the
cordage, and dancing from mast to mast, like fiery serpents, exulting in
the destruction they were making. We made all sail, and strained every
inch of canvas to reach the ill-fated vessel, for distances at sea that
look small are in reality very great, and an hour's hard sailing in a
fair wind, with every stitch of canvas set, would not do more than
enable us to reach that ill-fated bark; but fancy in an hour what
ravages the flames might make! The vessel was doomed. The fiat had gone
forth that it was to be among the things that had been; and long before
we could reach the spot upon which it floated idly on the now
comparatively calm waters, we saw a bright shower of sparks rush up into
the air. Then came a loud roaring sound over the surface of the deep,
and all was still--the ship had disappeared, and the water closed over
it for ever."

"But how knew you," said Johanna, as she clasped her hands, and the
pallid expression of her countenance betrayed the deep interest she took
in the narration, "how knew you that the ship was the Star? might it not
have been some other ill-fated vessel that met with so dreadful a fate?"

"I will tell you: although we had seen the ship go down, we kept on our
course, straining every effort to reach the spot, with the hope of
picking up some of the crew, who surely had made an effort by the boats
to leave the burning vessel. The captain of the Indiaman kept his glass
at his eye, and presently he said to me,--'There is a floating piece of
wreck, and something clinging to it; I know not if there be a man, but
what I can perceive seems to me to be the head of a dog.' I looked
through the glass myself, and saw the same object; but as we neared it,
we found it was a large piece of the wreck, with a dog and a man
supported by it, who were clinging with all the energy of desperation.
In ten minutes more we had them on board the vessel--the man was the
Lieutenant Thornhill I have before mentioned, and the dog belonged to
him. He related to us that the ship, we had seen burning was the Star;
and that it had never reached its destination, and that he believed all
had perished but himself and the dog; for, although one of the boats had
been launched, so desperate a rush was made into it by the crew that it
had swamped, and all perished. Such was his own state of exhaustion,
that, after he had made this short statement, it was some days before he
left his hammock; but when he did, and began to mingle with us, we found
an intelligent, cheerful companion--such a one, indeed, as we were glad
to have on board, and in confidence he related to the captain and myself
the object of the voyage of the Star, and the previous particulars with
which I have made you acquainted. And then, during a night-watch, when
the soft and beautiful moonlight was more than usually inviting, and he
and I were on the deck, enjoying the coolness of the night, after the
intense heat of the day in the tropics, he said to me,--'I have a very
sad mission to perform when I get to London. On board our vessel was a
young man named Mark Ingestrie; and some short time before the vessel in
which we were went down, he begged of me to call upon a young lady named
Johanna Oakley, the daughter of a spectacle-maker in London, providing I
should be saved and he perish; and of the latter event, he felt so
strong a presentiment that he gave me a string of pearls, which I was to
present to her in his name; but where he got them I have not the least
idea, for they are of immense value.' Mr. Thornhill showed me the
pearls, which were of different sizes, roughly strung together, but of
great value; and when we reached the river Thames, which was only three
days since, he left us with his dog, carrying his string of pearls with
him, to find out where you reside."

"Alas! he never came."

"No; from all the inquiries we can make, and all the information we can
learn, it seems he disappeared somewhere about Fleet-street."

"Disappeared!"

"Yes; we can trace him to the Temple-stairs, and from thence to the
barber' shop, kept by a man named Sweeny Todd; but beyond there no
information of him can be obtained."

"Sweeny Todd!"

"Yes; and what makes the affair more extraordinary, is, that neither
force nor persuasion will induce Thornhill's dog to leave the place."

"I saw it--I saw the creature, and it looked imploringly, although
kindly, in my face; but little did I think, when I paused a moment to
look upon that melancholy but faithful animal, that it held a part in my
destiny. Oh! Mark Ingestrie, Mark Ingestrie, dare I hope that you live
when all else have perished?"

"I have told you all that I can tell you, and, according as your own
judgment may dictate to you, you can encourage hope, or extinguish it
for ever. I have kept back nothing from you which can make the affair
worse or better--I have added nothing; but you have it simply as it was
told to me."

"He is lost--he is lost."

"I am one, lady, who always thinks certainty of any sort preferable to
suspense; and although, while there is no positive news of death, the
continuance of life ought fairly to be assumed, yet you must perceive,
from a review of all the circumstances, upon how very slender a
foundation all our hopes must rest."

"I have no hope--I have no hope--he is lost to me for ever! It were
madness to think he lived. Oh, Mark, Mark! and is this the end of all
our fond affection? did I indeed look my last upon that face, when on
this spot we parted?"

"The uncertainty," said Colonel Jeffery, wishing to withdraw as much as
possible from a consideration of her own sorrows, "the uncertainty, too,
that prevails with regard to the fate of poor Mr. Thornhill, is a sad
thing. I much fear that those precious pearls he had, have been seen by
some one who has not scrupled to obtain possession of them by his
death."

"Yes, it would seem so indeed; but what are pearls to me? Oh! would that
they had sunk to the bottom of that Indian sea, from whence they had
been plucked. Alas, alas! it has been their thirst for gain that has
produced all these evils. We might have been poor here, but we should
have been happy. Rich we ought to have been, in contentment; but now all
is lost, and the world to me can present nothing that is to be desired,
but one small spot large enough to be my grave."

She leant upon the arm of the garden-seat, and gave herself up to such a
passion of tears that Colonel Jeffery felt he dared not interrupt her.
There is something exceeding sacred about real grief which awes the
beholder, and it was with an involuntary feeling of respect that Colonel
Jeffery stepped a few paces off, and waited until that burst of agony
had passed away. It was during those brief moments that he overheard
some words uttered by one who seemed likewise to be suffering from that
prolific source of all affliction, disappointed affection. Seated at
some short distance was a maiden, and one not young enough to be called
a youth, but still not far enough advanced in existence to have had all
his better feelings crushed by an admixture with the cold world, and he
was listening while the maiden spoke.

"It is the neglect," she said, "which touched me to the heart. But one
word spoken or written, one message of affection, to tell me that the
memory of a love I thought would be eternal, still lingered in your
heart, would have been a world of consolation; but it came not, and all
was despair."

"Listen to me," said her companion, "and if ever in this world you can
believe that one who truly loves can be cruel to be kind, believe that I
am that one. I yielded for a time to the fascination of a passion which
should never have found a home within my heart; but yet it was far more
of a sentiment than a passion, inasmuch as never for one moment did an
evil thought mingle with its pure aspirations.

"It was a dream of joy, which for a time obliterated a remembrance that
ought never to have been forgotten; but when I was rudely awakened to
the fact that those whose opinions were of importance to your welfare
and your happiness knew nothing of love, but in its grossest aspect, it
became necessary at once to crush a feeling, which, in its continuance,
could shadow forth nothing but evil."

"You may not imagine, and you may never know--for I cannot tell the
heart-pangs that it has cost me to persevere in a line of conduct which
I felt was due to you--whatever heart-pangs it might cost me. I have
been content to imagine that your affection would turn to indifference,
perchance to hatred; that a consciousness of being slighted would arouse
in your defence all a woman's pride, and that thus you would be lifted
above regret. Farewell for ever! I dare not love you honestly and truly;
and better is it thus to part than to persevere in a delusive dream that
can but terminate in degradation and sadness."

"Do you hear those words?" whispered Colonel Jeffery to Johanna. "You
perceive that others suffer, and from the same cause, the perils of
affection."

"I do. I will go home, and pray for strength to maintain my heart
against this sad affliction."

"The course of true love never yet ran smooth; wonder not, therefore,
Johanna Oakley, that yours has suffered such a blight. It is the great
curse of the highest and noblest feelings of which humanity is capable,
that while, under felicitous circumstances, they produce to us an
extraordinary amount of happiness; when anything adverse occurs, they
are most prolific sources of misery. Shall I accompany you?"

Johanna felt grateful for the support of the colonel's arm towards her
own home, and as they passed the barber's shop they were surprised to
see that the dog and the hat were gone.




                              CHAPTER VII.
                      THE BARBER AND THE LAPIDARY.


It is night; and a man, one of the most celebrated lapidaries in London,
but yet a man frugal withal, although rich, is putting up the shutters
of his shop.

This lapidary is an old man; his scanty hair is white, and his hands
shake as he secures the fastenings, and then, over and over again, feels
and shakes each shutter, to be assured that his shop is well secured.

This shop of his is in Moorfields, then a place very much frequented by
dealers in bullion and precious stones. He was about entering his door,
just having cast a satisfied look upon the fastening of his shop, when a
tall, ungainly-looking man stepped up to him. This man had a
three-cornered hat, much too small for him, perched upon the top of his
great hideous-looking head, while the coat he wore had ample skirts
enough to have made another of ordinary dimensions.

Our readers will have no difficulty in recognising Sweeney Todd, and
well might the little old lapidary start as such a very
unprepossessing-looking personage addressed him.

"You deal," he said, "in precious stones."

"Yes, I do," was the reply; "but it's rather late. Do you want to buy or
sell?"

"To sell."

"Humph! Ah, I dare say it's something not in my line; the only order I
get is for pearls, and they are not in the market."

"And I have nothing but pearls to sell," said Sweeney Todd; "I mean to
keep all my diamonds, my garnets, topazes, brilliants, emeralds, and
rubies."

"The deuce you do! Why, you don't mean to say you have any of them? Be
off with you! I am too old to joke with, and am waiting for my supper."

"Will you look at the pearls I have?"

"Little seed pearls, I suppose; they are of no value, and I don't want
them, we have plenty of those. It's real, genuine, large pearls we want.
Pearls worth thousands."

"Will you look at mine?"

"No; good night!"

"Very good; then I will take them to Mr. Coventry up the street. He
will, perhaps, deal with me for them if you cannot."

The lapidary hesitated. "Stop," he said; "what's the use of going to Mr.
Coventry? he has not the means of purchasing what I can pay present cash
for. Come in, come in; I will, at all events, look at what you have for
sale."

Thus encouraged, Sweeney Todd entered the little, low, dusky shop, and
the lapidary having procured a light, and taken care to keep his
customer outside the counter, put on his spectacles, and said--

"Now, sir, where are your pearls?"

"There," said Sweeney Todd, as he laid a string of twenty-four pearls
before the lapidary.

The old man's eyes opened to an enormous width, and he pushed his
spectacles right upon his forehead as he glared in the face of Sweeney
Todd with undisguised astonishment. Then down came his spectacles again,
and taking up the string of pearls he rapidly examined every one of
them, after which, he exclaimed,--

"Real, real, by Heaven! All real!"

Then he pushed his spectacles up again to the top of his head, and took
another long stare at Sweeney Todd.

"I know they are real," said the latter. "Will you deal with me or will
you not?"

"Will I deal with you? Yes; I am not quite sure they are real. Let me
look again. Oh, I see, counterfeits; but so well done, that really for
the curiosity of the thing, I will give fifty pounds for them."

"I am fond of curiosities," said Sweeney Todd, "and as they are not
real, I will keep them; they will do for a present to some child or
another."

"What give those to a child? you must be mad--that is to say, not mad,
but certainly indiscreet. Come, now, at a word, I'll give you one
hundred pounds for them."

"Hark ye," said Sweeney Todd, "it neither suits my inclination nor my
time to stand here chaffing with you. I know the value of the pearls,
and, as a matter of ordinary and every-day business, I will sell them to
you so that you may get a handsome profit."

"What do you call a handsome profit?"

"The pearls are worth twelve thousand pounds, and I will let you have
them for ten. What do you think of that for an offer?"

"What odd noise was that?"

"Oh, it was only I who laughed. Come, what do you say, at once; are we
to do business or are we not?"

"Hark ye, my friend; since you do know the value of your pearls, and
this is to be a downright business transaction, I think I can find a
customer who will give eleven thousand pounds for them, and if so, I
have no objection to give you eight thousand pounds."

"Give me the eight thousand pounds," said Sweeney Todd, "and let me go.
I hate bargaining."

"Stop a bit; there are some rather important things to consider. You
must know, my friend, that a string of pearls of this value are not be
bought like a few ounces of old silver of anybody who might come with
it. Such a string of pearls as these are like a house, or an estate, and
when they change hands, the vendor must give every satisfaction as to
how he came by them, and prove how he can give to the purchaser a good
right and title to them."

"Pshaw!" said Sweeney Todd, "who will question you, you are well known
to be in the trade, and to be continually dealing in such things?"

"That's all very fine; but I don't see why I should give you the full
value of an article without evidence as to how you came by it."

"In other words you mean, you don't care how I came by them, provided I
sell them to you at a thief's price, but if I want their value you mean
to be particular."

"My good sir, you may conclude what you like. Show me that you have a
right to dispose of the pearls, and you need go no further than my shop
for a customer."

"I am no disposed to take that trouble, so I shall bid you good night,
and if you want any pearls again, I would certainly advise you not to be
so wonderfully particular where you get them."

Sweeney Todd strode towards the door, but the lapidary was not going to
part with him so easy, so springing over his counter with an agility one
would not have expected from so old a man, he was at the door in a
moment, and shouted at the top of his lungs--

"Stop thief! Stop thief! Stop him! There he goes! The big fellow with
the three-cornered hat! Stop thief! Stop thief!"

These cries, uttered with great vehemence as they were, could not be
totally ineffectual, but they roused the whole neighbourhood, and before
Sweeney Todd had proceeded many yards a man made an attempt to collar
him, but was repulsed by such a terrific blow in the face, that another
person, who had run half-way across the road with a similar object,
turned and went back again, thinking it scarcely prudent to risk his own
safety in apprehending a criminal for the good of the public. Having got
rid thus of one of his foes, Sweeney Todd, with an inward determination
to come back some day and be the death of the old lapidary, looked
anxiously about for some court down which he could plunge, and so get
out of sight of the many pursuers who were sure to attack him in the
public streets. His ignorance of the locality, however, was a great bar
to such a proceeding, for the great dread he had was, that he might get
down some blind alley, and so be completely caged, and at the mercy of
those who followed him. He pelted on at a tremendous speed, but it was
quite astonishing to see how the little old lapidary ran after him,
falling down every now and then, and never stopping to pick himself up,
as people say, but rolling on and getting on his feet in some miraculous
manner, that was quite wonderful to behold, particularly in one so aged
and so apparently unable to undertake any active exertion. There was one
thing, however, he could not continue doing, and that was to cry "stop
thief!" for he had lost his wind, and was quite incapable of uttering a
word. How long he would have continued the chase is doubtful, but his
career was suddenly put an end to, as regards that, by tripping his foot
over a projecting stone in the pavement, and shooting headlong down a
cellar which was open. But abler persons than the little old lapidary
had taken up the chase, and Sweeney Todd was hard pressed; and, although
he ran very fast, the provoking thing was, that in consequence of the
cries and shouts of his pursuers, new people took up the chase, who were
fresh and vigorous and close to him. There is something awful in seeing
a human being thus hunted by his fellows; and although we can have no
sympathy with such a man as Sweeney Todd, because, from all that has
happened, we begin to have some very horrible suspicion concerning him,
still, as a general principle, it does not decrease the fact, that it is
a dreadful thing to see a human being hunted through the streets. On he
flew at the top of his speed, striking down whoever opposed him, until
at last many who could have outrun him gave up the chase, not liking to
encounter the knock-down blow which such a hand as his seemed capable of
inflicting. His teeth were set, and his breathing became short and
laborious, just as a man sprung out at a shop-door and succeeded in
laying hold of him.

"I have got you, have I?" he said.

Sweeney Todd uttered not a word, but, putting forth an amount of
strength that was perfectly prodigious, he seized the man by a great
handful of his hair, and by his clothes behind, and flung him through a
shop-window, smashing glass, framework, and everything in its progress.
The man gave a shriek, for it was his own shop, and he was a dealer in
fancy goods of the most flimsy texture, so that the smash with which he
came down among his stock-in-trade, produced at once what the
haberdashers are so delighted with in the present day, namely, a ruinous
sacrifice. This occurrence had a great effect upon Sweeney Todd's
pursuers; it taught them the practical wisdom of not interfering with a
man possessed evidently of such tremendous powers of mischief, and
consequently, as just about this period the defeat of the little
lapidary took place, he got considerably the start of his pursuers. He
was by no means safe. The cry of "stop thief!" still sounded in his
ears, and on he flew, panting with the exertion he made, till he heard a
man behind him, say,--

"Turn into the second court on your right, and you will be safe--I'll
follow you. They shan't nab you, if I can help it."

Sweeney Todd had not much confidence in human nature--it was not likely
he would; but, panting and exhausted as he was, the voice of any one
speaking in friendly accents was welcome, and, rather impulsively than
from reflection, he darted down the second court to his right.




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                           THE THIEVES' HOME.


In a very few minutes Sweeney Todd found that this court had no
thoroughfare, and therefore there was no outlet or escape, but he
immediately concluded that something more was to be found than was at
first sight to be seen, and casting a furtive glance beside him in the
direction in which he had come, rested his hand upon a door which stood
close by. The door gave way, and Sweeney Todd, hearing, as he imagined,
a noise in the street, dashed in, and closed the door, and then he,
heedless of all consequences, walked to the end of a long dirty passage,
and, pushing open a door, descended a short flight of steps, to the
bottom of which he had scarcely got, when the door which faced him at
the bottom of the steps opened by some hand, and he suddenly found
himself in the presence of a number of men seated round a large table.
In an instant all eyes were turned towards Sweeney Todd, who was quite
unprepared for such a scene, and for a minute he knew not what to say;
but, as indecision was not Sweeney Todd's characteristic, he at once
advanced to the table and sat down. There was some surprise evinced by
the persons who were seated in that room, of whom there were many more
than a score, and much talking was going on among them, which did not
appear to cease on his entrance. Those who were near him looked hard at
him, but nothing was said for some minutes, and Sweeney Todd looked
about to understand, if he could, how he was placed, though it could not
be much a matter of doubt as to the character of the individuals
present.

Their looks were often an index to their vocations, for all grades of
the worst of characters were there, and some of them were by no means
complimentary to human nature, for there were some of the most desperate
characters that were to be found in London. Sweeney Todd gave a glance
around him, and at once satisfied himself of the desperate nature of the
assembly into which he had thrust himself. They were dressed in various
fashions, some after the manner of the city--some more gay, and some
half military, while not a few wore the garb of countrymen; but there
was in all that an air of scampish, off-hand behaviour, not unmixed with
brutality.

"Friend," said one, who sat near him, "how came you here; are you known
here?"

"I came here, because I found the door open, and I was told by some one
to come here, as I was pursued."

"Pursued?"

"Ay, some one running after me, you know."

"I know what being pursued is," replied the man, "and yet I know nothing
of you."

"That is not at all astonishing," said Sweeney, "seeing that I never saw
you before, nor you me; but that makes no difference. I'm in
difficulties, and I suppose a man may do his best to escape the
consequences?"

"Yes, he may, yet that is no reason why he should come here; this is the
place for free friends, who know and aid one another."

"And such I am willing to be; but at the same time I must have a
beginning. I cannot be initiated without some one introducing me. I have
sought protection, and I have found it; if there be any objection to my
remaining here any longer, I will leave."

"No, no," said a tall man on the other side of the table, "I have heard
what you have said, and we do not usually allow any such things; you
have come here unasked, and now we must have a little explanation--our
own safety may demand it; at all events we have our customs, and they
must be complied with."

"And what are your customs?" demanded Todd.

"This: you must answer the question which we shall propound unto you;
now answer truly what we shall ask of you."

"Speak," said Todd, "and I will answer all that you propose to me, if
possible."

"We will not tax you too hardly, depend upon it: who are you?"

"Candidly, then," said Todd, "that's a question I do not like to answer,
nor do I think it is one that you ought to ask. It is an inconvenient
thing to name oneself--you must pass by that inquiry."

"Shall we do so?" inquired the interrogator of those around him, and
gathering his cue from their looks, he, after a brief space, continued--

"Well, we will pass over that, seeing it is not necessary, but you must
tell us what you are--cutpurse, footpad, or what not?"

"I am neither."

"Then tell us in your own words," said the man, "and be candid with us.
What are you?"

"I am an artificial pearl-maker--or sham pearl-maker, whichever way you
please to call it."

"A sham pearl-maker! that may be an honest trade for all we know, and
that will hardly be your passport to our house, friend sham
pearl-maker!"

"That may be as you say," replied Todd, "but I will challenge any man to
equal me in my calling. I have made pearls that would pass with almost a
lapidary, and which would pass with nearly all the nobility."

"I begin to understand you, friend; but I would wish to have some proof
of what you say; we may hear a very good tale, and yet none of it shall
be true; we are not men to be made dupes of, besides, there are enough
to take vengeance, if we desire it."

"Ay, to be sure there is," said a gruff voice from the other end of the
table, which was echoed from one to the other, till it came to the top
of the table.

"Proof! proof! proof!" now resounded from one end of the room to the
other.

"My friends," said Sweeney Todd, rising up, and advancing to the table,
and thrusting his hand into his bosom and drawing out the string of
twenty-four pearls, "I challenge you, or any one, to make a set of
artificial pearls equal to these; they are my make, and I'll stand to it
in any reasonable sum, that you cannot bring a man who shall beat me in
my calling."

"Just hand them to me," said the man who had made himself interrogator.

Sweeney Todd threw the pearls on the table carelessly, and then said--

"There, look at them well, they'll bear it, and I reckon, though there
may be some good judges amongst you, that you cannot any of you tell
them from real pearls, if you had not been told so."

"Oh, yes, we know pretty well," said the man, "what these things are, we
have now and then a good string in our possession, and that helps us to
judge of them. Well, this is certainly a good imitation."

"Let me see it," said a fat man: "I was bred a jeweller, and I might say
born, only I couldn't stick to it; nobody likes working for years upon
little pay, and no fun with the gals. I say, hand it here!"

"Well," said Todd, "if you or anybody ever produced as good an
imitation, I'll swallow the whole string; and knowing there's poison in
the composition, it would not be a comfortable thing to think of."

"Certainly not," said the big man, "certainly not, but hand them over,
and I'll tell you all about it."

The pearls were given into his hands; and Sweeney Todd felt some
misgivings about his precious charge, and yet he showed it not, for he
turned to the man who sat beside him, saying--

"If he can tell true pearls from them, he knows more than I think he
does, for I am a maker, and have often had the true pearl in my hand."

"And I suppose," said the man, "you have tried your hand at putting the
one for the other, and so doing your confiding customers."

"Yes, yes, that is the dodge, I can see very well," said another man,
winking at the first; "and a good one too, I have known them do so with
diamonds."

"Yes, but never with pearls; however, there are some trades that it is
desirable to know."

"You're right."

The fat man now carefully examined the pearls, set them down on the
table, and looked hard at them.

"There now, I told you I could bother you. You are not so good a judge
that you would not have known, if you had not been told they were sham
pearls, but what they were real."

"I must say, you have produced the best imitations I have ever seen. Why
you ought to make your fortune in a few years--a handsome fortune!"

"So I should, but for one thing."

"And what is that?"

"The difficulty," said Todd, "of getting rid of them; if you ask
anything below their value, you are suspected, and you run the chance of
being stopped and losing them at the least, and perhaps entail a
prosecution."

"Very true; but there is risk in everything; we all run risks; but then
the harvest!"

"That may be," said Todd, "but this is peculiarly dangerous. I have not
the means of getting introduction to the nobility themselves, and if I
had I should be doubted, for they would say a working man cannot come
honestly by such valuable things, and then I must concoct a tale to
escape the Mayor of London."

"Ha!--ha!--ha!"

"Well, then, you can take them to a goldsmith."

"There are not many of them who would do so: they would not deal in
them; and, moreover, I have been to one or two of them; as for a
lapidary, why, he is not so easily cheated."

"Have you tried?"

"I did, and had to make the best of my way out, pursued as quickly as
they could run, and I thought at one time I must have been stopped, but
a few lucky turns brought me clear, when I was told to turn up this
court; and I came in here."

"Well," said one man, who had been examining the pearls, "and did the
lapidary find out they were not real?"

"Yes, he did; and he wanted to stop me and the string together, for
trying to impose upon him; however, I made a rush at the door, which he
tried to shut, but I was the stronger man, and here I am."

"It has been a close chance for you," said one.

"Yes, it just has," replied Sweeney, taking up the string of pearls,
which he replaced in his clothes, and continued to converse with some of
those around him.

Things now subsided into their general course; and little notice was
taken of Sweeney. There was some drink on the board, of which all
partook. Sweeney had some, too, and took the precaution of emptying his
pockets before them all, and gave them a share of his money to pay his
footing. This was policy, and they all drank to his success, and were
very good companions. Sweeney, however, was desirous of getting out as
soon as he could, and more than once cast his eyes towards the door; but
he saw there were eyes upon him, and dared not excite suspicion, for he
might undo all that he had done. To lose the precious treasure he
possessed would be maddening; he had succeeded to admiration in inducing
the belief that what he showed them was merely a counterfeit; but he
knew so well that they were real, and that a latent feeling that they
were humbugged might be hanging about; and that the first suspicious
movement he would be watched, and some desperate attempt made to make
him give them up. It was with no small violence to his own feelings that
he listened to their conversation, and appeared to take an interest in
their proceedings.

"Well," said one, who sat next him, "I'm just off for the north-road."

"Any fortune there?"

"Not much; and yet I mustn't complain: these last three weeks, the best
I have had has been two sixties."

"Well, that would do very well."

"Yes, the last man I stopped was a regular looby Londoner; he appeared
like a don, complete tip-top man of fashion; but, Lord! when I came to
look over him, he hadn't as much as would carry me twenty-four miles on
the road."

"Indeed! don't you think he had any hidden about him?--they do do so
now."

"Ah, ah!" returned another, "well said, old fellow; 'tis a true remark,
that we can't always judge a man from appearances. Lor! bless me, now,
who'd 'a thought your swell cove proved to be out o' luck? Well, I'm
sorry for you; but you know 'tis a long lane that has no turning, as Mr.
Somebody says--so, perhaps, you'll be more fortunate another time. But
come, cheer up, whilst I relate an adventure that occurred a little time
ago; 'twas a slice of good luck, I assure you, for I had no difficulty
in bouncing my victim, out of a good swag of tin; for you know farmers
returning from market are not always too wary and careful, especially as
the lots of wine they take at the market dinners make the cosy old boys
ripe and mellow for sleep. Well, I met one of these jolly gentlemen,
mounted on horseback, who declared he had nothing but a few paltry
guineas about him; however, that would not do--I searched him, and found
a hundred and four pounds secreted about his person."

"Where did you find it?"

"About him. I tore his clothes to ribands. A pretty figure he looked
upon horseback, I assure you. By Jove, I could hardly help laughing; in
fact, I did laugh at him, which so enraged him, that he immediately
threatened to horse-whip me, and yet he dared not defend his money; but
I threatened to shoot him, and that soon brought him to his senses."

"I should imagine so. Did you ever have a fight for it?" inquired
Sweeney Todd.

"Yes, several times. Ah! it's by no means an easy life, you may depend.
It is free, but dangerous. I have been fired at six or seven times."

"So many?"

"Yes. I was near York once, when I stopped a gentleman; I thought him an
easy conquest, but not as he turned out, for he was a regular devil."

"Resisted you?"

"Yes, he did. I was coming along when I met him, and I demanded his
money. 'I can keep it myself,' he said, 'and do not want any assistance
to take care of it.'"

"But I want it," said I; "your money or your life."

"You must have both, for we are not to be parted," he said, presenting
his pistol at me; "and then I had only time to escape from the effect of
the shot. I struck the pistol up with my riding-whip, and the bullet
passed by my temples, and almost stunned me. I cocked and fired; he did
the same, but I hit him, and he fell. He fired, however, but missed me.
I was down upon him; he begged hard for life."

"Did you give it him?"

"Yes; I dragged him to the side of the road, and then left him. Having
done so much, I mounted my horse and came away as fast as I could, and
then I made for London, and spent a merry day or two there."

"I can imagine you must enjoy your trips into the country, and then you
must have still greater relish for the change when you come to
London--the change is so great and so entire."

"So it is; but have you never any run of luck in your line? I should
think you must at times succeed in tricking the public."

"Yes, yes," said Todd, "now and then we do--but I tell you it is only
now and then; and I have been afraid of doing too much. In small sums I
have been a gainer; but I want to do something grand. I tried it on, but
at the same time I have failed."

"That is bad; but you may have more opportunities by and by. Luck is all
chance."

"Yes," said Todd, "that is true, but the sooner the better, for I am
growing impatient."

Conversation now went on; each man speaking of his exploits, which were
always some species of rascality and robbery, accompanied by violence
generally; some were midnight robbers and breakers into people's houses;
in fact, all the crimes that could be imagined. This place was, in fact,
a complete house of rendezvous for thieves, cutpurses, highwaymen,
footpads, and burglars of every grade and description--a formidable set
of men of the most determined and desperate appearance. Sweeney Todd
hardly knew how to rise and leave the place, though it was now growing
very late, and he was most anxious to get safe out of the den he was in;
but how to do that, was a problem yet to be solved.

"What is the time?" he muttered to the man next to him.

"Past midnight," was the reply.

"Then I must leave here," he answered, "for I have work that I must be
at in a very short time, and I shall not have too much time."

So saying he watched his opportunity, and rising, walked up to the door,
which he opened and went out; after that he walked up the five steps
that led to the passage, and this latter had hardly been gained when the
street-door opened, and another man came in at the same moment, and met
him face to face.

"What do you do here?"

"I am going out," said Sweeney Todd.

"You are going back; come back with me."

"I will not," said Todd. "You must be a better man than I am, if you
make me; I'll do my best to resist your attack, if you intend one."

"That I do," replied the man; and he made a determined rush upon
Sweeney, who was scarcely prepared for such a sudden onslaught, and was
pushed back till he came to the head of the stairs, where a struggle
took place, and both rolled down the steps. The door was thrown open,
and every one rushed out to see what was the matter, but it was some
moments before they could make it out.

"What does he do here?" said the first, as soon as he could speak, and
pointing to Sweeney Todd.

"It's all right."

"All wrong, I say."

"He's a sham-pearl maker, and has shown us a string of sham pearls that
are beautiful."

"Psha!"

"I will insist upon seeing them; give them to me," he said, "or you do
not leave this place."

"I will not," said Sweeney.

"You must. Here, help me--but I don't want help, I can do it by myself."

As he spoke, he made a desperate attempt to collar Sweeney and pull him
to the earth, but he had miscalculated his strength when he imagined
that he was superior to Todd, who was by far the more powerful man of
the two, and resisted the attack with success. Suddenly, by an Herculean
effort, he caught his adversary below the waist, and lifting him up, he
threw him upon the floor with great force; and then, not wishing to see
how the gang would take this--whether they would take the part of their
companion or of himself he knew not--he thought he had an advantage in
the distance, and he rushed up stairs as fast as he could, and reached
the door before they could overtake him to prevent him. Indeed, for more
than a minute they were irresolute what to do; but they were somehow
prejudicial in favour of their companion, and they rushed up after
Sweeney just as he had got to the door. He would have had time to escape
them, but, by some means, the door became fast, and he could not open
it, exert himself how he would. There was no time to lose; they were
coming to the head of the stairs, and Sweeney had hardly time to reach
the stairs, to fly upwards, when he felt himself grasped by the throat.
This he soon released himself from; for he struck the man who seized him
a heavy blow, and he fell backwards, and Todd found his way up to the
first floor, but he was closely pursued. Here was another struggle; and
again Sweeney Todd was the victor, but he was hard pressed by those who
followed him--fortunately for him there was a mop left in a pail of
water, this he seized hold of, and, swinging it over his head, he
brought it full on the head of the first man who came near him. Dab it
came, soft and wet, and splashed over some others who were close at
hand. It is astonishing what an effect a new weapon will sometimes have.
There was not a man among them, who would not have faced danger in more
ways than one, that would not have rushed headlong upon deadly and
destructive weapons, but who were quite awed when a heavy wet mop was
dashed into their faces. They were completely paralysed for a moment;
indeed, they began to look upon it as something between a joke and a
serious matter and either would have been taken just as they might be
termed.

"Get the pearls!" shouted the man who had first stopped him; "seize the
spy! seize him--secure him--rush at him! You are men enough to hold one
man!"

Sweeney Todd saw matters were growing serious, and he plied his mop most
vigorously upon those who were ascending, but they had become somewhat
used to the mop, and it had lost much of its novelty, and was by no
means a dangerous weapon. They rushed on, despite the heavy blows
showered by Sweeney, and he was compelled to give way stair after stair.
The head of the mop came off, and then there remained but the handle,
which formed an efficient weapon, and which made fearful havoc on the
heads of the assailants; and despite all that their slouched hats could
do in the way of protecting them, yet the staff came with a crushing
effect. The best fight in the world cannot last for ever; and Sweeney
again found numbers were not to be resisted for long; indeed, he could
not have physical energy enough to sustain his own efforts, supposing he
had received no blows in return. He turned and fled as he was forced
back to the landing, and then came to the next stair-head, and again he
made a desperate stand. This went on for stair after stair, and
continued for more than two or three hours. There were moments of
cessation when they all stood still and looked at each other.

"Fire upon him!" said one.

"No, no; we shall have the authorities down upon us, and then all will
go wrong."

"I think we had much better have let it alone in the first place, as he
was in, for you may be sure this won't make him keep a secret; we shall
all be split upon as sure as fate."

"Well, then, rush upon him, and down with him. Never let him out! On to
him! Hurrah!"

Away they went, but they were resolutely met by the staff of Sweeney
Todd, who had gained new strength by the short rest he had had.

"Down with the spy!"

This was shouted out by the men, but as each of them approached, they
were struck down, and at length, finding himself on the second floor
landing, and being fearful that some one was descending from above, he
rushed into one of the inner rooms. In an instant he had locked the
doors, which were strong and powerful.

"Now," he muttered, "for means to escape."

He waited a moment to wipe the sweat from his brow, and then he crossed
the floor to the windows, which were open. They were the old-fashioned
bay-windows, with the heavy ornamental work which some houses possessed,
and overhung the low door-ways, and protected them from the weather.

"This will do," he said, as he looked down to the pavement--"this will
do. I will try this descent, if I fall."

The people on the other side of the door were exerting all their force
to break it open, and it had already given one or two ominous creaks,
and a few minutes more would probably let them into the room. The
streets were clear--no human being was moving about, and there were
faint signs of the approach of morning. He paused a moment to inhale the
fresh air, and then he got outside of the window. By means of the sound
oaken ornaments, he contrived to get down to the drawing-room balcony,
and then he soon got down into the street. As he walked slowly away, he
could hear the crash of the door, and a slight cheer, as they entered
the room; and he could imagine to himself the appearance of the faces of
those who entered, when they found the bird had flown, and the room was
empty. Sweeney Todd had not far to go; he soon turned into Fleet-street,
and made for his own house. He looked about him, but there were none
near him; he was tired and exhausted, and right glad was he when he
found himself at his own door. Then stealthily he put the key into the
door, and slowly entered the house.




                              CHAPTER IX.
                  JOHANNA AT HOME, AND THE RESOLUTION.


Johanna Oakley would not allow Colonel Jeffery to accompany her all the
way home, and he, appreciating the scruples of the young girl, did not
press his attention upon her, but left her at the corner of Fore-street,
after getting from her a half promise that she would meet him again on
that day week, at the same hour, in the Temple-gardens.

"I ask this of you, Johanna Oakley," he said, "because I have resolved
to make all the exertion in my power to discover what has become of Mr.
Thornhill, in whose fate I am sure I have succeeded in interesting you,
although you care so little for the string of pearls which he has in
trust for you."

"I do, indeed, care little for them," said Johanna, "so little, that it
may be said to amount to nothing."

"But still they are yours, and you ought to have the option of disposing
of them as you please. It is not well to despise such gifts of fortune;
for if you can yourself do nothing with them, there are surely some
others whom you may know, upon whom they would bestow great happiness."

"A string of pearls, great happiness?" said Johanna, inquiringly.

"Your mind is so occupied by your grief that you quite forget such
strings are of great value. I have seen those pearls, Johanna, and can
assure you that they are in themselves a fortune."

"I suppose," she said sadly, "it is too much for human nature to expect
two blessings at once. I had the fond, warm heart that loved me without
the fortune, that would have enabled us to live in comfort and
affluence; and now, when that is perchance within my grasp, the heart,
that was by far the more costly possession, and the richest jewel of
them all, lies beneath the wave with its bright influences, and its
glorious and romantic aspirations, quenched for ever."

"You will meet me then, as I request of you, to hear if I have any news
for you?"

"I will endeavour so to do. I have all the will; but Heaven knows if I
may have the power."

"What mean you, Johanna?"

"I cannot tell what a week's anxiety may do; I know not but a sick bed
may be my resting-place, until I exchange it for the tomb. I feel even
now my strength fail me, and that I am scarcely able to totter to my
home. Farewell, sir! I owe you my best thanks, as well for the trouble
you have taken, as for the kindly manner in which you have detailed to
me what has passed."

"Remember," said Colonel Jeffery, "that I bid you adieu, with the hope
of meeting you again."

It was thus they parted, and Johanna proceeded to her father's house.
Who now that had met her and had chanced not to see that sweet face,
which could never be forgotten, would have supposed her to be the once
gay and sprightly Johanna Oakley? Her steps were sad and solemn, and all
the juvenile elasticity of her frame seemed like one prepared for death;
and she hoped that she would be able to glide, silently and unobserved,
to her own little bed-chamber--that chamber where she had slept since
she was a child, and on the little couch, on which she had so often laid
down to sleep that holy and calm slumber which such hearts as hers can
only know. But she was doomed to be disappointed, for the Rev. Mr. Lupin
was still there, and as Mrs. Oakley had placed before that pious
individual a great assortment of creature comforts, and among the rest
some mulled wine, which seemed particularly to agree with him, he showed
no disposition to depart. It unfortunately happened that this wine, of
which the reverend gentleman partook with such a holy relish, was kept
in a cellar, and Mrs. Oakley had had occasion twice to go down to
procure a fresh supply, and it was on a third journey for the same
purpose that she encountered poor Johanna, who had just let herself in
at the private door.

"Oh! you have come home, have you?" said Mrs. Oakley; "I wonder where
you have been to, gallivanting; but I suppose I may wonder long enough
before you will tell me. Go into the parlour, I want to speak to you."

Now poor Johanna had quite forgotten the very existence of Mr.
Lupin--so, rather than explain to her mother, which she knew would beget
more questions, she wished to go to bed at once, notwithstanding it was
an hour before the usual time for so doing. She walked unsuspectingly
into the parlour, and as Mr. Lupin was sitting, the slightest movement
of his chair closed the door, so she could not escape. Under any other
circumstances probably Johanna would have insisted upon leaving the
apartment; but a glance at the countenance of the pious individual was
quite sufficient to convince her that he had been sacrificing
sufficiently to Bacchus to be capable of any amount of effrontery, so
that she dreaded passing him, more especially as he swayed his arms
about like the sails of a windmill. She thought at least that when her
mother returned she would rescue her; but in that hope she was mistaken,
and Johanna had no more idea of the extent to which religious fanaticism
will carry its victim, than she had of the manners and customs of the
inhabitants of the moon. When Mrs. Oakley did return, she had some
difficulty in getting into the apartment, inasmuch as Mr. Lupin's chair
occupied so large a portion of it; but when she did obtain admission,
and Johanna said--

"Mother, I beg of you to protect me against this man, and allow me a
free passage from the apartment!"

Mrs. Oakley affected to lift up her hands in amazement, as she said--

"How dare you speak so disrespectfully of a chosen vessel? How dare you,
I say, do such a thing--it's enough to drive any one mad to see the
young girls now-a-days!"

"Don't snub her--don't snub the virgin," said Mr. Lupin; "she don't know
the honour yet that's intended her."

"She don't deserve it," said Mrs. Oakley, "she don't deserve it."

"Never mind, madam--never mind; we--we--we don't get all what we deserve
in this world."

"Take a drop of something, Mr. Lupin; you have got the hiccups."

"Yes; I--I rather think I have a little. Isn't it a shame that anybody
so intimate with the Lord should have the hiccups? What a lot of lights
you have got burning, Mrs. Oakley!"

"A lot of lights, Mr. Lupin! Why, there is only one; but perhaps you
allude to the lights of the gospel?"

"No; I--I don't, just at present; damn the lights of the gospel--that is
to say, I mean damn all backsliders! But there is a lot of lights, and
no mistake, Mrs. Oakley. Give me a drop of something, I'm as dry as
dust."

"There is some more mulled wine, Mr. Lupin; but I am surprised that you
think there is more than one light."

"It's a miracle madam, in consequence of my great faith. I have faith in
s--s--s--six lights, and here they are."

"Do you see that, Johanna?" exclaimed Mrs. Oakley, "are you not
convinced now of the holiness of Mr. Lupin?"

"I am convinced of his drunkenness, mother, and entreat of you to let me
leave the room at once."

"Tell her of the honour," said Mr. Lupin--"tell her of the honour."

"I don't know, Mr. Lupin; but don't you think it would be better to take
some other opportunity?"

"Very well, then, this is the opportunity."

"If it's your pleasure, Mr. Lupin, I will. You must know, then, Johanna,
that Mr. Lupin has been kind enough to consent to save my soul, on
condition that you marry him, and I am quite sure you can have no
reasonable objection; indeed, I think it's the least you can do, whether
you have any objection or not."

"Well put," said Mr. Lupin, "excellently well put."

"Mother," said Johanna, "if you are so far gone in superstition, as to
believe this miserable drunkard ought to come between you and heaven, I
am so lost as not to be able to reject the offer with more scorn and
contempt than ever I thought I could have entertained for any human
being; but hypocrisy never, to my mind, wears so disgusting a garb as
when it attires itself in the outward show of religion."

"This conduct is unbearable," cried Mrs. Oakley; "am I to have one of
the Lord's saints under my own roof?"

"If he were ten times a saint, mother, instead of being nothing but a
miserable, drunken profligate, it would be better that he should be
insulted ten times over, than that you should permit your own child to
have passed through the indignity of having to reject such a proposition
as that which has just been made. I must claim the protection of my
father; he will not suffer one, towards whom he has ever shown an
affection, the remembrance of which sinks deep into my heart, to meet
with so cruel an insult beneath his roof."

"That's right, my dear," cried Mr. Oakley, at that moment pushing open
the parlour-door. "That's right, my dear; you never spoke truer words in
all your life."

A faint scream came from Mrs. Oakley, and the Rev. Mr. Lupin immediately
seized upon the fresh jug of mulled wine, and finished it at a draught.

"Get behind me, Satan," he said. "Mr. Oakley, you will be damned if you
say a word to me."

"It's all the same, then," said Mr. Oakley; "for I'll be damned if I
don't. Then, Ben! Ben! come--come in, Ben."

"I'm a coming," said a deep voice, and a man about six feet four inches
in height, and nearly two-thirds of that amount in width, entered the
parlour. "I'm a coming, Oakley, my boy. Put on your blessed spectacles,
and tell me which is the fellow."

"I could have sworn it," said Mrs. Oakley, as she gave the table a knock
with her fist,--"I could have sworn when you came in, Oakley--I could
have sworn, you little snivelling, shrivelled-up wretch, you'd no more
have dared to come into this parlour as never was with those words in
your mouth, than you'd have dared to have flown, if you hadn't had your
cousin, Big Ben, the beef-eater, from the Tower, with you."

"Take it easy, ma'am," said Ben, as he sat down in a chair, which
immediately broke all to pieces with his weight. "Take it easy, ma'am;
the devil--what's this?"

"Never mind, Ben," said Mr. Oakley, "it's only a chair; get up."

"A cheer," said Ben; "do you call that a cheer? but never mind--take it
easy."

"Why, you big, bullying, idle, swilling and guttling ruffian!"

"Go on, marm, go on."

"You good-for-nothing lump of carrion; a dog wears his own coat, but you
wear your master's, you great stupid, overgrown, lurking hound. You
parish-brought-up wild beast, go and mind your lions and elephants in
the Tower, and don't come into honest people's houses, you cut-throat,
bullying, pickpocketing wretch."

"Go on, marm, go on."

This was a kind of dialogue that could not last, and Mrs. Oakley sank
down exhausted, and then Ben said--

"I tell you what, marm, I considers you--I looks upon you, marm, as a
female wariety of that ere animal as is very useful and sagacious,
marm."

There was no mistake in this allusion, and Mrs. Oakley was about to make
some reply, when the Rev. Mr. Lupin rose from his chair, saying--

"Bless you all! I think I'll go home."

"Not yet, Mr. Tulip," said Ben; "you had better sit down again--we've
got something to say to you."

"Young man, young man, let me pass. If you do not, you will endanger
your soul."

"I aint got none," said Ben; "I'm only a beef-eater, and don't pretend
to such luxuries."

"The heathen!" exclaimed Mrs. Oakley, "the horrid heathen! but there's
one consolation, and that is, that he will be fried in his own fat for
everlasting."

"Oh, that's nothing," said Ben; "I think I shall like it, especially if
it's any pleasure to you. I suppose that's what you call a Christian
consolation. Will you sit down, Mr. Tulip?"

"My name aint Tulip, but Lupin; but if you wish it, I don't mind sitting
down, of course."

The beef-eater, with a movement of his foot, kicked away the reverend
gentleman's chair, and down he sat with a dab upon the floor.

"My dear," said Mr. Oakley to Johanna, "you go to bed, and then your
mother can't say you have anything to do with this affair. I intend to
rid my house of this man. Good night, my dear, good night."

Johanna kissed her father on the cheek, and then left the room, not at
all sorry that so vigorous a movement was about being made for the
suppression of Mr. Lupin. When she was gone, Mrs. Oakley spoke, saying--

"Mr. Lupin, I bid you good night, and, of course, after the rough
treatment of these wretches, I can hardly expect you to come again. Good
night, Mr. Lupin, good night."

"That's all very well, marm," said Ben, "but before this ere wild beast
of a parson goes away, I want to admonish him. He don't seem to be wide
awake, and I must rouse him up."

Ben took hold of the reverend gentleman's nose, and gave it such an
awful pinch, that when he took his finger and thumb away, it was
perfectly blue.

"Murder! oh, murder! my nose! my nose!" shrieked Mr. Lupin, and at that
moment Mrs. Oakley, who was afraid to attack Ben, gave her husband such
an open-handed whack on the side of his head, that the little man reeled
again, and saw a great many more lights than the Rev. Mr. Lupin had done
under the influence of the mulled wine.

"Very good," said Ben; "now we are getting into, the thick of it."

[Illustration: Big Ben Compels Mr. Lupin To Do Penance.]

With this Ben took from his pocket a coil of rope, one end of which was
a noose, and that he dexterously threw over Mrs. Oakley's head.

"Murder!" she shrieked. "Oakley, are you going to see me murdered before
your eyes?"

"There is such a singing in my ears," said Mr. Oakley, "that I can't see
anything."

"This is the way," said Ben, "we manages the wild beastesses when they
shuts their ears to all sorts of argument. Now, marm, if you please, a
little this way."

Ben looked about until he found a strong hook in the wall, over which,
in consequence of his great height, he was enabled to draw the rope, and
then the other end of it he tied securely to the leg of a heavy
secretaire that was in the room, so that Mrs. Oakley was well secured.

"Murder!" she cried. "Oakley, are you a man, that you stand by and see
me treated in this way by this big brute?"

"I can't see anything," said Mr. Oakley; "there is such a singing in my
ears; I told you so before--I can't see anything."

"Now, ma'am, you may just say what you like," said Ben; "it won't matter
a bit, any more than the grumbling of a bear with a sore head; and as
for you, Mr. Tulip, you'll just get down on your knees, and beg Mr.
Oakley's pardon for coming and drinking his tea without his leave, and
having the infernal impudence to speak to his daughter."

"Don't do it, Mr. Lupin," cried Mrs. Oakley--"don't do it."

"You hear," said Ben, "what the lady advises. Now, I am quite different;
I advise you to do it--for, if you don't, I shan't hurt you, but it
strikes me I shall be obliged to fall on you and crush you."

"I think I will," said Mr. Lupin: "the saints were always forced to
yield to the Philistines."

"If you call me any names," said Ben, "I'll just wring your neck,"

"Young man, young man, let me exhort you. Allow me to go, and I will put
up prayers for your conversion."

"Confound your impudence! what do you suppose the beasts in the Tower
would do, if I was converted? Why, that 'ere tiger, we have had lately,
would eat his own tail, to think as I had turned out such an ass. Come,
I can't waste any more of my precious time; and if you don't get down on
your knees directly, we'll see what we can do."

"I must," said Mr. Lupin, "I must, I suppose;" and down he flopped on
his knees.

"Very good; now repeat after me.--I am a wolf that stole sheeps'
clothing."

"Yes; 'I am a wolf that stole sheeps' clothing'--the Lord forgive me."

"Perhaps he may, and perhaps he mayn't. Now go on--all that's wirtuous
is my loathing."

"Oh dear, yes--'all that's wirtuous is my loathing.'"

"Mr. Oakley, I have offended."

"Yes; I am a miserable sinner, Mr. Oakley, I have offended."

"And asks his pardon, on my bended--"

"Oh dear, yes--I asks his pardon on my bended--The Lord have mercy upon
us, miserable sinners!"

"Knees--I won't do so no more."

"Yes,--knees, I won't do so no more."

"As sure as I lies on this floor."

"Yes,--as sure as I lies on this floor.--Death and the devil, you've
killed me!"

Ben took hold of the reverend gentleman by the back of the neck, and
pressed his head down upon the floor, until his nose, which had before
been such a sufferer, was nearly completely flattened with his face.

"Now you may go;" said Ben.

Mr. Lupin scrambled to his feet; but Ben followed him into the passage,
and did not yet let him go, until he had accelerated his movements by
two hearty kicks. And then the victorious beef-eater returned to the
parlour.

"Why, Ben," said Mr. Oakley, "you are quite a poet."

"I believe you, Oakley, my boy," said Ben, "and now let us be off, and
have a pint round the corner."

"What!" exclaimed Mrs. Oakley, "and leave me here, you wretches?"

"Yes," said Ben, "unless you promises never to be a female variety of a
useful animal again, and begs pardon of Mr. Oakley, for giving him all
this trouble; as for me, I'll let you off cheap, you shall only give me
a kiss, and say you loves me."

"If I do, may I be--"

"Damned, you mean."

"No, I don't; choked I was going to say."

"Then you may be choked, for you have nothing to do but to let your legs
go from under you, and you will be hung as comfortable as possible--come
along, Oakley."

"Mr. Oakley--stop, stop--don't leave me here. I am sorry."

"That's enough," said Mr. Oakley; "and now, my dear, bear in mind one
thing from me--I intend from this time forward to be master in my own
house. If you and I are to live together, we must do so on very
different terms to what we have been living, and if you won't make
yourself agreeable, Lawyer Hutchins tells me that I can turn you out and
give you a maintenance; and, in that case, I'll have my sister Rachel
home to mind house for me; so now you know my determination, and what
you have to expect. If you wish to begin, well, do so at once, by
getting something nice and tasty for Ben's supper."

Mrs. Oakley made the required promise, and being released, she set about
preparations for the supper in real earnest, but whether was really
subdued or not we shall, in due time, see.




                               CHAPTER X.
                      THE COLONEL AND HIS FRIEND.


Colonel Jeffery was not at all satisfied with the state of affairs, as
regarded the disappointment of Mr. Thornhill, for whom he entertained a
sincere regard, both on account of the private estimation in which he
held him, and on account of actual services rendered to Thornhill by
him. Not to detain Johanna Oakley in the Temple-gardens, he had stopped
his narrative, completely at the point when what concerned her had
ceased, and had said nothing of much danger which the ship "Neptune" and
its crew and passengers had gone through, after Mr. Thornhill had been
taken on board with his dog. The fact is, the storm which he had
mentioned was only the first of a series of gales of wind that buffeted
the ship about for some weeks, doing it much damage, and enforcing
almost the necessity of putting in somewhere for repairs. But a glance
at the map will be sufficient to show that, situated as the "Neptune"
was, the nearest port at which they could at all expect assistance, was
the British Colony, at the Cape of Good Hope; but such was the contrary
nature of the winds and waves, that just upon the evening of a
tempestuous day, they found themselves bearing down close in shore, on
the eastern coast of Madagascar. There was much apprehension that the
vessel would strike on a rocky shore; but the water was deep, and the
vessel rode well; there was a squall, and they let go both anchors to
secure the vessel, as they were so close in shore, lest they should be
driven in and stranded. It was fortunate they had so secured themselves,
for the gale while it lasted blew half a hurricane, and the ship lost
some of her mast, and some other trifling damage, which, however,
entailed upon them the necessity of remaining there a few days, to cut
timber to repair their masts, and to obtain a few supplies. There is but
little to interest a general reader in the description of a gale. Order
after order was given until the masts and spars went one by one, and
then the orders for clearing the wreck were given. There was much work
to be done, and but little pleasure in doing it, for it was wet and
miserable while it lasted, and there was the danger of being driven upon
a lee shore, and knocked to pieces upon the rocks. This danger was
averted, and they anchored safe at a very short distance from the shore
in comparative security.

"We are safe now," remarked the captain, as he gave his second in
command charge of the deck, and approached Mr. Thornhill and Colonel
Jeffery.

"I am happy it is so," replied Jeffery.

"Well, captain," said Mr. Thornhill, "I am glad we have done with being
knocked about; we are anchored, and the water here appears smooth
enough."

"It is so, and I dare say it will remain so; it is a beautiful basin of
water--deep and good anchorage; but you see it is not large enough to
make a fine harbour."

"True; but it is rocky."

"It is, and that may make it sometimes dangerous, though I don't know
that it would be so in some gales. The sea may beat in at the opening,
which is deep enough for anything to enter--even Noah's ark would enter
easily enough."

"What will you do now?"

"Stay here a day or so, and send boats ashore to cut some pine trees, to
refit the ship with masts."

"You have no staves, then?"

"Not enough for such a purpose; and we never do go out stored with such
things."

"You obtain them wherever you may go to."

"Yes, any part of the world will furnish them in some shape or other."

"When you send ashore, will you permit me to accompany the boat's crew?"
said Jeffery.

"Certainly; but the natives of this country are violent and intractable,
and should you get into any row with them, there is every probability of
your being captured, or some bodily injury done you."

"But I will take care to avoid all that."

"Very well, colonel, you shall be welcome to go."

"I must beg the same permission," said Mr. Thornhill, "for I should much
like to see the country, as well as to have some acquaintance with the
natives themselves."

"By no means trust yourself alone with them," said the captain, "for if
you live you will have cause to repent it--depend upon what I say."

"I will," said Thornhill; "I will go nowhere but where the boat's
company goes."

"You will be safe then."

"But do you apprehend any hostile attack from the natives?" inquired
Colonel Jeffery.

"No, I do not expect it; but such things have happened before to-day,
and I have seen them when least expected, though I have been on this
coast before, and yet I never met with any ill-treatment; but there have
been many who have touched on this coast, who have had a brush with the
natives and come off second best, the natives generally retiring when
the ship's company muster strong in number, and calling out the chiefs,
who come down in great force, that we may not conquer them."

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next morning the boats were ordered out to go ashore with crews,
prepared for cutting timber, and obtaining such staves as the ship was
in want of. With these boats old Thornhill and Colonel Jeffery went both
of them on board, and after a short ride they reached the shore of
Madagascar. It was a beautiful country, and one in which vegetables
appear luxuriant and abundant, and the party in search of timber for
shipbuilding purposes soon came to some lordly monarchs of the forest,
which would have made vessels of themselves. But this was not what was
wanted; but where the trees grew thicker and taller, they began to cut
some tall pine-trees down. This was the wood they most desired; in fact,
it was exactly what they wanted; but they hardly got through a few such
trees, when the natives came down upon them, apparently to reconnoitre.
At first they were quiet and tractable enough, but anxious to see and
inspect everything, being very inquisitive and curious. However, that
was easily borne, but at length they became more numerous, and began to
pilfer all they could lay their hands upon, which, of course brought
resentment, and, after some time, a blow or two was exchanged. Colonel
Jeffery was forward, and endeavouring to prevent some violence being
offered to one of the wood-cutters; in fact, he was interposing himself
between the two contending parties, and tried to restore order and
peace, but several armed natives rushed suddenly upon him, secured him,
and were hurrying him away to death before any one could stir in his
behalf. His doom appeared certain, for, had they succeeded, they would
have cruelly and brutally murdered him. However, just at that moment aid
was at hand, and Mr. Thornhill, seeing how matters stood, seized a
musket from one of the sailors, and rushed after the natives who had
Colonel Jeffery. There were three of them, two others had gone on to
apprise, it was presumed, the chiefs. When Mr. Thornhill arrived, they
had thrown a blanket over the head of Jeffery; but Mr. Thornhill in an
instant hurled one down with a blow from the butt-end of his musket, and
the second met the same fate, as he turned to see what was the matter.
The third, seeing the colonel free, and the musket levelled at his own
head, immediately ran after the other two, to avoid any serious
consequences to himself.

[Illustration: Thornhill Rescues Colonel Jeffery From The Savages.]

"Thornhill, you have saved my life," said Colonel Jeffery, excitedly.

"Come away, don't stop here--to the ship!--to the ship!" And as he
spoke, they hurried after the crew and they succeeded in reaching the
boats and the ship in safety; congratulating themselves not a little
upon so lucky an escape from a people quite warlike enough to do
mischief, but not civilized enough to distinguish when to do it.

When men are far away from home, and in foreign lands with the skies of
other climes above them, their hearts become more closely knit together
in those ties of brotherhood which certainly ought to actuate the whole
universe, but which as certainly do not do so, except in very rare
instances. One of these instances, however, would be found in the
conduct of Colonel Jeffery and Mr. Thornhill, even under any
circumstances, for they were most emphatically what might be termed
kindred spirits; but when we come to unite to that fact the remarkable
manner in which they had been thrown together, and the mutual services
that they had it in their power to render to each other, we should not
be surprised at the almost romantic friendship that arose between them.
It was then that Thornhill made the colonel's breast the depository of
all his thoughts and all his wishes, and a freedom of intercourse and a
community of feeling ensued between them, which when it does take place
between persons of really congenial dispositions, produces the most
delightful results of human companionship. No one who has not endured
the tedium of a sea voyage, can at all be aware of what a pleasant thing
it is to have some one on board, in the rich stores of whose intellect
and fancy one can find a never-ending amusement. The winds might now
whistle through the cordage, and the waves toss the great ship on their
foaming crests, still Thornhill and Jeffery were together, finding in
the midst of danger, solace in each other's society, and each animating
the other to the performance of deeds of daring that astonished the
crew. The whole voyage was one of the greatest peril, and some of the
oldest seamen on board did not scruple, during the continuance of their
night watches to intimate to their companions that the ship, in their
opinion, would never reach England, and that she would founder somewhere
along the long stretch of the African coast. The captain, of course,
made every possible exertion to put a stop to such prophetic sayings,
but when once they commenced, in a short time there is no such thing as
completely eradicating them; and they, of course, produced the most
injurious effect, paralysing the exertions of the crew in times of
danger, and making them believe that they are in a doomed ship, and
consequently all they can do is useless. Sailors are extremely
superstitious on such matters, and there cannot be any reasonable doubt,
but that some of the disasters that befel the Neptune on her homeward
voyage from India, may be attributed to this feeling of fatality getting
hold of the seamen, and inducing them to think that, let them try what
they might, they could not save the ship. It happened that after they
had rounded the Cape, a dense fog came on, such as had not been known on
that coast for many a year; although the western shore of Africa at some
seasons of the year is rather subject to such a species of vaporous
exhalation. Every object was wrapped in the most profound gloom, and yet
there was a strong eddy or current of the ocean, flowing parallel with
the land, and as the captain hoped, rather off than on the shore. Still
there was a suspicion that the ship was making lee-way, which must
eventually bring it on shore, by some of the low promontories that were
by the maps indicated to be upon the coast. In consequence of this fear,
the greatest anxiety prevailed on board the vessel, and lights were left
burning on all parts of the deck, while two men were continually engaged
making soundings. It was about half-an-hour after midnight, as the
chronometer indicated a storm, that suddenly the men, who were on watch
on the deck, raised a loud cry of dismay. They had suddenly seen close
on to the larboard bow, lights which must belong to some vessel that,
like the Neptune, was encompassed in the fog, and a collision was quite
inevitable, for neither ship had time to put about. The only doubt,
which was a fearful and an agonising one to have solved, was whether the
stronger vessel was of sufficient bulk and power to run them down, or
they it; and that fearful question was one which a few moments must
settle. In fact, almost before the echo of that cry of horror which had
come from the men, had died away, the vessels met. There was a hideous
crash--one shriek of dismay and horror, and then all was still. The
Neptune, with considerable damage, and some of her bulwarks stove in,
sailed on; but the other ship went, with a surging sound, to the bottom
of the sea. Alas! nothing could be done. The fog was so dense, that
coupled, too, as it was with the darkness of the night, there could be
no hope of rescuing one of the ill-fated crew of the ship; and the
officers and seamen of the Neptune, although they shouted for some time,
and then listened, to hear if any survivors of the ship that had been
run down were swimming, no answer came to them; and when in about six
hours more, they sailed out of the fog into a clear sunshine, where
there was not so much as a cloud to be seen, they looked at each other
like men newly awakened from some strange and fearful dream. They never
discovered the name of the ship they had run down, and the whole affair
remained a profound mystery. When the Neptune reached the port of
London, the affair was repeated, and every exertion was made to obtain
some information concerning the ill-fated ship that had met with so
fearful a doom. Such were the circumstances which awakened all the
liveliest feelings of gratitude on the part of Colonel Jeffery towards
Mr. Thornhill; and hence was it that he considered it a sacred duty, now
that he was in London, and had the necessary leisure to do so, to leave
no stone unturned to discover what had become of him. After deep and
anxious thought, and feeling convinced that there was some mystery which
it was beyond his power to discover, he resolved upon asking the opinion
of a friend, likewise in the army, a Captain Rathbone, concerning the
whole of the facts. This gentleman, and a gentleman he was in the
fullest acceptance of the term, was in London; in fact, he had retired
from active service, and inhabited a small but pleasant house in the
outskirts of the metropolis. It was one of those old-fashioned cottage
residences, with all sorts of odd places and corners about it, and a
thriving garden full of fine old wood, such as are rather rare near to
London, and which are daily becoming more rare, in consequence of the
value of land immediately contiguous to the metropolis not permitting
large pieces to remain attached to small residences. Captain Rathbone
had an amiable family about him, such as he was and might well be proud
of, and was living in as great a state of domestic felicity as this
world could very well afford him. It was to this gentleman, then, that
Colonel Jeffery resolved upon going to lay all the circumstances before
him concerning the probable fate of poor Thornhill. This distance was
not so great but that he could walk it conveniently, and he did so,
arriving, towards the dusk of the evening, on the following day to that
which had witnessed his deeply interesting interview with Johanna Oakley
in the Temple-gardens. There is nothing on earth so delightfully
refreshing, after a dusty and rather a long country walk, as to suddenly
enter a well-kept and extremely verdant garden; and this was the case
especially to the feelings of Colonel Jeffery, when he arrived at Lime
Tree Lodge, the residence of Captain Rathbone. He met him with a most
cordial and frank welcome--a welcome which he expected, but which was
none the less delightful on that account; and, after sitting awhile with
the family in the house, he and the captain strolled into the garden,
and then Colonel Jeffery commenced his revelation. The captain, with
very few interruptions, heard him to an end; and, when he concluded by
saying--

"And now I am come to ask your advice upon all these matters;" the
captain immediately replied, in his warm, off-hand manner--

"I am afraid you won't find my advice of much importance; but I offer
you my active co-operation in anything you think ought to be done or can
be done in this affair, which, I assure you deeply interests me, and
gives me the greatest possible impulse to exertion. You have but to
command me in the matter, and I am completely at your disposal."

"I was quite certain you would say as much. But, notwithstanding the
manner in which you shrink from giving an opinion, I am anxious to know
what you really think with regard to what are, you will allow, most
extraordinary circumstances."

"The most natural thing in the world," said Captain Rathbone, "at the
first flush of the affair, seemed to be, that we ought to look for your
friend Thornhill at the point where he disappeared."

"At the barber's in Fleet-street?"

"Precisely. Did he leave the barber, or did he not?"

"Sweeney Todd says that he left him, and proceeded down the street
towards the city, in pursuance of a direction he had given him to Mr.
Oakley, the spectacle-maker, and that he saw him get into some sort of
disturbance at the end of the market; but to put against that, we have
the fact of the dog remaining by the barber's door, and his refusing to
leave it on any amount of solicitation. Now the very fact that a dog
could act in such a way proclaims an amount of sagacity that seems to
tell loudly against the presumption that such a creature could make any
mistake."

"It does. What say you, now, to go into town to-morrow morning, and
making a call at the barber's, without proclaiming we have any special
errand, except to be shaved and dressed? Do you think he would know you
again?"

"Scarcely, in plain clothes. I was in my undress uniform when I called
with the captain of the Neptune, so that his impression of me must be of
decidedly a military character; and the probability is, that he would
not know me at all in the clothes of a civilian. I like the idea of
giving a call at the barber's."

"Do you think your friend Thornhill was a man likely to talk about the
valuable pearls he had in his possession?"

"Certainly not."

"I merely ask you, because they might have offered a great temptation;
and if he has experienced any foul play at the hands of the barber, the
idea of becoming possessed of such a valuable treasure might have been
the inducement."

"I do not think it probable, but it has struck me that, if we obtain any
information whatever of Thornhill, it will be in consequence of these
very pearls. They are of great value, and not likely to be overlooked;
and yet, unless a customer be found for them, they are of no value at
all; and nobody buys jewels of that character but from the personal
vanity of making, of course, some public display of them."

"That is true; and so, from hand to hand, we might trace those pearls
until we come to the individual who must have had them from Thornhill
himself, and who might be forced to account most strictly for the manner
in which they came into his possession."

After some more desultory conversation upon the subject, it was agreed
that Colonel Jeffery should take a bed for the night at Lime Tree Lodge,
and that, in the morning, they should both start for London, and,
disguising themselves as respectable citizens, make some attempts, by
talking about jewels and precious stones, to draw out the barber into a
confession that he had something of the sort to dispose of; and,
moreover, they fully intended to take away the dog, with the care of
which Captain Rathbone charged himself. We may pass over the pleasant,
social evening which the colonel passed with the amiable family of the
Rathbones, and, skipping likewise a conversation of some strange and
confused dreams which Jeffery had during the night concerning his friend
Thornhill, we will presume that both the colonel and the captain have
breakfasted, and that they have proceeded to London and are at the shop
of a clothier in the neighbourhood of the Strand, in order to procure
coats, wigs, and hats, that should disguise them for their visit to
Sweeney Todd. Then, arm in arm, they walked towards Fleet-street, and
soon arrived opposite the little shop within which there appears to be
so much mystery.

"The dog, you perceive, is not here," said the colonel; "I had my
suspicions, however, when I passed with Johanna Oakley that something
was amiss with him, and I have no doubt but that the rascally barber has
fairly compassed his destruction."

"If the barber be innocent," said Captain Rathbone, "you must admit that
it would be one of the most confoundedly annoying things in the world to
have a dog continually at his door assuming such an aspect of
accusation, and in that case I can scarcely wonder at his putting the
creature out of the way."

"No, presuming upon his innocence, certainly; but we will say nothing
about all that, and remember we must come in as perfect strangers,
knowing nothing of the affair of the dog, and presuming nothing about
the disappearance of any one in this locality."

"Agreed, come on; if he should see us through the window, hanging about
at all or hesitating, his suspicions will be at once awakened, and we
shall do no good."

They both entered the shop and found Sweeney Todd wearing an
extraordinary singular appearance, for there was a black patch over one
of his eyes, which was kept in its place by a green riband that went
round his head, so that he looked more fierce and diabolical than ever;
and having shaved off a small whisker that he used to wear, his
countenance, although to the full as hideous as ever, certainly had a
different character of ugliness to that which had before characterised
it, and attracted the attention of the colonel. That gentleman would
hardly have known him again any where but in his own shop, and when we
come to consider Sweeney Todd's adventures of the preceding evening, we
shall feel not surprised that he saw the necessity of endeavouring to
make as much change in his appearance as possible, for fear he should
come across any of the parties who had chased him, and who, for all he
knew to the contrary, might, quite unsuspectingly, drop in to be shaved
in the course of the morning, perhaps to retail at that acknowledged
mart for all sorts of gossip--a barber's shop--some of the very
incidents which he has so well qualified himself to relate.

"Shaved and dressed, gentlemen?" said Sweeney Todd, as his customers
made their appearance.

"Shaved only." said Captain Rathbone, who had agreed to be principal
spokesman, in case Sweeney Todd should have any remembrance of the
colonel's voice, and so suspect him.

"Pray be seated," said Sweeney Todd to Colonel Jeffery. "I'll soon
polish off your friend, sir, and then I'll begin upon you. Would you
like to see the morning paper, sir? it's at your service. I was just
looking myself, sir, at a most mysterious circumstance, if it's true,
but you can't believe, you know sir, all that is put in newspapers."

"Thank you--thank you," said the colonel.

Captain Rathbone sat down to be shaved, for he had purposely omitted
that operation at home, in order that it should not appear a mere excuse
to get into Sweeney Todd's shop.

"Why, sir," continued Sweeney Todd, "as I was saying, it is a most
remarkable circumstance."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, sir, an old gentleman of the name of Fidler had been to receive a
sum of money at the west-end of the town, and has never been heard of
since; that was yesterday, sir, and here is a description of him in the
papers of to-day. 'A snuff-coloured coat, and velvet smalls--black
velvet, I should have said--silk stockings, and silver shoe-buckles, and
a gold-headed cane, with W. D. F. upon it, meaning "William Dumpledown
Fidler"--a most mysterious affair, gentlemen.'"

A sort of groan came from the corner of the shop, and, on the impulse of
the moment, Colonel Jeffery sprang to his feet, exclaiming--

"What's that--what's that?"

"Oh, it's only my apprentice, Tobias Ragg. He has got a pain in his
stomach from eating too many of Lovett's pork pies. Aint that it,
Tobias, my bud?"

"Yes, sir," said Tobias with another groan.

"Oh, indeed," said the colonel, "it ought to make him more careful for
the future."

"It's to be hoped it will, sir; Tobias, do you hear what this gentleman
says: it ought to make you more careful in future. I am too indulgent to
you, that's the fact. Now, sir, I believe you are as clean shaved as
ever you were in your life."

"Why, yes," said Captain Rathbone, "I think that will do very well; and
now, Mr. Green"--addressing the colonel by that assumed named--"and now,
Mr. Green, be quick, or we shall be too late for the duke, and so lose
the sale of some of our jewels."

"We shall indeed," said the colonel, "if we don't mind. We sat too long
over our breakfast at the inn, and his grace is too rich and too good a
customer to lose--he don't mind what price he gives for things that take
his fancy, or the fancy of his duchess."

"Jewel merchants, gentlemen, I presume," said Sweeney Todd.

"Yes, we have been in that line for some time; and by one of us trading
in one direction, and the other in another, we manage extremely well,
because we exchange what suits our different customers, and keep up two
distinct connexions."

"A very good plan," said Sweeney Todd. "I'll be as quick as I can with
you, sir. Dealing in jewels is better than shaving."

"I dare say it is."

"Of course, it is, sir; here have I been slaving for some years in this
shop, and not done much good--that is to say, when I talk of not having
done much good, I admit I have made enough to retire upon quietly and
comfortably, and I mean to do so very shortly. There you are, sir,
shaved with celerity you seldom meet with, and as clean as possible, for
the small charge of one penny. Thank you, gentlemen--there's your
change; good morning."

They had no resource but to leave the shop; and when they had gone
Sweeney Todd, as he stropped the razor he had been using upon his hand,
gave a most diabolical grin, muttering--

"Clever--very ingenious--but it won't do. Oh dear, no, not at all! I am
not so easily taken in--diamond merchants, ah! ah! and no objection, of
course, to deal in pearls--a good jest that, truly, a capital jest. If I
had been accustomed to be so easily defeated, I had not now been here a
living man. Tobias, Tobias, I say."

"Yes, sir," said the lad, dejectedly.

"Have you forgotten your mother's danger in case you breathe a syllable
of anything that has occurred here, or that you think has occurred here,
or so much as dream of?"

"No," said the boy, "indeed I have not. I never can forget it, if I were
to live a hundred years."

"That's well, prudent, excellent, Tobias. Go out now, and if those two
persons who were here last, waylay you in the street, let them say what
they will, and do you reply to them as shortly as possible; but be sure
you come back to me quickly and report what they do say. They turned to
the left, towards the city--now be off with you."

                  *       *       *       *       *

"It's of no use," said Colonel Jeffery to the captain; "the barber is
either too cunning for me, or he is really innocent of all participation
in the disappearance of Thornhill."

"And yet there are suspicious circumstances. I watched his countenance
when the subject of jewels was mentioned, and I saw a sudden change come
over it; it was but momentary, but still it gave me a suspicion that he
knew something which caution alone kept within the recesses of his
breast. The conduct of the boy, too, was strange; and then again, if he
has the string of pearls, their value would give him all the power to do
what he says he is about to do--viz., to retire from business with an
independence."

"Hush! There, did you see that lad?"

"Yes; why it's the barber's boy."

"It is the same lad he called Tobias--shall we speak to him?"

"Let's make a bolder push, and offer him an ample reward for any
information he may give us."

"Agreed, agreed."

They both walked up to Tobias, who was listlessly walking along the
streets, and when they reached him, they were both struck with the
appearance of care and sadness that was upon the boy's face. He looked
perfectly haggard and careworn--an expression sad to see upon the face
of one so young; and, when the colonel accosted him in a kindly tone, he
seemed so unnerved that tears immediately darted to his eyes, although
at the same time he shrank back as if alarmed.

"My lad," said the colonel, "you reside, I think, with Sweeney Todd, the
barber. Is he not a kind master to you, that you seem so unhappy?"

"No, no--that is, I mean yes, I have nothing to tell. Let me pass on."

"What is the meaning of this confusion?"

"Nothing, nothing."

"I say, my lad, here is a guinea for you, if you will tell us what
became of the man of a sea-faring appearance, who came with a dog to
your master's house, some days since, to be shaved."

"I cannot tell you," said the boy, "I cannot tell you what I do not
know."

"But, you have some idea, probably. Come, we will make it worth your
while, and thereby protect you from Sweeney Todd. We have the power to
do so, and all the inclination; but you must be quite explicit with us,
and tell us frankly what you think, and what you know concerning the man
in whose fate we are interested."

"I know nothing, I think nothing," said Tobias. "Let me go, I have
nothing to say, except that he was shaved, and went away."

"But how came he to leave his dog behind him?"

"I cannot tell. I know nothing."

"It is evident that you do know something, but hesitate either from fear
or some other motive to tell it; as you are inaccessible to fair means,
we must resort to others, and you shall at once come before a
magistrate, who will force you to speak out."

"Do with me what you will," said Tobias, "I cannot help it. I have
nothing to say to you, nothing whatever. Oh, my poor mother, if it were
not for you--"

"What then?"

"Nothing! nothing! nothing!"

It was but a threat of the colonel to take the boy before a magistrate,
for he had really no grounds for so doing; and if the boy chose to keep
a secret, if he had one, not all the magistrates in the world could
force words from his lips that he felt not inclined to utter; and so,
after one more effort, they felt that they must leave him.

"Boy," said the colonel, "you are young, and cannot well judge of the
consequences of particular lines of conduct; you ought to weigh well
what you are about, and hesitate long before you determine keeping
dangerous secrets: we can convince you that we have the power of
completely protecting you from all that Sweeney Todd could possibly
attempt. Think again, for this is an opportunity of saving yourself
perhaps from much future misery, that may never arise again."

"I have nothing to say," said the boy, "I have nothing to say."

He uttered these words with such an agonized expression of countenance,
that they were both convinced he had something to say, and that, too, of
the first importance--a something which would be valuable to them in the
way of information, extremely valuable probably, and yet which they felt
the utter impossibility of wringing from him. They were compelled to
leave him, and likewise with the additional mortification, that, far
from making any advance in the matter, they had placed themselves and
their cause in a much worse position, in so far as they had awakened all
Sweeney Todd's suspicions if he were guilty, and yet advanced not one
step in the transaction. And then, to make the matter all the more
perplexing, there was still the possibility that they might be
altogether upon a wrong scent, and that the barber of Fleet-street had
no more to do with the disappearance of Mr. Thornhill than they had
themselves.




                              CHAPTER XI.
                       THE STRANGER AT LOVETT'S.


Towards the dusk of the evening of that day, after the last batch of
pies at Lovett's had been disposed of, there walked into the shop a man
most miserably clad, and who stood for a few moments staring with
weakness and hunger at the counter before he spoke. Mrs. Lovett was
there, but she had no smile for him, and instead of its usual bland
expression, her countenance wore an aspect of anger, as she forestalled
what the man had to say, by exclaiming--

"Go away, we never give anything to beggars."

There came a flush of colour for the moment across the features of the
stranger, and then he replied--

"Mistress Lovett, I do not come to ask alms of you, but to know if you
can recommend me to any employment?"

"Recommend you! recommend a ragged wretch like you?"

"I am a ragged wretch, and, moreover, quite destitute. In better times I
have sat at your counter, and paid cheerfully for what I wanted, and
then one of your softest smiles has ever been at my disposal. I do not
say this as a reproach to you, because the cause of your smile was well
known to be a self-interested one, and when that cause had passed away,
I can no longer expect it; but I am so situated, that I am willing to do
anything for a mere subsistence."

"Oh, yes, and then when you get into a better case again, I have no
doubt but you have quite sufficient insolence to make you unbearable;
besides, what employment can we have but pie-making, and we have a man
already who suits us very well with the exception that he, as you would
do if we were to exchange him, has grown insolent, and fancies himself
master of the place."

[Illustration: The Stranger At Mrs. Lovett's Pie Shop.]

"Well, well," said the stranger, "of course, there is always sufficient
argument against the poor and destitute to keep them so. If you will
assert that my conduct will be the nature you describe, it is quite
impossible for me to prove the contrary."

He turned and was about to leave the shop, but Mrs. Lovett called after
him saying--

"Come in again in two hours."

He paused a moment or two, and then, turning his emaciated countenance
upon her, said--

"I will if my strength permit me--water from the pumps in the street is
but a poor thing for a man to subsist upon for twenty-four hours."

"You may take one pie."

The half-famished, miserable-looking man seized upon a pie, and devoured
it in an instant.

"My name," he said, "is Jarvis Williams; I'll be here, never fear, Mrs.
Lovett, in two hours; and, notwithstanding all you have said, you shall
find no change in my behaviour because I may be well kept and better
clothed; but if I should feel dissatisfied with my situation, I will
leave it, and no harm done."

So saying, he walked from the shop, and when he was gone, a strange
expression came across the countenance of Mrs. Lovett, and she said in a
low tone to herself--

"He might suit for a few months, like the rest, and it is clear that we
must get rid of the one we have; I must think of it."

                  *       *       *       *       *

There is a cellar of vast extent, and of dim and sepulchral aspect--some
rough red tiles are laid upon the floor, and pieces of flint and large
jagged stones have been hammered into the earthen walls to strengthen
them; while here and there rough huge pillars made by beams of timber
rise perpendicularly from the floor, and prop large flat pieces of wood
against the ceiling, to support it. Here and there gleaming lights seem
to be peeping out from furnaces, and there is a strange hissing,
simmering sound going on, while the whole air is impregnated with a rich
and savoury vapour. This is Lovett's pie manufactory beneath the
pavement of Bell-yard and at this time a night-batch of some thousands
is being made for the purpose of being sent by carts the first thing in
the morning all over the suburbs of London. By the earliest dawn of day
a crowd of itinerant hawkers of pies would make their appearance,
carrying off a large quantity to regular customers who had them daily,
and no more thought of being without them, than of forbidding the
milkman or the baker to call at their residences. It will be seen and
understood, therefore, that the retail part of Mrs. Lovett's business,
which took place principally between the hours of twelve and one, was by
no means the most important or profitable portion of a concern which was
really of immense magnitude, and which brought in a large yearly income.
To stand in the cellar when this immense manufacture of what, at first
sight, would appear such a trivial article was carried on, and to look
about as far as the eye could reach, was by no means to have a
sufficient idea of the extent of the place; for there were as many doors
in different directions and singular low-arched entrances to different
vaults, which all appeared as black as midnight, that one might almost
suppose the inhabitants of all the surrounding neighbourhood had, by
common consent given up their cellars to Lovett's pie factory. There is
but one miserable light, except the occasional fitful glare that comes
from the ovens where the pies are stewing, hissing, and spluttering in
their own luscious gravy. There is but one man, too, throughout all the
place, and he is sitting on a low three-legged stool in one corner, with
his head resting upon his hands, and gently rocking to and fro, as he
utters scarcely audible moans. He is but lightly clad; in fact, he seems
to have but little on him except a shirt and a pair of loose canvas
trousers. The sleeves of the former are turned up beyond his elbows, and
on his head he has a white night-cap. It seems astonishing that such a
man, even with the assistance of Mrs. Lovett, could make so many pies as
are required in a day; but then, system does wonders, and in those
cellars there are various mechanical contrivances for kneading the
dough, chopping up the meat, &c., which greatly reduced the labour. But
what a miserable object is that man--what a sad and soul-striken wretch
he looks! His face is pale and haggard, his eyes deeply sunken; and, as
he removes his hands from before his visage, and looks about him, a more
perfect picture of horror could not have been found.

"I must leave to-night," he said, in coarse accents--"I must leave
to-night. I know too much--my brain is full of horrors. I have not slept
now for five nights, nor dare I eat anything but the raw flour. I will
leave to-night if they do not watch me too closely. Oh! if I could but
get into the streets--if I could but once again breathe the fresh air!
Hush! what's that? I thought I heard a noise."

He rose, and stood trembling and listening; but all was still, save the
simmering and hissing of the pies, and then he resumed his seat with a
deep sigh.

"All the doors fastened upon me," he said, "what can it mean? It's very
horrible, and my heart dies within me. Six weeks only have I been
here--only six weeks. I was starving before I came. Alas, alas! how much
better to have starved! I should have been dead before now, and spared
all this agony."

"Skinner!" cried a voice, and it was a female one--"Skinner, how long
will the ovens be?"

"A quarter of an hour--a quarter of an hour, Mrs. Lovett. God help me!"

"What is that you say?"

"I said, God help me!--surely a man may say that without offence."

A door slammed shut, and the miserable man was alone again.

"How strangely," he said, "on this night my thoughts go back to early
days, and to what I once was. The pleasant scenes of my youth recur to
me. I see again the ivy-mantled porch, and the pleasant village green. I
hear again the merry ringing laughter of my playmates, and there, in my
mind's eye, appears to me the bubbling stream, and the ancient mill, the
old mansion-house, with its tall turrets, and its air of silent
grandeur. I hear the music of the birds, and the winds making rough
melody among the trees. 'Tis very strange that all those sights and
sounds should come back to me at such a time as this, as if just to
remind me what a wretch I am."

He was silent for a few moments, during which he trembled with emotion;
then he spoke again, saying--

"Thus the forms of those whom I once knew, and many of whom have gone
already to the silent tomb, appear to come thronging round me. They bend
their eyes momentarily upon me, and, with settled expressions, show
acutely the sympathy they feel for me. I see her, too, who first, in my
bosom, lit up the flame of soft affection. I see her gliding past me
like the dim vision of a dream, indistinct, but beautiful; no more than
a shadow--and yet to me most palpable. What am I now--what am I now?"

He resumed his former position, with his head resting upon his hands; he
rocked himself slowly to and fro, uttering those moans of a tortured
spirit, which we have before noticed. But see, one of the small arch
doors open, in the gloom of those vaults, and a man, in a stooping
posture, creeps in--a half-mask is upon his face, and he wears a cloak;
but both his hands are at liberty. In one of them he carries a
double-headed hammer, with a powerful handle, of about ten inches in
length. He has probably come out of a darker place than the one into
which he now so cautiously creeps, for he shades the light from his
eyes, as if it were suddenly rather too much for him, and then he looks
cautiously round the vault, until he sees the crouched-up figure of the
man whose duty it is to attend the ovens. From that moment he looks at
nothing else; but advances towards him, steadily and cautiously. It is
evident that great secresy is his object, for he is walking on his
stocking soles only; and it is impossible to hear the slightest sounds
of his foot-steps. Nearer and nearer he comes, so slowly, and yet so
surely, towards him, who still keeps up the low moaning sound,
indicative of mental anquish. Now he is close to him, and he bends over
him for a moment, with a look of fiendish malice. It is a look which,
despite his mask, glances full from his eyes, and then grasping the
hammer tightly, in both hands, he raises it slowly above his head, and
gives it a swinging motion through the air. There is no knowing what
induced the man that was crouching on the stool to rise at that moment;
but he did so, and paced about with great quickness. A sudden shriek
burst from his lips, as he beheld so terrific an apparition before him;
but, before he could repeat the word, the hammer descended, crushing
into his skull, and he fell lifeless, without a moan.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"And so, Mr. Jarvis Williams, you have kept your word," said Mrs. Lovett
to the emaciated, care-worn stranger, who had solicited employment of
her, "and so, Jarvis Williams, you have kept your word, and come for
employment?"

"I have, madam, and hope that you can give it to me: I frankly tell you
that I would seek for something better, and more congenial to my
disposition, if I could; but who would employ one presenting such a
wretched appearance as I do? You see that I am all in rags, and I have
told you that I have been half starved, and therefore it is only some
common and ordinary employment that I can hope to get, and that made me
come to you."

"Well, I don't see why we should not make a trial of you, at all events,
so if you like to go down into the bakehouse, I will follow you, and
show you what you have to do. You remember that you have to live
entirely upon the pies, unless you like to purchase for yourself
anything else, which you may do if you can get the money. We give none,
and you must likewise agree never to leave the bakehouse."

"Never to leave it?"

"Never, unless you leave it for good, and for all; if upon those
conditions you choose to accept the situation, you may, and if not, you
can go about your business at once, and leave it alone."

"Alas, madam, I have no resource; but you spoke of having a man
already."

"Yes; but he has gone to his friends; he has gone to some of his very
oldest friends, who will be quite glad to see him, so now say the
word:--are you willing or are you not, to take the situation?"

"My poverty and my destitution consent, if my will be averse, Mrs.
Lovett; but, of course, I quite understand that I leave when I please."

"Oh, of course, we never think of keeping anybody many hours after they
begin to feel uncomfortable. If you be ready, follow me."

"I am quite ready, and thankful for a shelter. All the brightest visions
of my early life have long since faded away, and it matters little or
indeed nothing what now becomes of me; I will follow you, madam, freely,
upon the conditions you have mentioned."

Mrs. Lovett lifted up a portion of the counter which permitted him to
pass behind it, and then he followed her into a small room, which was at
the back of the shop. She then took a key from her pocket, and opened an
old door which was in the wainscoting, and immediately behind which was
a flight of stairs. These she descended, and Jarvis Williams followed
her, to a considerable depth, after which she took an iron bar from
behind another door, and flung it open, showing her new assistant the
interior of that vault which we have already very briefly described.

"These," she said, "are the ovens, and I will proceed to show you how
you can manufacture the pies, feed the furnaces, and make yourself
generally useful. Flour will be always let down through a trap-door from
the upper shop, as well as everything required for making the pies but
the meat, and that you will always find ranged upon shelves either in
lumps or steaks, in a small room through this door, but it is only at
particular times you will find the door open; and whenever you do so,
you had better always take out what meat you think you will require for
the next batch."

"I understand all that, madam," said Williams, "but how does it get
there?"

"That's no business of yours; so long as you are supplied with it, that
is sufficient for you; and now I will go through the process of making
one pie, so that you may know how to proceed, and you will find with
what amazing quickness they can be manufactured if you set about them in
the proper manner."

She then showed him how a piece of meat thrown into a machine became
finely minced up, by merely turning a handle; and then how flour and
water and lard were mixed up together, to make the crust of the pies, by
another machine, which threw out the paste thus manufactured in small
pieces, each just large enough for a pie. Lastly, she showed him how a
tray, which just held a hundred, could be filled, and, by turning a
windlass, sent up to the shop, through a square trap-door, which went
right up to the very counter.

"And now," she said, "I must leave you. As long as you are industrious
you will go on very well, but as soon as you begin to be idle, and
neglect the orders which are sent to you by me, you will get a piece of
information which will be useful, and which if you be a prudent man will
enable you to know what you are about."

"What is that? you may as well give it to me now."

"No; we seldom find there is occasion for it at first, but, after a
time, when you get well fed, you are pretty sure to want it."

So saying she left the place, and he heard the door by which he had
entered, carefully barred after her. Suddenly then he heard her voice
again, and so clearly and distinctly, too, that he thought she must have
come back again; but upon looking up at the door, he found that that
arose from her speaking through a small grating at the upper part of it,
to which her mouth was closely placed.

"Remember your duty," she said, "and I warn you, that any attempt to
leave here will be as futile as it will be dangerous."

"Except with your consent, when I relinquish the situation."

"Oh, certainly--certainly, you are quite right there, everybody who
relinquishes the situation goes to his old friends, whom he has not seen
for many years, perhaps."

"What a strange manner of talking she has!" said Jarvis Williams to
himself, when he found he was alone. "There seems to be some singular
and hidden meaning in every word she utters. What can she mean by a
communication being made to me, if I neglect my duty! It is very
strange; and what a singular looking place this is! I think it would be
quite unbearable if it were not for the delightful odour of the pies,
and they are indeed delicious--perhaps more delicious to me, who has
been famished so long, and have gone through so much wretchedness; there
is no one here but myself, and I am hungry now--frightfully hungry, and
whether the pies be done or not, I'll have half a dozen of them at any
rate, so here goes."

He opened one of the ovens, and the fragrant steam that came out was
perfectly delicious, and he sniffed it up with a satisfaction such as he
had never felt before, as regards anything that was eatable.

"Is it possible," he said "that I shall be able to make such delicious
pies? At all events one can't starve here, and if it be a kind of
imprisonment, it's a pleasant one. Upon my soul, they are nice, even
half-cooked--delicious! I'll have another half-dozen, there are lots of
them--delightful! I can't keep the gravy from running out of the corners
of my mouth. Upon my soul, Mrs. Lovett, I don't know where you get your
meat, but it's all as tender as young chickens, and the fat actually
melts away in one's mouth. Ah, these are pies, something like
pies!--they are positively fit for the gods!"

Mrs. Lovett's new man ate twelve threepenny pies, and then he thought of
leaving off. It was a little drawback not to have anything to wash them
down with but cold water; but he reconciled himself to this.

"For," as he said, "after all it would be a pity to take the flavour of
such pies out of one's mouth--indeed it would be a thousand pities, so I
won't think of it, but just put up with what I have got and not
complain. I might have gone further and fared worse with a vengeance,
and I cannot help looking upon it as a singular piece of good fortune
that made me think of coming here in my deep distress to try and get
something to do. I have no friends and no money; she whom I loved is
faithless, and here I am, master of as many pies as I like, and to all
appearance monarch of all I survey; for there really seems to be no one
to dispute my supremacy. To be sure my kingdom is rather a gloomy one;
but then I can abdicate it when I like, and when I am tired of those
delicious pies, if such a thing be possible, which I really very much
doubt, I can give up my situation, and think of something else. If I do
that, I will leave England for ever; it's no place for me after the many
disappointments I have had. No friend left me--my girl false--not a
relation but who would turn his back upon me! I will go somewhere where
I am unknown and can form new connexions, and perhaps make new
friendships of a more permanent and stable character than the old ones,
which have all proved so false to me; and, in the meantime, I'll make
and eat pies as fast as I can."




                              CHAPTER XII.
               THE RESOLUTION COME TO BY JOHANNA OAKLEY.


The beautiful Johanna--when in obedience to the command of her father
she left him, and begged him (the beef-eater) to manage matters with the
Rev. Mr. Lupin--did not proceed directly up stairs to her apartment, but
lingered on the staircase to hear what ensued; and if anything in her
dejected state of mind could have given her amusement, it would
certainly have been the way in which the beef-eater exacted a
retribution from the reverend personage, who was not likely again to
intrude himself into the house of the spectacle-maker. But when he was
gone, and she heard that a sort of peace had been patched up with her
mother--a peace which, from her knowledge of the high contracting
parties, she conjectured would not last long--she returned to her room,
and locked herself in; so that if any attempt were made to get her down
to partake of the supper, it might be supposed she was asleep, for she
felt herself totally unequal to the task of making one in any party,
however much she might respect the individual members that composed it.
And she did respect Ben the beef-eater; for she had a lively
recollection of much kindness from him during her early years, and she
knew that he had never come to the house when she was a child without
bringing her some token of his regard in the shape of a plaything, or
some little article of doll's finery, which at that time was very
precious. She was not wrong in her conjectures that Ben would make an
attempt to get her down stairs, for her father came up at the
beef-eater's request, and tapped at her door. She thought the best plan,
as indeed it was, would be to make no answer, so that the old
spectacle-maker concluded at once what she wished him to conclude,
namely, that she had gone to sleep; and he walked quietly down the
stairs again, glad that he had not disturbed her, and told Ben as much.
Now, feeling herself quite secure from interruption for the night,
Johanna did not attempt to seek repose, but set herself seriously to
reflect upon what had occurred. She almost repeated to herself, word for
word, what Colonel Jeffery had told her; and, as she revolved the matter
over and over again in her brain, a strange thought took possession of
her, which she could not banish, and which, when once it found a home
within her breast, began to gather probability from every slight
circumstance that was in any way connected with it. This thought,
strange as it may appear, was, that the Mr. Thornhill, of whom Colonel
Jeffery spoke in terms of such high eulogium, was no other than Mark
Ingestrie himself. It is astonishing, when once a thought occurs to the
mind, that makes a strong impression, how, with immense rapidity, a rush
of evidence will appear to come to support it. And thus it was with
regard to this supposition of Johanna Oakley. She immediately remembered
a host of little things which favoured the idea, and among the rest, she
fully recollected that Mark Ingestrie had told her he meant to change
his name when he left England; for that he wished her and her only to
know anything of him, or what had become of him; and that his intention
was to baffle inquiry, in case it should be made, particularly by Mr.
Grant, towards whom he felt a far greater amount of indignation, than
the circumstances at all warranted him in feeling. Then she recollected
all that Colonel Jeffery had said with regard to the gallant and noble
conduct of this Mr. Thornhill, and, girl like, she thought that those
high and noble qualities could surely belong to no one but her own
lover, to such an extent; and that, therefore, Mr. Thornhill and Mark
Ingestrie must be one and the same person. Over and over again, she
regretted she had not asked Colonel Jeffery for a personal description
of Mr. Thornhill, for that would have settled all her doubts at once,
and the idea that she had it still in her power to do so, in consequence
of the appointment he had made with her for that day week brought her
some consolation.

"It must have been he," she said; "his anxiety to leave the ship, and
get here by the day he mentions, proves it; besides, how improbable it
is, that at the burning of the ill-fated vessel, Ingestrie should place
in the hands of another what he intended for me, when that other was
quite as likely, and perhaps more so, to meet with death as Mark
himself."

Thus she reasoned, forcing herself each moment into a stronger belief of
the identity of Thornhill with Mark Ingestrie, and so certainly
narrowing her anxieties to a consideration of the fate of one person
instead of two.

"I will meet Colonel Jeffery," she said, "and ask him if this Mr.
Thornhill had fair hair, and a soft and pleasing expression about the
eyes, that could not fail to be remembered. I will ask him how he spoke,
and how he looked; and get him, if he can, to describe to me even the
very tones of his voice; and then I shall be sure, without the shadow of
a doubt, that it is Mark. But then, oh! then comes the anxious question,
of what has been his fate?"

When poor Johanna began to consider the multitude of things that might
have happened to her lover during his progress from Sweeney Todd's, in
Fleet-street, to her father's house, she became quite lost in a perfect
maze of conjecture, and then her thoughts always painfully reverted back
to the barber's shop where the dog had been stationed; and she trembled
to reflect for a moment upon the frightful danger to which that string
of pearls might have subjected him.

"Alas! alas!" she cried, "I can well conceive that the man whom I saw
attempting to poison the dog would be capable of any enormity. I saw his
face but for a moment, and yet it was one never again to be forgotten.
It was a face in which might be read cruelty and evil passions; besides,
the man who would put an unoffending animal to a cruel death, shows an
absence of feeling, and a baseness of mind, which make him capable of
any crime he thinks he can commit with impunity. What can I do--oh! what
can I do to unravel this mystery?"

No one could have been more tenderly and gently brought up than Johanna
Oakley, but yet, inhabitive of her heart, was a spirit and a
determination which few indeed could have given her credit for, by
merely looking on the gentle and affectionate countenance which she
ordinarily presented. But it is no new phenomenon in the history of the
human heart to find that some of the most gentle and loveliest of human
creatures are capable of the highest efforts of perversion; and when
Johanna Oakley told herself, which she did, she was determined to devote
her existence to a discovery of the mystery that enveloped the fate of
Mark Ingestrie, she likewise made up her mind that the most likely man
for accomplishing that object should not be rejected by her on the score
of danger, and she at once set to work considering what those means
should be. This seemed an endless task, but still she thought that if,
by any means whatever, she could get admittance to the barber's house,
she might be able to come to some conclusion as to whether or not it was
there where Thornhill, whom she believed to be Ingestrie, had been
stayed in his progress.

"Aid me Heaven," she cried, "in the adoption of some means of action on
the occasion. Is there any one with whom I dare advise? Alas! I fear
not, for the only person in whom I have put my whole heart is my father,
and his affection for me would prompt him at once to interpose every
possible obstacle to my proceeding, for fear danger should come of it.
To be sure, there is Arabella Wilmot, my old school fellow and bosom
friend, she would advise me to the best of her ability, but I much fear
she is too romantic and full of odd, strange actions, that she has taken
from books, to be a good adviser; and yet what can I do? I must speak to
some one, if it be but in case any accident happening to me, my father
may get news of it, and I know of no one else whom I can trust but
Arabella."

After some little more consideration, Johanna made up her mind that on
the following morning she would go to the house of her old school
friend, which was in the immediate vicinity, and hold a conversation
with her.

"I shall hear something," she said, "at least of a kindly and a
consoling character; for what Arabella may want in calm and steady
judgment, she fully compensates for in actual feeling, and what is most
of all, I know I can trust her word implicitly, and that my secret will
remain as safely locked in her breast as if it were in my own."

It was something to come to a conclusion to ask advice, and she felt
that some portion of her anxiety was lifted from her mind by the mere
fact that she had made so firm a mental resolution, that neither danger
nor difficulty should deter her from seeking to know the fate of her
lover. She retired to rest now with a greater hope, and while she is
courting repose, notwithstanding the chance of the discovered images
that fancy may present to her in her slumbers, we will take a glance at
the parlour below, and see how far Mrs. Oakley is conveying out the
pacific intention she had so tacitly expressed, and how the supper is
going forward, which, with not the best grace in the world, she is
preparing for her husband, who for the first time in his life had begun
to assert his rights, and for big Ben, the beef-eater, whom she as
cordially disliked as it was possible for any woman to detest any man.
Mrs. Oakley by no means preserved her taciturn demeanour, for after a
little she spoke, saying--

"There's nothing tasty in the house; suppose I run over the way to
Waggarge's, and get some of those Epping sausages with the peculiar
flavour."

"Ah, do," said Mr. Oakley, "they are beautiful, Ben, I can assure you."

"Well, I don't know," said Ben the beef-eater, "sausages are all very
well in their way, but you need such a plaguey lot of them; for if you
only eat them one at a time, how soon will you get through a dozen or
two."

"A dozen or two," said Mrs. Oakley; "why, there are only five to a
pound."

"Then," said Ben, making a mental calculation, "then, I think, ma'am,
that you ought not to get more than nine pounds of them, and that will
be a matter of forty-five mouthfuls for us."

"Get nine pounds of them," said Mr. Oakley, "if they be wanted; I know
Ben has an appetite."

"Indeed," said Ben, "but I have fell off lately, and don't take to my
wittals as I used; you can order, missus, if you please, a gallon of
half-and-half as you go along. One must have a drain of drink of some
sort; and mind you don't be going to any expense on my account, and
getting anything but the little snack I have mentioned, for ten to one I
shall take supper when I get to the Tower; only human nature is weak,
you know, missus, and requires something to be a continually a holding
of it up."

"Certainly," said Mr. Oakley, "certainly, have what you like, Ben; just
say the word before Mrs. Oakley goes out; is there anything else?"

"No, no," said Ben, "oh dear no, nothing to speak of; but if you should
pass a shop where they sells fat bacon, about four or five pounds, cut
into rashers, you'll find, missus, will help down the blessed sausages."

"Gracious Providence," said Mrs. Oakley, "who is to cook it?"

"Who is to cook it, ma'am? why the kitchen fire, I suppose; but mind ye
if the man aint got any sausages, there's a shop where they sells biled
beef at the corner, and I shall be quite satisfied if you brings in
about ten or twelve pounds of that. You can make it up into about half a
dozen sandwiches."

"Go, my dear, go at once," said Mr. Oakley, "and get Ben his supper. I
am quite sure he wants it, and be as quick as you can."

"Ah," said Ben, when Mrs. Oakley was gone, "I didn't tell you how I was
sarved last week at Mrs. Harveys. You know they are so precious genteel
there that they don't speak above their blessed breaths for fear of
wearing themselves out; and they sits down in a chair as if it were
balanced only on one leg, and a little more one way or t'other would
upset them. Then, if they sees a crumb a laying on the floor they rings
the bell, and a poor half-starved devil of a servant comes and says,
'Did you ring, ma'am?' and then they says 'Yes, bring a dust-shovel and
a broom, there is a crumb a laying there,' and then says I--'Damn you
all,' says I, 'bring a scavenger's cart, and half-dozen birch brooms,
there's a cinder just fell out of the fire.' Then in course they gets
shocked, and looks as blue as possible, and arter that, when they see as
I aint agoing, one of them says 'Mr. Benjamin Blumergutts, would you
like to take a glass of wine?' 'I should think so,' says I. Then he
says, says he, 'which would you prefer, red or white?' says he. 'White,'
says I, 'while you are screwing up your courage to pull out the red,' so
out they pull it; and as soon as I got hold of the bottle, I knocked the
neck of it off over the top bar of the fire-place, and then drank it all
up. 'Now, damn ye,' says I, 'you thinks all this is mighty genteel and
fine, but I don't, and consider you to be the blessedest set of humbugs
ever I set my eyes on; and, if ever you catch me here again, I'll be
genteel too, and I can't say more than that. Go to the devil, all of
ye.' So out I went, only I met with a little accident in the hall, for
they had got a sort of lamp hanging there, and somehow or 'nother, my
head went bang into it, and I carried it out round my neck; but when I
did get out, I took it off, and shied it slap in at the parlour window.
You never heard such a smash in all your life. I dare say they all
fainted away for about a week, the blessed humbugs."

"Well, I should not wonder," said Mr. Oakley, "I never go near them,
because I don't like their foolish pomposity and pride, which, upon very
slender resources, tries to ape what it don't at all understand; but
here is Mrs. Oakley with the sausages, and I hope you will make yourself
comfortable, Ben."

"Comfortable! I believe ye, I rather shall. I means it, and no mistake."

"I have brought three pounds," said Mrs. Oakley, "and told the man to
call in a quarter of an hour, in case there is any more wanted."

"The devil you have; and the bacon, Mrs. Oakley, the bacon!"

"I could not get any--the man had nothing but hams."

"Lor', ma'am, I'd put up with a ham cut thick, and never have said a
word about it. I am a angel of a temper, and if you did but know it.
Hilloa, look, is that the fellow with the half-and half?"

"Yes, here it is--a pot."

"A what?"

"A pot, to be sure."

"Well, I never; you are getting genteel, Mrs. Oakley. Then give us a
hold of it."

Ben took the pot, and emptied it at a draught, and then he gave a tap at
the bottom of it with his knuckles, to signify that he had accomplished
that feat, and then he said, "I tells you what, ma'am, if you takes me
for a baby, it's a great mistake, and any one would think you did, to
see you offering me a pot merely; it's an insult, ma'am."

"Fiddle-de-dee," said Mrs. Oakley; "it's a much greater insult to drink
it all up, and give nobody a drop."

"Is it? I wants to know how you are to stop it, ma'am, when you gets it
to your mouth? that's what I axes you--how are you to stop it, ma'am?
You didn't want me to spew it back again, did you, eh, ma'am?"

"You vile, low wretch!"

"Come, come, my dear," said Mr. Oakley, "you know our cousin. Ben don't
live among the most refined society, and so you ought to be able to look
over a little of--of--his--I may say, I am sure, without offence,
roughness now and then;--come, come, there is no harm done, I'm sure.
Forget and forgive say I. That's my maxim, and has always been, and will
always be."

"Well," said the beef-eater, "it's a good one to get through the world
with, and so there's an end of it. I forgives you, Mother Oakley."

"You forgive--"

"Yes, to be sure. Though I am only a beaf-eater, I suppose as I may
forgive people for all that--eh, Cousin Oakley?"

"Oh, of course, Ben, of course. Come, come, wife, you know as well as I
that Ben has many good qualities, and that take him for all in all, as
the man in the play says, we shan't in a hurry look upon his like
again."

"And I'm sure I don't want to look upon his like again," said Mrs.
Oakley; "I'd rather by a good deal keep him a week than a fortnight.
He's enough to breed a famine in the land, that he is."

"Oh, bless you, no," said Ben, "that's amongst your little mistakes,
ma'am, I can assure you. By the bye, what a blessed long time that
fellow is coming with the rest of the beer and the other sausages--why,
what's the matter with you, cousin Oakley--eh, old chap, you look out of
sorts?"

"I don't feel just the thing, do you know, Ben."

"Not--the thing--why--why, now you come to mention it, I somehow feel as
if all my blessed inside was on a turn and a twist. The devil--I--don't
feel comfortable at all I don't."

"And I'm getting very ill," gasped Mr. Oakley.

"And I'm getting iller," said the beef-eater, manufacturing a word for
the occasion. "Bless my soul! there's something gone wrong in my inside.
I know there's murder--there's a go--oh, Lord! it's a doubling me up, it
is."

"I feel as if my last hour had come," said Mr. Oakley--"I'm a--a--dying
man--I am--oh, good gracious! there was a twinge!"

Mrs. Oakley, with all the coolness in the world, took down her bonnet
from behind the parlour-door where it hung, and, as she put it on
said,--

"I told you both that some judgment would come over you, and now you see
it has. How do you like it? Providence is good, of course, to its own,
and I have--"

"What--what--?"

"_Pisoned_ the half-and-half."

Big Ben, the beef-eater, fell off his chair with a deep groan, and poor
Mr. Oakley sat glaring at his wife, and shivering with apprehension,
quite unable to speak, while she placed a shawl over her shoulders, as
she added in the same tone of calmness she had made the terrific
announcement concerning the poisoning--

"Now, you wretches, you see what a woman can do when she makes up her
mind for vengeance. As long as you all live, you'll recollect me; but,
if you don't, that won't much matter, for you won't live long, I can
tell you, and now I'm going to my sister's, Mrs. Tiddiblow."

So saying, Mrs. Oakley turned quickly round, and, with an insulting toss
of her head, and not at all caring for the pangs and sufferings of her
poor victims, she left the place, and proceeded to her sister's house,
where she slept as comfortably as if she had not by any means committed
two diabolical murders. But has she done so, or shall we, for the honour
of human nature, discover that she went to a neighbouring chemist's, and
only purchased some dreadfully powerful medicinal compound, which she
placed in the half-and-half, and which began to give those pangs to Big
Ben, the beef-eater, and to Mr. Oakley, concerning which they were both
so eloquent? This must have been the case; for Mrs. Oakley could not
have been such a fiend in a human guise as to laugh as she passed the
chemist's shop. Oh no! she might not have felt remorse, but that is a
very different thing, indeed, from laughing at the matter, unless it
were really laughable and not serious, at all. Big Ben and Mr. Oakley
must have at length found out how they had been hoaxed, and the most
probable thing was that the before-mentioned chemist himself told them;
for they sent for him in order to know if anything could be done to save
their lives. Ben from that day forthwith made a determination that he
would not visit Mr. Oakley, and the next time they met he said--

"I tell you what it is, that old hag, your wife, is one too many for us,
that's a fact; she gets the better of me altogether--so, whenever you
feels a little inclined for a gossip about old times, just you come down
to the Tower."

"I will, Ben."

"Do; we can always find something to drink, and you can amuse yourself,
too, by looking at the animals. Remember, feeding time is two o'clock;
so, now and then, I shall expect to see you, and, above all, be sure you
let me know if that canting parson, Lupin, comes any more to your
house."

"I will, Ben."

"Ah, do; and I'll give him another lesson if he should, and I tell you
how I'll do it. I'll get a free admission to the wild _beastesses_ in
the Tower, and when he comes to see 'em, for them 'ere sort of fellows
always goes everywhere they can go for nothing, I'll just manage to pop
him into a cage along of some of the most _cantankerous_ creatures as we
have."

"But would not that be dangerous?"

"Oh dear no! we has a laughing hyaena as would frighten him out of his
wits; but I don't think as he'd bite him much, do you know. He's as
playful as a kitten, and very fond of standing on his head."

"Well, then, Ben, I have, of course, no objection, although I do think
that the lesson you have already given to the reverend gentleman will
and ought to be fully sufficient for all purposes, and I don't expect we
shall see him again."

"But how does Mrs. O. behave to you?" asked Ben.

"Well, Ben, I don't think there's much difference; sometimes she's a
little civil, and sometimes she ain't; it's just as she takes it into
her head."

"Ah! that all comes of marrying."

"I have often wondered, though, Ben, that you never married." Ben gave a
chuckle as he replied--

"Have you though, really? Well, Cousin Oakley, I don't mind telling you,
but the real fact is, once I was very near being served out in that sort
of way."

"Indeed!"

"Yes. I'll tell you how it was; there was a girl called Angelina Day,
and a nice-looking enough creature she was as you'd wish to see, and
didn't seem as if she'd got any claws at all; leastways she kept them
in, like a cat at meal times."

"Upon my word, Ben, you have a great knowledge of the world."

"I believe you, I have! Haven't I been brought up among the wild beasts
in the Tower all my life? That's the place to get a knowledge of the
world in, my boy. I ought to know a thing or two, and in course I does."

"Well, but how was it, Ben, that you did not marry this Angelina you
speak of?"

"I'll tell you; she thought she had me as safe as a hare in a trap, and
she was as amiable as a lump of cotton. You'd have thought, to look at
her, that she did nothing but smile; and, to hear her, that she said
nothing but nice, mild, pleasant things, and I really began to think as
I had found out the proper sort of animal."

"But you were mistaken?"

"I believe you, I was. One day I'd been there to see her, I mean, at her
father's house, and she'd been as amiable as she could be; I got up to
go away, with a determination that the next time I got there I would ask
her to say yes, and when I had got a little way out of the garden of the
house where they lived--it was out of town some distance--I found I had
left my little walking-cane behind me, so I goes back to get it, and
when I got into the garden I heard a voice."

"Whose voice?"

"Why Angelina's, to be sure; she was speaking to a poor little dab of a
servant they had; and oh, my eye! how she did rap out, to be sure! Such
a speech as I never heard in all my life. She went on a matter of ten
minutes without stopping, and every other word was some ill name or
another; and her voice--oh, gracious! it was like a bundle of wire all
of a tangle--it was."

"And what did you do, then, upon making such a discovery as that in so
very odd and unexpected a manner?"

"Do! What do you suppose I did?"

"I really cannot say, as you are rather an eccentric fellow."

"Well then, I'll tell you. I went up to the house, and just popped in my
head, and says I, 'Angelina, I find out that all cats have claws after
all; good evening, and no more from your humble servant, who don't mind
the job of taming any wild animal but a woman;' and then off I walked,
and I never heard of her afterwards."

"Ah, Ben, it's true enough! You never know them beforehand; but after a
little time, as you say, then out come the claws."

"They does--they does."

"And I suppose you since, then, made up your mind to be a bachelor for
the rest of your life, Ben?"

"Of course I did. After such experience as that, I should have deserved
all I got, and no mistake, I can tell you; and if ever you catches me
paying any attention to a female woman, just put me in mind of Angelina
Day, and you'll see how I shall be off at once like a shot."

"Ah!" said Mr. Oakley, with a sigh, "everybody, Ben, aint born with your
good luck, I can tell you. You are a most fortunate man, Ben, and that's
a fact. You must have been born under some lucky planet I think, Ben, or
else you never would have had such a warning as you have had about the
claws. I found 'em out, Ben, but it was a deal too late; so I had only
to put up with my fate, and put the best face I could upon the matter."

"Yes, that's what learned folks call--what's its
name--fill--fill--something."

"Philosophy, I suppose you mean, Ben."

"Ah, that's it--you must put up with what you can't help, it means, I
take it. It's a fine name for saying you must grin and bear it."

"I suppose that is about the truth, Ben."

It cannot, however, be exactly said that the little incident connected
with Mr. Lupin had no good effect upon Mrs. Oakley, for it certainly
shook most alarmingly her confidence in that pious individual. In the
first place, it was quite clear that he shrank from the horrors of
martyrdom; and, indeed, to escape any bodily inconvenience, was
perfectly willing to put up with any amount of degradation or
humiliation that he could be subjected to; and that was, to the
apprehension of Mrs. Oakley, a great departure from what a saint ought
to be. Then again, her faith in the fact that Mr. Lupin was such a
chosen morsel as he had represented himself, was shaken from the
circumstance that no miracle in the shape of a judgment had taken place
to save him from the malevolence of Big Ben, the beef-eater; so that,
taking one thing in connexion with another, Mrs. Oakley was not near so
religious a character after that evening as she had been before it, and
that was something gained. Then circumstances soon occurred, of which
the reader will very shortly be fully aware, which were calculated to
awaken all the feelings of Mrs. Oakley, if she had really any feelings
to awaken, and to force her to make common cause with her husband in an
affair that touched him to the very soul, and did succeed in awakening
some feelings in her heart that had lain dormant for a long time, but
which were still far from being completely destroyed. These
circumstances were closely connected with the fate of one in whom we
hope, that by this time, the reader has taken a deep and kindly
interest--we mean Johanna--that young and beautiful, and gentle,
creature, who seemed to have been created with all the capacity to be so
very happy, and yet whose fate had become so clouded by misfortune, and
who appears now to be doomed through her best affections to suffer so
great an amount of sorrow, and to go through so many sad difficulties.
Alas, poor Johanna Oakley! Better had you loved some one of less
aspiring feelings, and of less ardent imagination, than he possessed to
whom you have given your heart's young affections. It is true that Mark
Ingestrie possessed genius, and perhaps it was the glorious light that
hovers around that fatal gift which prompted you to love him. But genius
is not only a blight and a desolation to its possessor, but it is so to
all who are bound to the gifted being by the ties of fond affection. It
brings with it that unhappy restlessness of intellect which is ever
straining after the unattainable, and which is never content to know the
end and ultimatum of earthly hopes and wishes; no, the whole life of
such persons is spent in one long struggle for a fancied happiness,
which like the ignis-fatuus of the swamp glitters but to betray those
who trust to its delusive and flickering beams.




                             CHAPTER XIII.
       JOHANNA'S INTERVIEW WITH ARABELLA WILMOT, AND THE ADVICE.


Alas! poor Johanna, thou hast chosen but an indifferent confidante in
the person of that young and inexperienced girl to whom it seems good to
thee to impart thy griefs. Not for one moment do we mean to say, that
the young creature to whom the spectacle-maker's daughter made up her
mind to unbosom herself, was not all that any one could wish as regards
honour, goodness, and friendship. But she was one of those creatures who
yet look upon the world as a fresh green garden, and had not yet lost
that romance of existence which the world and its ways soon banish from
the breasts of all. She was young, even almost to girlhood, and having
been the idol of her family circle, she knew just about as little of the
great world as a child. But while we cannot but to some extent regret
that Johanna should have chosen such a confidant and admirer, we with
feelings of great freshness and pleasure proceed to accompany her to
that young girl's house. Now, a visit from Johanna Oakley to the Wilmots
was not so rare a thing, that it should excite any unusual surprise, but
in this case it did excite unusual pleasure, because they had not been
there for some time. And the reason that she had not, may well be found
in the peculiar circumstances that had for a considerable period
environed her. She had a secret to keep which, although it might not
proclaim what it was most legibly upon her countenance, yet proclaimed
that it had an existence, and as she had not made Arabella a confidant,
she dreaded the other's friendly questions of the young creature. It may
seem surprising that Johanna Oakley had kept from one whom she so much
esteemed, and with whom she had made such a friendship, the secret of
her affections; but that must be accounted for by a difference of ages
between them to a sufficient extent in that early period of life to show
itself palpably. That difference was not quite two years, but when we
likewise state, that Arabella was of that small, delicate style of
beauty, which makes her look like a child, when even upon the very verge
of womanhood, we shall not be surprised that the girl of seventeen
hesitated to confide a secret of the heart to what seemed but a
beautiful child. The last year, however, had made a great difference in
the appearance of Arabella, for, although she still looked a year or so
younger than she really was, a more staid and thoughtful expression had
come over her face, and she no longer presented, at times when she
laughed, that child-like expression, which had been as remarkable in her
as it was delightful. She was as different looking from Johanna as she
could be, for whereas Johanna's hair was of a rich and glossy brown, so
nearly allied to black that it was commonly called such; the long waving
ringlets that shaded the sweet countenance of Arabella Wilmot were like
amber silk blended to a pale beauty. Her eyes were nearly blue, and not
that pale grey, which courtesy calls of that celestial colour, and their
long, fringing lashes hung upon a cheek of the most delicate and
exquisite hue that nature could produce. Such was the young, loveable,
and amiable creature who had made one of those girlish friendships with
Johanna Oakley that, when they do endure beyond the period of almost
mere childhood, endure for ever, and become one among the most dear and
cherished sensations of the heart. The acquaintance had commenced at
school, and might have been of that evanescent character of so many
school friendships, which, in after life, are scarcely so much
remembered as the most dim visions of a dream; but it happened that they
were congenial spirits, which, let them be thrown together under any
circumstances whatever, would have come together with a perfect and a
most endearing confidence in each other's affections. That they were
school companions was the mere accident that brought them together, and
not the cause of their friendship. Such, then, was the being to whom
Johanna Oakley looked for counsel and assistance; and notwithstanding
all that we have said respecting the likelihood of that counsel being of
an inactive and girlish character, we cannot withhold our meed of
approbation to Johanna, that she had selected one so much in every way
worthy of her honest esteem. The hour at which she called was such as to
ensure Arabella being within, and the pleasure which showed itself upon
the countenance of the young girl, as she welcomed her old playmate, was
a feeling of the most delightful and unaffecting character.

"Why, Johanna," she said, "you so seldom call upon me now, that I
suppose I must esteem it as a very special act of grace and favour to
see you."

"Arabella," said Johanna, "I do not know what you will say to me when I
tell you that my present visit is because I am in a difficulty, and want
your advice."

"Then you could not have come to a better person, for I have read all
the novels in London, and know all the difficulties that anybody can
possibly get into, and, what is more important, too, I know all the
means of getting out of them, let them be what they may."

"And yet, Arabella, scarcely in all your novel reading will you find
anything so strange and so eventful as the circumstances, I grieve to
say, it is in my power to record to you. Sit down, and listen to me,
dear Arabella, and you shall know all."

"You surprise and alarm me by that serious countenance, Johanna."

"The subject is a serious one. I love."

"Oh! is that all? So do I; there's a young Captain Desbrook in the
King's Guards. He comes here to buy his gloves; and if you did but hear
him sigh as he leans over the counter, you would be astonished."

"Ah! but, Arabella, I know you well. Yours is one of those fleeting
passions that, like the forked lightning, appear for a moment, and ere
you can say behold, is gone again. Mine is deeper in my heart, so deep,
that to divorce it from it would be to destroy its home for ever."

"But, why so serious, Johanna? You do not mean to tell me that it is
possible for you to love any man without his loving you in return?"

"You are right there, Arabella. I do not come to speak to you of a
hopeless passion--far from it; but you shall hear. Lend me, my dear
friend, your serious attention, and you shall hear of such mysterious
matters."

"Mysterious!--then I shall be in my very element. For know that I quite
live and exult in mystery, and you could not possibly have come to any
one who would more welcomely receive such a commission from you; I am
all impatience."

Johanna then, with great earnestness, related to her friend the whole of
the particulars connected with her deep and sincere attachment to Mark
Ingestrie. She told her how, in spite of all circumstances which
appeared to have a tendency to cast a shadow and blight upon their young
affection, they had loved, and loved truly; how Ingestrie, disliking,
both from principle and distaste, the study of the law, had quarrelled
with his uncle, Mr. Grant, and then how, as a bold adventurer, he had
gone to seek his fortunes in the Indian seas; fortunes which promised to
be splendid, but which might end in disappointment and defeat, and that
they had ended in such calamities most deeply and truly did she mourn to
be compelled to state. And she concluded by saying--

"And now, Arabella, you know all I have to tell you. You know how truly
I have loved, and how, after teaching myself to expect happiness, I have
met with nothing but despair; and you may judge for yourself, how sadly
the fate, or rather the mystery, which hangs over Mark Ingestrie, must
deeply affect me, and how lost my mind must be in all kinds of
conjecture concerning him."

The hilarity of spirits which had characterised Arabella in the earlier
part of their interview, entirely left her as Johanna proceeded in her
mournful narration, and by the time she had concluded, tears of the most
genuine sympathy stood in her eyes. She took the hands of Johanna in
both her own, and said to her--

"Why, my poor Johanna, I never expected to hear from your lips so sad a
tale. This is most mournful, indeed very mournful; and, although I was
half inclined before to quarrel with you for this tardy confidence--for
you must recollect that it is the first I have heard of this whole
affair--but now the misfortunes that oppress you are quite sufficient,
Heaven knows, without me adding to them by the shadow of a reproach."

"They are indeed, Arabella, and believe me, if the course of my love ran
smoothly, instead of being, as it has been, full of misadventures, you
should have had nothing to complain of on the score of want of
confidence; but I will own I did hesitate to inflict on you my miseries,
for miseries they have been, and, alas! miseries they seem destined to
remain."

"Johanna, you could not have used an argument more delusive than that.
It is not one which should have come from your lips to me."

"But surely it was a good motive to spare you pain?"

"And did you think so lightly of my friendship that it was to be
entrusted with nothing but what wore a pleasant aspect? True friendship
surely is best shown in the encounter of difficulty and distress. I
grieve, Johanna, indeed, that you have so much mistaken me."

"Nay, now you do me an injustice: it was not that I doubted your
friendship for one moment, but that I did indeed shrink from casting the
shadow of my sorrows over what should be, and what I hope is, the
sunshine of your heart. That was the respect which deterred me from
making you a confidant of, what I suppose I must call, this ill-fated
passion."

"No, not ill-fated, Johanna. Let us still believe that the time will
come when it will be far otherwise than ill-fated."

"But what do you think of all that I have told you? Can you gather from
it any hope?"

"Abundance of hope, Johanna. You have no certainty of the death of
Ingestrie."

"I certainly have not, as far as regards the loss of him in the Indian
seas; but, Arabella, there is one supposition which, from the first
moment that it found a home in my breast, has been growing stronger and
stronger, and that supposition is, that this Mr. Thornhill was no other
than Mark Ingestrie himself."

"Indeed! Think you so? That would be a strange supposition. Have you any
special reasons for such a thought?"

"None--further than a something which seemed ever to tell my heart from
the first moment that such was the case, and a consideration of the
improbability of the story related by Thornhill. Why should Mark
Ingestrie have given him the string of pearls and the message to me,
trusting to the preservation of this Thornhill, and assuming, for some
strange reason, that he himself must fall?"

"There is good argument in that, Johanna."

"And, moreover, Mark Ingestrie told me he intended altering his name
upon the expedition."

"It is strange; but now you mention such a supposition, it appears, do
you know, Johanna, each moment more probable to me. Oh, that fatal
string of pearls!"

"Fatal, indeed! for if Mark Ingestrie and Thornhill be one and the same
person, the possession of those pearls has been the temptation to
destroy him."

"There cannot be a doubt upon that point, Johanna, and so you will find
in all tales of love and of romance, that jealousy and wealth have been
the sources of all the abundant evils which fond and attached hearts
have from time to time suffered."

"It is so; I believe, it is so, Arabella; but advise me what to do, for
truly I am myself incapable of action. Tell me what you think it is
possible to do, under those disastrous circumstances, for there is
nothing which I will not dare attempt." "Why, my dear Johanna, you must
perceive that all the evidence you have regarding this Thornhill,
follows him up to that barber's shop in Fleet-street, and no farther."

"It does, indeed."

"Can you not imagine, then, that there lies the mystery of his fate;
and, from what you have yourself seen of this man, Todd, do you think he
is one who would hesitate even at murder?"

"Oh, horror! my own thoughts have taken that dreadful turn, but I
dreaded to pronounce the word which would embody them. If, indeed, that
fearful-looking man fancied that, by any deed of blood, he could become
possessed of such a treasure as that which belonged to Mark Ingestrie,
unchristian and illiberal as it may sound, the belief clings to me that
he would not hesitate to do it."

"Do not, however, conclude, Johanna, that such is the case. It would
appear from all you have heard and seen of these circumstances, that
there is some fearful mystery; but do not, Johanna, conclude hastily
that that mystery is one of death."

"Be it so, or not," said Johanna, "I must solve it, or go distracted.
Heaven have mercy upon me!--for even now I feel a fever in my brain that
precludes almost the possibility of rational thought."

"Be calm, be calm--we will think the matter over calmly and seriously;
and who knows but that, mere girls as we are, we may think of some
adventitious mode of arriving at a knowledge of the truth; and now I am
going to tell you something, which your narrative has recalled to my
mind."

"Say on, Arabella, I shall listen to you with deep attention."

"A short time since, about six months, I think, an apprentice of my
father, in the last week of his servitude, was sent to the west-end of
the town, to take a considerable sum of money; but he never came back
with it, and from that day to this we have heard nothing of him,
although, from inquiry that my father made, he ascertained that he
received the money, and that he met an acquaintance in the Strand, who
parted from him at the corner of Milford-lane, and to whom he said that
he intended to call at Sweeney Todd's, the barber, in Fleet-street, to
have his hair dressed, because there was to be a regatta on the Thames,
and he was determined to go to it whether my father liked or not."

"And he was never heard of?"

"Never. Of course, my father made every inquiry upon the subject, and
called upon Sweeney Todd for the purpose; but, as he declared that no
such person had ever called at his shop, the inquiry there terminated."

"'Tis very strange."

"And most mysterious; for the friends of the youth were indeed
indefatigable in their searches for him; and, by subscribing together
for the purpose, they offered a large reward to any one who could or
would give them information regarding his fate."

"And was it all in vain?"

"All; nothing could be learned whatever. Not even the remotest clue was
obtained, and there the affair has rested, in the most profound of
mysteries."

Johanna shuddered, and for some few moments the two young girls were
silent. It was Johanna who broke that silence, by exclaiming--

"Arabella, assist me with what advice you can, so that I may set about
what I purpose with the best prospect of success and the least danger;
not that I shrink on my own account from risk, but if any misadventure
were to occur to me, I might thereby be incapacitated from pursuing that
object, to which I will now devote the remainder of my life."

"But what can you do, my dear Johanna? It was but a short time since
there was a placard in the barber's window to say that he wanted a lad
as an assistant in his business, but that has been removed, or we might
have procured some one to take the situation for the express purpose of
playing the spy upon the barber's proceedings."

"But, perchance, still there may be an opportunity of accomplishing
something in that way, if you knew of any one that would undertake the
adventure."

"There will be no difficulty, Johanna, in discovering one willing to do
so, although we might be long in finding one of sufficient capacity that
we could trust; but I am adventurous, Johanna, as you know, and I think
I could have got my cousin Albert to personate the character, only that
I think he's rather a giddy youth, and scarcely to be trusted with a
mission of so much importance."

"Yes, and a mission likewise, Arabella, which, by a single false step,
might be made frightfully dangerous."

"It might indeed."

"Then it will be unfair to place it upon any one but those who feel most
deeply for its success."

"Johanna, the enthusiasm with which you speak awakens in me a thought
which I shrink from expressing to you, and which, I fear, perhaps more
originates from a certain feeling of romance, which, I believe, is a
besetting sin, than from any other cause."

"Name it, Arabella; name it."

"It would be possible for you or I to accomplish the object, by going
disguised to the barber's, and accepting such a situation, if it were
vacant, for a period of about twenty-four hours, in order that during
that time an opportunity might be taken of searching in his house for
some evidence upon the subject nearest to your heart."

"It is a happy thought," said Johanna, "and why should I hesitate at
encountering any risk, or toil, or difficulty, for him who has risked so
much for me? What is there to hinder me from carrying out such a
resolution? At any moment, if great danger should beset me, I can rush
into the street, and claim protection from the passers-by."

"And moreover, Johanna, if you went on such a mission, remember you go
with my knowledge, and that consequently I would bring you assistance,
if you appeared not in the specified time for your return."

"Each moment, Arabella, the plan assumes to my mind a better shape. If
Sweeney Todd be innocent of contriving anything against the life and
liberty of those who seek his shop, I have nothing to fear; but if, on
the contrary, he be guilty, danger to me would be the proof of such
guilt, and that is a proof which I am willing to chance encountering for
the sake of the great object I have in view; but how am I to provide
myself with the necessary means?"

"Be at rest upon that score. My cousin Albert and you are as nearly of a
size as possible. He will be staying here shortly, and I will secure
from his wardrobe a suit of clothes, which I am certain will answer your
purpose. But let me implore you to wait until you have had your second
interview with Colonel Jeffery."

"That is well thought of; I will meet him, and question him closely as
to the personal appearance of this Mr. Thornhill; beside, I shall hear
if he has any confirmed suspicion on the subject."

"That is well, you will soon meet him, for the week is running on; and
let me implore you, Johanna, to come to me the morning after you have so
met him, and then we will again consult upon this plan of operations,
which appears to us feasible and desirable."

Some more conversation of a similar character ensued between these young
girls; and upon the whole, Johanna Oakley felt much comforted by her
visit, and more able to think calmly as well as seriously upon the
subject which engrossed her whole thoughts and feelings; and when she
returned to her own home, she found that much of the excitement of
despair which had formerly had possession of her, had given way to hope;
and with that natural feeling of joyousness, and that elasticity of mind
which belongs to the young, she began to build in her imagination some
airy fabrics of future happiness. Certainly, these suppositions went
upon the fact that Mark Ingestrie was a prisoner, and not that his life
had been taken by the mysterious barber; for although the possibility of
his having been murdered had found a home in her imagination, still to
her pure spirit it seemed by far too hideous to be true, and she
scarcely could be said really and truly to entertain it as a matter
which was likely to be true.




                              CHAPTER XIV.
                 TOBIAS'S THREAT, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.


Perhaps one of the most pitiable objects now in our history is poor
Tobias, Sweeney Todd's boy, who certainly had his suspicions aroused in
the most terrific manner, but who was terrified, by the threats of what
the barber was capable of doing against his mother, from making any
disclosures. The effect upon his personal appearance of this wear and
tear of his intellect was striking and manifest. The hue of youth and
health entirely departed from his cheeks, and he looked so sad and
careworn, that it was quite a terrible thing to look upon a young lad
so, as it were, upon the threshold of existence, and in whom anxious
thoughts were making such war upon the physical energies. His cheeks
were pale and sunken; his eyes had an unnatural brightness about them,
and, to look upon his lips, one would think they had never parted in a
smile for many a day, so sadly were they compressed together. He seemed
ever to be watching likewise for something fearful, and even as he
walked the streets he would frequently turn and look inquiringly around
him with a shudder; and in his brief interview with Colonel Jeffery and
his friend the captain, we can have a tolerably good comprehension of
the state of his mind. Oppressed with fears, and all sorts of dreadful
thoughts, panting to give utterance to what he knew and to what he
suspected, yet terrified into silence for his mother's sake, we cannot
but view him as signally entitled to the sympathy of the reader, and as,
in all respects, one sincerely to be pitied for the cruel circumstances
in which he was placed. The sun is shining brightly, and even that busy
region of trade and commerce, Fleet-street, is looking gay and
beautiful; but not for that poor spirit-stricken lad are any of the
sights and sounds which used to make up the delight of his existence,
reaching his eyes or ears now with their accustomed force. He sits moody
and alone, and in the position which he always assumes when Sweeney Todd
is from home--that is to say, with his head resting on his hands, and
looking the picture of melancholy abstraction.

"What shall I do?" he said to himself, "what will become of me? I think
if I live here any longer, I shall go out of my senses. Sweeney Todd is
a murderer--I am quite certain of it, and I wish to say so, but I dare
not for my mother's sake. Alas! alas! the end of it will be, that he
will kill me, or that I shall go out of my senses, and then I shall die
in some mad-house, and no one will care what I say."

The boy wept bitterly after he had uttered these melancholy reflections,
and he felt his tears something of a relief to him, so that he looked up
after a little time, and glanced around him.

"What a strange thing," he said, "that people should come into this
shop, to my certain knowledge, who never go out of it again, and yet
what becomes of them I cannot tell."

He looked with a shuddering anxiety towards the parlour, the door of
which Sweeney Todd took care to lock always when he left the place, and
he thought that he should like much to have a thorough examination of
that room.

"I have been in it," he said, "and it seems full of cupboards and
strange holes and corners, such as I never saw before, and there is an
odd stench in it that I cannot make out at all; but it's out of the
question thinking of ever being in it above a few minutes at a time, for
Sweeney Todd takes good care of that."

The boy rose, and opened a small cupboard that was in the shop. It was
perfectly empty.

"Now, that's strange," he said, "there was a walking-stick with an ivory
top to it here just before he went out, and I could swear it belonged to
a man who came in to be shaved. More than once--ah! and more than twice,
too, when I have come in suddenly, I have seen people's hats, and
Sweeney Todd would try and make me believe that people go away after
being shaved, and leave their hats behind them."

He walked up to the shaving chair as it was called, which was a large,
old-fashioned piece of furniture, made of oak, and carved; and, as the
boy threw himself into it, he said--

"What an odd thing it is that this chair is screwed so tight to the
floor! Here is a complete fixture, and Sweeney Todd says it is so
because it's in the best possible light, and if he were not to make it
fast in such a way, the customers would shift it about from place to
place, so that he could not conveniently shave them; it may be true, but
I don't know."

"And you have your doubts," said the voice of Sweeney Todd, as that
individual, with a noiseless step, walked into the shop--"you have your
doubts, Tobias? I shall have to cut your throat, that is quite clear."

[Illustration: Tobias Alarmed At The Mysterious Appearance Of Todd.]

"No, no, have mercy upon me; I did not mean what I said."

"Then it's uncommonly imprudent to say it, Tobias. Do you remember our
last conversation? Do you remember that I can hang your mother when I
please, because, if you do not, I beg to put you in mind of that
pleasant little circumstance?"

"I cannot forget--I do not forget."

"'Tis well; and mark me, I will not have you assume such an aspect as
you wear when I am not here. You don't look cheerful, Tobias; and,
notwithstanding your excellent situation, with little to do, and the
number of Lovett's pies you eat, you fall away."

"I cannot help it," said Tobias, "since you told me what you did
concerning my mother. I have been so anxious that I cannot help--"

"Why should you be anxious? Her preservation depends upon yourself, and
upon yourself wholly. You have but to keep silent, and she is safe; but
if you utter one word that shall be displeasing to me about my affairs,
mark me, Tobias, she comes to the scaffold; and if I cannot conveniently
place you in the same mad-house where the last boy I had was placed, I
shall certainly be under the troublesome necessity of cutting your
throat."

"I will be silent--I will say nothing, Mr. Todd. I know I shall die
soon, and then you will get rid of me altogether, and I don't care how
soon that may be, for I am quite weary of my life--I shall be glad when
it is over."

"Very good," said the barber; "that's all a matter of taste. And now,
Tobias, I desire that you look cheerful and smile, for a gentleman is
outside feeling his chin with his hand, and thinking he may as well come
in and be shaved. I may want you, Tobias, to go to Billingsgate, and
bring me a pennyworth of shrimps."

"Yes," thought Tobias, with a groan--"yes, while you murder him."




                              CHAPTER XV.
   THE SECOND INTERVIEW BETWEEN JOHANNA AND THE COLONEL IN THE TEMPLE
                                GARDENS.


Now that there was a great object to gain by a second interview with
Colonel Jeffery, the anxiety of Johanna Oakley to have it became
extremely great, and she counted the very hours until the period should
arrive when she could again proceed to the Temple-gardens with something
like a certainty of finding him. The object, of course, was to ask him
for a description of Mr. Thornhill, sufficiently accurate to enable her
to come to something like a positive conclusion as to whether she ought
to call him to her own mind as Mark Ingestrie or not. And Colonel
Jeffery was not a bit the less anxious to see her than she was to look
upon him; for although in divers lands he had looked upon many a fair
face, and heard many a voice that had sounded soft and musical in his
ears, he had seen none that, to his mind, was so fair, and had heard no
voice that he had considered really so musical and charming to listen
to, as Johanna Oakley's. A man of more honourable and strict sense of
honour than Colonel Jeffery could not have been found, and, therefore,
it was that he allowed himself to admire the beautiful under any
circumstances, because he knew that his admiration was of no dangerous
quality, but that, on the contrary, it was one of those feelings which
might exist in a bosom such as his, quite undebased by a meaner
influence. We think it necessary, however, before he has his second
meeting with Johanna Oakley, to give such an explanation of his thoughts
and feelings as it is in our power. When first he met her, the purity of
her mind, and the genuine and beautiful candour of all she said, struck
him most forcibly, as well as her great beauty, which could not fail to
be extremely manifest. After that he began to reason with himself as to
what ought to be his feelings with regard to her--namely, what portion
of these ought to be suppressed, and what ought to be encouraged. If
Mark Ingestrie were dead, there was not a shadow of interference or
dishonour in him, Colonel Jeffery, loving the beautiful girl, who was
surely not to be shut out of the pale of all affection because the first
person to whom her heart had warmed with a pure and holy passion, was no
more.

"It may be," he thought, "that she is incapable of feeling a sentiment
which can at all approach that which once she has felt; but still she
may be happy and serene, and may pass many joyous hours as the wife of
another."

He did not positively make these reflections as applicable to himself,
although they had a tendency that way, and he was fast verging to a
state of mind which might induce him to give them a more actual
application. He did not tell himself that he loved her--no, the word
"admiration" took the place of the more powerful term; but then, can we
not doubt that, at this time, the germ of a very pure and holy affection
was lighted up in the heart of Colonel Jeffery for the beautiful
creature who suffered the pangs of so much disappointment, and who loved
one so well, who, we almost fear, if he were living, was scarcely the
sort of person fully to requite such an affection. But we know so little
of Mark Ingestrie, and there appears to be so much doubt as to whether
he be alive or dead, that we should not prejudge him upon such very
insufficient evidence. Johanna Oakley did think of taking Arabella
Wilmot with her to this meeting with Colonel Jeffery, but she abandoned
the idea, because it really looked as if she was either afraid of him or
afraid of herself, so she resolved to go alone; and when the hour of
appointment came, she was then walking upon that broad gravelled path,
which has been trodden by some of the best, and some of the most
eminent, as well as some of the worst of human beings. It was not likely
that with the feelings of Colonel Jeffery towards her, he would keep her
waiting. Indeed, he was then a good hour before the time, and his only
great dread was, that she might not come. He had some reason for this
dread, because it will be readily recollected by the reader, that she
had not positively promised to come; so that all he had was a hope that
way tending and nothing further. As minute after minute had passed away,
she came not, although the time had not yet really arrived; his
apprehension that she would not give him the meeting had grown in his
mind almost to a certainty, when he saw her timidly advancing along the
garden walk. He rose to meet her at once, and for a few moments after he
had greeted her with kind civility she could do nothing but look
inquiringly in his face, to know if he had any news to tell her of the
object of her anxious solicitude.

"I have heard nothing, Miss Oakley," he said, "that can give you any
satisfaction concerning the fate of Mr. Thornhill, but we have much
suspicion--I say we, because I have taken a friend into my
confidence--that something serious must have happened to him, and that
the barber, Sweeney Todd, in Fleet-street, at whose door the dog so
mysteriously took his post, knows something of that circumstance, be it
what it may."

He led her to a seat as she spoke, and when she had recovered
sufficiently the agitation of her feelings to speak, she said in a
timid, hesitating voice--

"Had Mr. Thornhill fair hair, and large, clear, grey eyes?"

"Yes, he had such; and, I think, his smile was the most singularly
beautiful I ever beheld in a man."

"Heaven help me!" said Johanna.

"Have you any reason for asking that question concerning Thornhill?"

"God grant I had not; but, alas! I have indeed. I feel that in
Thornhill, I must recognise Mark Ingestrie himself."

"You astonish me."

"It must be so, it must be so; you have described him to me, and I
cannot doubt it; Mark Ingestrie and Thornhill are one! I knew that he
was going to change his name, when he went out upon that wild adventure
to the Indian Sea. I was well aware of that fact."

"I cannot think, Miss Oakley, that you are correct in that supposition.
There are many things which induce me to think otherwise; and the first
and foremost of them is, that the ingenuous character of Mr. Thornhill
forbids the likelihood of such a thing occurring. You may depend it is
not--cannot be, as you suppose."

"The proofs are too strong for me, and I find I dare not doubt them. It
is so, Colonel Jeffery, as time, perchance, may show; it is sad, very
sad, to think that it is so, but I dare not doubt it, now that you have
described him to me exactly as he lived."

"I must own, that in giving an opinion on such a point to you, I may be
accused of arrogance and presumption, for I have had no description of
Mark Ingestrie, and never saw him; and although you never saw certainly
Mr. Thornhill, yet I have described him to you, and therefore you are
able to judge from that description something of him."

"I am indeed, and I cannot--dare not doubt. It is horrible to be
positive on this point to me, because I do fear with you that something
dreadful has occurred, and that the barber in Fleet-street could unravel
a frightful secret, if he chose, connected with Mark Ingestrie's fate."

"I do sincerely hope from my heart that you are wrong; I hope it,
because I tell you frankly, dim and obscure as the hope that Mark
Ingestrie may have been picked up from the wreck of his vessel, it is
yet stronger than the supposition that Thornhill has escaped the
murderous hands of Sweeney Todd, the barber."

Johanna looked in his face so imploringly, and with such an expression
of hopelessness, that it was most sad indeed to see her, and quite
involuntarily he exclaimed--

"If the sacrifice of my life would be to you a relief, and save you from
the pangs you suffer, believe me, it should be made."

She started as she said--

"No, no: Heaven knows enough has been sacrificed already--more than
enough, much more than enough. But do not suppose that I am ungrateful
for the generous interest you have taken in me. Do not suppose that I
think any the less of the generosity and nobility of soul that would
offer a sacrifice, because it is one that I would hesitate to accept.
No, believe me, Colonel Jeffery, that among the few names that are
enrolled in my breast--and such to me will ever be honoured--remember
yours will be found while I live, but that will not be long--but that
will not be long."

"Nay, do not speak so despairingly."

"Have I not cause for despair?"

"Cause have you for great grief, but yet scarcely for despair. You are
young yet, and let me entertain a hope that even if a feeling of regret
may mingle with your future thoughts, time will achieve something in
tempering your sorrow; and if not great happiness, you may know yet
great serenity."

"I dare not hope it, but I know your words are kindly spoken, and most
kindly meant."

"You may well assure yourself that they are so."

"I will ascertain his fate, or perish."

"You alarm me by those words, as well as by your manner of uttering
them. Let me implore you, Miss Oakley, to attempt nothing rash; remember
how weak and inefficient must be the exertions of a young girl like
yourself, one who knows so little of the world, and can really
understand so little of its wickedness."

"Affection conquers all obstacles, and the weakest and most inefficient
girl that ever stepped, if she have strong within her that love which,
in all its sacred intensity, knows no fear, shall indeed accomplish
much. I feel that, in such a cause, I could shake off all girlish
terrors and ordinary alarms; and if there be danger, I would ask, what
is life to me without all that could adorn it and make it beautiful?"

"This, indeed, is the very enthusiasm of affection, when, believe me, it
will lead you to some excess--to some romantic exercise of feeling, such
as will bring great danger in its train, to the unhappiness of those who
love you."

"Those who love me--who is there to love me now?"

"Johanna Oakley, I dare not and will not utter words that come thronging
to my lips, but which I fear might be unwelcome to your ears; I will not
say that I can answer the question that you have asked, because it would
sound ungenerous at such a time as this, when you have met me to talk
about the fate of another. Oh! forgive me, that, hurried away by the
feeling of a moment, I have uttered these words, for I meant not to
utter them."

Johanna looked at him in silence, and it might be that there was the
slightest possible tinge of reproach in her look, but it was very
slight, for one glance at that ingenuous countenance would be sufficient
to convince the most sceptical of the truth and single-mindedness of its
owner: of this there could be no doubt whatever, and if anything in the
shape of a reproach was upon the point of coming from her lips, she
forbore to utter it.

"May I hope," he added, "that I have not lowered myself in your esteem,
Miss Oakley, by what I have said?"

"I hope," she said gently, "that you will continue to be my friend."

He laid an emphasis on the word "friend," and he fully understood what
she meant to imply thereby, and after a moment's pause said--

"Heaven forbid that ever, by word or by action, Johanna, I should do
aught to deprive myself of that privilege. Let me be yet your friend,
since--"

He left the sentence unfinished, but if he had added the words--"Since I
can do no more," he could not have made it more evident to Johanna that
those were the words he intended to utter.

"And now," he added, "that I hope and trust we understand each other
better than we did, and you are willing to call me by the name of
friend, let me once more ask of you, by the privilege of such a title,
to be careful of yourself, and not to risk much in order that you may,
perhaps, have some remote chance of achieving very little."

"But can I endure this dreadful suspense?"

"It is, alas! too common an infliction on human nature, Johanna. Pardon
me for addressing you as Johanna."

"Nay, it requires no excuse. I am accustomed so to be addressed by all
who feel a kindly interest for me. Call me Johanna if you will, and I
shall feel a greater assurance of your friendship and your esteem."

"I will then avail myself of that permission, and again and again I will
entreat you to leave to me the task of making what attempts may be made
to discover the fate of Mr. Thornhill. There must be danger even in
inquiring for him, if he has met with any foul play, and therefore I ask
you to let that danger be mine."

Johanna asked herself if she should or not tell him of the scheme of
operations that had been suggested by Arabella Wilmot, but, somehow or
another, she shrank most wonderfully from so doing, both on account of
the censure which she concluded he would be likely to cast upon it, and
the romantic, strange nature of the plan itself, so she said, gently and
quickly--

"I will attempt nothing that shall not have some possibility of success
attending it. I will be careful, you may depend, for many
considerations. My father, I know, centres all his affections in me, and
for his sake I will be careful."

"I shall be content then, and now may I hope that this day week I may
see you here again, in order that I may tell you if I have made any
discovery, and that you may tell me the same; for my interest in
Thornhill is that of a sincere friend, to say nothing of the deep
interest in your happiness which I feel, and which now has become an
element in the transaction of the highest value?"

"I will come," said Johanna, "if I can come."

"You do not doubt?"

"No, no. I will come, and I hope to bring you some news of him in whom
you are so much interested. It shall be no fault of mine if I come not."

He walked with her from the gardens, and together they passed the shop
of Sweeney Todd, but the door was close shut, and they saw nothing of
the barber, or of that poor boy, his apprentice, who was so much to be
pitied. He parted with Johanna near to her father's house, and he walked
slowly away with his mind so fully impressed with the excellence and
beauty of the spectacle-maker's daughter, that it was quite clear, as
long as he lived, he would not be able to rid himself of the favourable
impression she had made upon him.

"I love her," he said; "I love her, but she seems in no respect willing
to enchain her affections. Alas! alas! how sad it is for me, that the
being who above all others I could wish to call my own, instead of a joy
to me, I have only encountered that she might impart a pang to my heart.
Beautiful and excellent Johanna, I love you, but I can see that your own
affections are withered for ever."




                              CHAPTER XVI.
     THE BARBER MAKES ANOTHER ATTEMPT TO SELL THE STRING OF PEARLS.


It would seem as if Sweeney Todd, after his adventure in already trying
to dispose of the string of pearls which he possessed, began to feel
little doubtful about his chances of success in that matter, for he
waited patiently for a considerable period before he again made the
attempt, and then he made it after a totally different fashion. Towards
the close of night on that same evening when Johanna Oakley had met
Colonel Jeffery, for the second time, in the Temple Garden, and while
Tobias sat alone in the shop in his usual deep dejection, a stranger
entered the place, with a large blue bag in his hand, and looked
inquiringly about him.

"Hilloa, my lad!" said he, "is this Mr. Todd's?"

"Yes," said Tobias; "but he is not at home. What do you want?"

"Well, I'll be hanged," said the man, "if this don't beat everything;
you don't mean to tell me he is a barber, do you?"

"Indeed I do; don't you see?"

"Yes, I see to be sure; but I'll be shot if I thought of it beforehand.
What do you think he has been doing?"

"Doing," said Tobias, with animation; "do you think he will be hung?"

"Why, no, I don't say it is a hanging matter, although you seem as if
you wished it was; but I'll just tell you now we are artists at the
west-end of the town."

"Artists! Do you mean to say you draw pictures?"

"No, no, we make clothes; but we call ourselves artists now, because
tailors are out of fashion."

"Oh, that's it, is it?"

"Yes, that's it; and you would scarcely believe it, but he came to our
shop actually, and ordered a suit of clothes, which were to come to no
less a sum than thirty pounds, and told us to make them up in such a
style that they were to do for any nobleman, and he gave his name and
address, as Mr. Todd, at this number in Fleet-street, but I hadn't the
least idea that he was a barber; if I had, I am quite certain the
clothes would not have been finished in the style they are, but quite
the reverse."

"Well," said Tobias, "I can't think what he wants such clothing for, but
I suppose it's all right. Was he a tall, ugly-looking fellow?"

"As ugly as the very devil. I'll just show you the things, as he is not
at home. The coat is of the finest velvet, lined with silk, and trimmed
with lace. Did you ever, in all your life, see such a coat for a
barber?"

"Indeed, I never did; but it is some scheme of his, of course. It is a
superb coat."

"Yes, and all the rest of the dress is of the same style; what on earth
he can be going to do with it I can't think, for it's only fit to go to
court in."

"Oh, well, I know nothing about it," said Tobias, with a sigh, "you can
leave it or not as you like, it is all one to me."

"Well, you do seem the most melancholy wretch ever I came near; what's
the matter with you?"

"The matter with me? Oh, nothing. Of course, I am as happy as I can be.
Ain't I Sweeney Todd's apprentice, and ain't that enough to make anybody
sing all day long?"

"It may be for all I know, but certainly you don't seem to be in a
singing humour; but, however, we artists cannot waste our time, so just
be so good as to take care of the clothes, and be sure you give them to
your master; and so I wash my hands of the transaction."

"Very good, he shall have them; but do you mean to leave such valuable
clothes without getting the money for them?"

"Not exactly, for they are paid for."

"Oh! that makes all the difference--he shall have them."

Scarcely had this tailor left the place, when a boy arrived with a
parcel, and, looking around him with undisguised astonishment, said--

"Isn't there some other Mr. Todd, in Fleet-street?"

"Not that I know of," said Tobias. "What have you got there?"

"Silk stockings, gloves, lace, cravats, ruffles, and so on."

"The deuce you have; I dare say it's all right."

"I shall leave them--they are paid for. This is the name, and this is
the number."

"Now, stupid!"

This last exclamation arose from the fact that this boy, in going out,
ran up against another who was coming in.

"Can't you see where you are going?" said the new arrival.

"What's that to you? I have a good mind to punch your head."

"Do it, and then come down our court, and see what a licking I'll give
you."

"Will you? Why don't you? Only let me catch you, that's all."

They stood for some moments so closely together that their noses very
nearly touched; and then, after mutual assertions of what they would do
if they caught each other--although, in either case, to stretch out an
arm would have been quite sufficient to have accomplished that
object--they separated, and the last comer said to Tobias, in a tone of
irritation, probably consequent upon the misunderstanding he had just
had with the hosier's boy--

"You can tell Mr. Todd that the carriage will be ready at half-past
seven precisely."

And then he went away, leaving Tobias in a state of great bewilderment
as to what Sweeney Todd could possibly be about to do with such an
amount of finery as that which was evidently coming home for him.

"I can't make it out," he said. "It's some villany, of course, but I
can't make out what it is--I wish I knew; I might thwart him in it. He
is a villain, and neither could nor would project anything good; but
what can I do? I am quite helpless in this, and will just let it take
its course. I can only wish for a power of action I shall never possess.
Alas, alas! I am very sad, and know not what will become of me. I wish
that I was in my grave, and there I am sure I shall be soon, unless
something happens to turn the tide of all this wretched evil fortune
that has come upon me."

It was in vain for Tobias to think of vexing himself with conjectures as
to what Sweeney Todd was about to do with so much finery, for he had not
the remotest foundation to go upon in the matter, and could not for the
life of him imagine any possible contingency or chance which should make
it necessary for the barber to deck himself in such gaudy apparel. All
he could do was to lay down in his own mind a general principle as
regarded Sweeney Todd's conduct, and that consisted in the fact, that
whatever might be his plans, and whatever might be his objects, they
were for no good purpose; but, on the contrary, were most certainly
intended for the accomplishment of some great evil which that most
villanous person intended to perpetrate.

"I will observe all I can," thought Tobias to himself, "and do what I
can to put a stop to his mischiefs; but I fear it will be very little he
will allow me to observe, and perhaps still less that he will allow me
to do; but I can but try, and do my best."

Poor Tobias's best, as regarded achieving anything against Sweeney Todd,
we may well suppose would be little indeed, for that individual was not
the man to give anybody an opportunity of doing much; and, possessed as
he was of the most consummate art, as well as the greatest possible
amount of unscrupulousness, there can be very little doubt but that any
attempt poor Tobias might make would recoil upon himself. In about half
an hour the barber returned, and his first question was--

"Have any things been left for me?"

"Yes, sir," said Tobias, "here are two parcels, and a boy has been to
say that the carriage will be ready at half-past seven precisely."

"'Tis well," said the barber, "that will do; and Tobias, you will be
careful, whilst I am gone, of the shop. I shall be back in half an hour,
mind you, and not later; and be sure that I find you here at your post.
But you may say, if any one comes here on business, there will be
neither shaving nor dressing to-night. You understand me?"

"Yes, sir, certainly."

Sweeney Todd then took the bundles which contained the costly apparel,
and retired into the parlour with them; and, as it was then seven
o'clock, Tobias correctly enough supposed that he had gone to dress
himself, and he waited with a considerable amount of curiosity to see
what sort of an appearance the barber would cut in his fine apparel.
Tobias had not to control his impatience long, for in less than twenty
minutes, out came Sweeney Todd, attired in the very height of fashion
for the period. His waistcoat was something positively gorgeous, and his
fingers were loaded with such costly rings, that they quite dazzled the
sight of Tobias to look upon; then, moreover, he wore a sword with a
jewelled hilt, but it was one which Tobias really thought he had seen
before, for he had a recollection that a gentleman had come to have his
hair dressed, and had taken it off, and laid just such a sword across
his hat during the operation.

"Remember," said Sweeney Todd, "remember your instructions; obey them to
the letter, and no doubt you will ultimately become happy and
independent."

With these words, Sweeney Todd left the place, and poor Tobias looked
after him with a frown, as he repeated the words--

"Happy and independent. Alas! what a mockery it is of this man to speak
to me in such a way--I only wish that I were dead!"

But we will leave Tobias to his own reflections, and follow the more
interesting progress of Sweeney Todd, who, for some reason best known to
himself, was then playing so grand a part, and casting away so large a
sum of money. He made his way to a livery-stables in the immediate
neighbourhood, and there, sure enough, the horses were being placed to a
handsome carriage; and all being very soon in readiness, Sweeney Todd
gave some whispered directions to the driver, and the vehicle started
off westward. At that time Hyde Park Corner was very nearly out of town,
and it looked as if you were getting a glimpse of the country, and
actually seeing something of the peasantry of England, when you got
another couple of miles off, and that was the direction in which Sweeney
Todd went; and as he goes, we may as well introduce to the reader the
sort of individual whom he was going to visit in so much state, and for
whom he thought it necessary to go to such great expense. At that period
the follies and vices of the nobility were somewhere about as great as
they are now, and consequently extravagance induced on many occasions
tremendous sacrifice of money, and it was found extremely convenient on
many occasions for them to apply to a man of the name of John Mundel, an
exceedingly wealthy person, a Dutchman by extraction, who was reported
to make immense sums of money by lending to the nobility and others what
they required on emergencies, at enormous rates of interest. But it must
not be supposed that John Mundel was so confiding as to lend his money
without security. It was quite the reverse, for he took care to have the
jewels, some costly plate, or the title-deeds of an estate, perchance,
as security, before he would part with a single shilling of his cash. In
point of fact, John Mundel was nothing more than a pawnbroker on a very
extensive scale, and, although he had an office in town, he usually
received his more aristocratic customers at his private residence, which
was about two miles off, on the Uxbridge Road. After this explanation,
it can very easily be imagined what was the scheme of Sweeney Todd, and
that he considered, if he borrowed from John Mundel a sum equal in
amount to half the real value of the pearls, he should be well rid of a
property which he certainly could not sufficiently well account for the
possession of, to enable him to dispose of it openly to the highest
bidder. We give Sweeney Todd great credit for the scheme he proposed. It
was eminently calculated to succeed, and one which, in the way he
undertook it, was certainly set about in the best possible style. During
the ride, he revolved in his mind exactly what he should say to John
Mundel, and, from what we know of him, we may be well convinced that
Sweeney Todd was not likely to fail from any amount of bashfulness in
the transaction; but that, on the contrary, he was just the man to
succeed in any scheme which required great assurance to carry it
through; for he was most certainly master of great assurance, and
possessed of a kind of diplomatic skill, which, had fortune placed him
in a more elevated position of life, would no doubt have made a great
man of him, and gained him great political reputation. John Mundel's
villa, which was called, by the by, Mundel House, was a large, handsome,
and modern structure, surrounded by a few acres of pleasure-gardens,
which, however, the money-lender never looked at, for his whole soul was
too much engrossed by his love for cash to enable him to do so; and, if
he derived any satisfaction at all from it, that satisfaction must have
been entirely owing to the fact, that he had wrung mansion, grounds, and
all the costly furnishing of the former, from an improvident debtor, who
had been forced to fly the country, and leave his property wholly in the
hands of the money-lender and usurer. It was but a short drive with the
really handsome horses that Sweeney Todd had succeeded in hiring for the
occasion, and he soon found himself opposite the entrance gates of the
residence of John Mundel. His great object now was that the usurer
should see the equipage which he had brought down; and he accordingly
desired the footman who accompanied him at once to ring the bell at the
entrance-gate, and to say that a gentleman was waiting in his carriage
to see Mr. Mundel. This was done; and when the money-lender's servant
reported to him that the equipage was a costly one, and that, in his
opinion, the visitor must be some nobleman of great rank, John Mundel
made no difficulty about the matter, but walked down to the gate at
once, where he immediately mentally subscribed to the opinion of his
servant, by admitting to himself that the equipage was faultless, and
presumed at once that it did belong to some person of great rank. He was
proportionally humble, as such men always are, and, advancing to the
side of the carriage, he begged to know what commands his lordship--for
so he called him at once--had for him?

[Illustration: The Barber Acts The Duke To Pawn The Pearls.]

"I wish to know," said Sweeney Todd, "Mr. Mundel, if you are inclined to
lay under an obligation a rather illustrious lady, by helping her out of
a little pecuniary difficulty?"

John Mundel glanced again at the equipage, and he likewise saw something
of the rich dress of his visitor, who had not disputed the title which
had been applied to him, of lord; and he made up his mind accordingly
that it was just one of the transactions that would suit him, provided
the security that would be offered was of a tangible nature. That was
the only point upon which John Mundel had the remotest doubt, but, at
all events, he urgently pressed his visitor to alight and walk in.




                              CHAPTER XIV.
           THE GREAT CHANGE IN THE PROSPECTS OF SWEENEY TODD.


As Sweeney Todd's object, so far as regarded the money-lender having
seen the carriage, was fully answered, he had no objection to enter the
house, which he accordingly did at once, being preceded by John Mundel,
who became each moment more and more impressed with the fact, as he
considered it, that his guest was some person of very great rank and
importance in society. He ushered him into a splendidly-furnished
apartment, and after offering him refreshments, which Sweeney Todd
politely declined, he waited with no small degree of impatience for his
visitor to be more explicit with regard to the object of his visit.

"I should," said Sweeney Todd, "have myself accommodated the illustrious
lady with the sum of money she requires, but as I could not do so
without incumbering some estates, she positively forbade me to think of
it."

"Certainly," said Mr. Mundel, "she is a very illustrious lady, I
presume?"

"Very illustrious indeed, but it must be a condition of this
transaction, if you at all enter into it, that you are not to inquire
precisely who she is, nor are you to inquire precisely who I am."

"It's not my usual way of conducting business, but if everything else be
satisfactory, I shall not cavil at that."

"Very good; by everything else being satisfactory, I presume you mean
the security offered?"

"Why, yes, that is of great importance, my lord."

"I informed the illustrious lady, that, as the affair was to be wrapped
up in something of a mystery, the security must be extremely ample."

"That's a very proper view to take of the matter, my lord. I wonder,"
thought John Mundel, "if he is a duke; I'll call him 'your grace' next
time, and see if he objects to it."

"Therefore," continued Sweeney Todd, "the illustrious lady placed in my
hands security to a third greater amount than she required."

"Certainly, certainly, a very proper arrangement, your grace; may I ask
the nature of the proffered security?"

"Jewels."

"Highly satisfactory and unexceptionable security; they go into a small
space, and do not deteriorate in value."

"And if they do," said the barber, "deteriorate in value, it would make
no difference to you, for the illustrious person's honour would be
committed to your redemption."

"I don't doubt that, your grace, in the least; I merely made the remark
incidentally, quite incidentally."

"Of course, of course; and I trust, before going further, that you are
quite in a position to enter into this subject."

"Certainly I am, and, I am proud to say, to any amount. Show me the
money's worth, your grace, and I will show you the money--that's my way
of doing business; and no one can say that John Mundel ever shrunk from
a matter that was brought fairly before him, and that he considered
worth his going into."

"It was by hearing such a character of you that I was induced to come to
you. What do you think of that?"

Sweeney Todd took from his pocket, with a careless air, the string of
pearls, and cast them down before the eyes of the money-lender, who took
them up and ran them rapidly through his fingers for a few seconds
before he said--

"I thought there was but one string like this in the kingdom, and those
belonged to the Queen."

"Well," said Sweeney Todd.

"I humbly beg your grace's pardon. How much money does your grace
require on these pearls?"

"Twelve thousand pounds is their current value, if a sale of them was
enforced; eight thousand pounds are required of you on their security."

"Eight thousand is a large sum. As a general thing I lend but half the
value upon anything; but in this case, to oblige your grace and the
illustrious personage, I do not, of course, hesitate for one moment but
shall for one month lend you the required amount."

"That will do," said Sweeney Todd, scarcely concealing the exultation he
felt at getting so much more from John Mundel than he expected, and
which he certainly would not have got if the money-lender had not been
most fully and completely impressed with the idea that the pearls
belonged to the Queen, and that he had actually at length majesty itself
for a customer. He did not suppose for one moment that it was the queen
who wanted the money; but his view of the case was, that she had lent
the pearls to this nobleman to meet some exigency of his own, and that,
of course, they would be redeemed very shortly. Altogether a more
pleasant transaction for John Mundel could not have been imagined. It
was just the sort of thing he would have looked out for, and had the
greatest satisfaction in bringing to a conclusion, and he considered it
was opening the door to the highest class of business in his way that he
was capable of doing.

"In what name, your grace," he said, "shall I draw a cheque upon my
banker?"

"In the name of Colonel George."

"Certainly, certainly; and if your grace will give me an acknowledgment
for eight thousand pounds, and please to understand that at the end of a
month from this time the transaction will be renewed if necessary, I
will give you a cheque for seven thousand five hundred pounds."

"Why seven thousand five hundred only, when you mentioned eight thousand
pounds?"

"The five hundred pounds is my little commission upon the transaction.
Your grace will perceive that I appreciate highly the honour of your
grace's custom, and consequently charge the lowest possible price. I can
assure your grace I could get more for my money by a great deal, but the
pleasure of being able to meet your grace's views is so great, that I am
willing to make a sacrifice, and therefore it is that I say five
hundred, when I really ought to say one thousand pounds, taking into
consideration the great scarcity of money at the present juncture; and I
can assure your grace that--"

"Peace, peace," said Sweeney Todd; "and if it be not convenient to
redeem the jewels at the end of a month from this time, you will hear
from me most assuredly."

"I am quite satisfied of that," said John Mundel, and he accordingly
drew a cheque for seven thousand five hundred pounds, which he handed to
Sweeney Todd, who put it in his pocket, not a little delighted that at
last he had got rid of his pearls, even at a price so far beneath their
real value.

"I need scarcely urge upon you, Mr. Mundel," he said, "the propriety of
keeping this affair profoundly secret."

"Indeed you need not, your grace, for it is part of my business to be
discreet and cautious. I should very soon have nothing to do in my line,
your grace may depend, if I were to talk about it. No, this transaction
will for ever remain locked up in my own breast, and no living soul but
your grace and I need know what has occurred."

With this, John Mundel showed Sweeney Todd to his carriage, with
abundance of respect, and in two minutes more he was travelling along
towards town with what might be considered a small fortune in his
pocket. We should have noticed earlier that Sweeney Todd had, upon the
occasion of his going to sell the pearls to the lapidary, in the city,
made some great alterations in his appearance, so that it was not likely
he should be recognised again to a positive certainly. For
example--having no whiskers whatever of his own, he had put on a large
black pair of false ones, as well as moustachios, and he had given some
colour to his cheeks likewise which had so completely altered his
appearance, that those who were most intimate with him would not have
known him except by his voice, and that he took good care to alter in
his intercourse with John Mundel, so that it should not become a future
means of detection.

"I thought that this would succeed," he muttered to himself, as he went
towards town, "and I have not been deceived. For three months longer,
and only three, I will carry on the business in Fleet-street, so that
any sudden alteration in my fortunes may not give rise to suspicion."

He was then silent for some minutes, during which he appeared to be
revolving some very knotty question in his brain, and then he said,
suddenly--

"Well, well, as regards Tobias, I think it will be safer,
unquestionably, to put him out of the way by taking his life, than to
try to dispose of him in a mad-house, and I think there are one or two
more persons whom it will be highly necessary to prevent being
mischievous, at all events at present. I must think--I must think."

When such a man as Sweeney Todd set about thinking, there could be no
possible doubt but that some serious mischief was meditated, and any one
who could have watched his face during that ride home from the
money-lender's, would have seen by its expression that the thoughts
which agitated him were of a dark and desperate character, and such as
anybody but himself would have shrunk from aghast. But he was not a man
to shrink from anything, and, on the contrary, the more a set of
circumstances presented themselves in a gloomy and a terrific aspect,
the better they seemed to suit him, and the peculiar constitution of his
mind. There can be no doubt but that the love of money was the
predominant feeling in Sweeney Todd's intellectual organization, and
that, by the amount it would bring him, or the amount it would deprive
him of, he measured everything. With such a man, then, no question of
morality or ordinary feeling could arise, and there can be no doubt that
he would quite willingly have sacrificed the whole human race, if, by so
doing, he could have achieved any of the objects of his ambition. And
so, on his road homeward, he probably made up his mind to plunge still
deeper into criminality, and perchance to indulge in acts that a man not
already so deeply versed in iniquity would have shrunk from with the
most positive terror. And by a strange style of reasoning, such men as
Sweeney Todd reconcile themselves to the most heinous crimes upon the
ground of what they call policy. That is to say, that having committed
some serious offence, they are compelled to commit a great number more
for the purpose of endeavouring to avoid the consequences of the first
lot, and hence the continuance of criminality becomes a matter necessary
to self-defence, and an essential ingredient in their consideration of
self-preservation. Probably Sweeney Todd had been for the greater part
of his life, aiming at the possession of extensive pecuniary resources,
and, no doubt, by the aid of a superior intellect, and a mind full of
craft and design, he had managed to make others subservient to his
views; and now that those views were answered, and that his underlings
and accomplices were no longer required, they became positively
dangerous. He was well aware of that cold-blooded policy which teaches
that it is far safer to destroy than to cast away the tools by which a
man carves his way to power and fortune.

"They shall die," said Sweeney Todd--"dead men tell no tales, nor women
nor boys either, and they shall all die; after which there will, I
think, be a serious fire in Fleet-street. Ha! ha! it may spread to what
mischief it likes, always provided it stops not short of the entire
destruction of my house and premises. Rare sport--rare sport will it be
to me, for then I will at once commence a new career, in which the
barber will be forgotten, and the man of fashion only seen and
remembered, for with this sad addition to my means, I am fully capable
of vying with the highest and the noblest, let them be whom they may."

This seemed a pleasant train of reflections to Sweeney Todd, and as the
coach entered Fleet-street, there sat such a grim smile upon his
countenance that he looked like some fiend in human shape, who had just
completed the destruction of a human soul. When he reached the livery
stables to which he directed them to drive, instead of his own shop, he
rewarded all who had gone with him most liberally, so that the coachman
and footman, who were both servants out of place, would have had no
objection for Sweeney Todd every day to have gone on some such an
expedition, so that they should receive as liberal wages for the small
part they enacted in it as they did upon that occasion. He then walked
from the stables toward his own house, but upon reaching there a little
disappointment awaited him, for he found to his surprise that no light
was burning; and when he placed his hand upon the shop-door, it opened,
but there was no trace of Tobias, although he, Sweeney Todd, called
loudly upon him the moment he set foot within the shop. Then a feeling
of apprehension crept across the barber, and he groped anxiously about
for some matches, by the aid of which he hoped to procure a light, and
then an explanation of the mysterious absence of Tobias. But in order
that we may, in its proper form, relate how it was that Tobias had had
the daring thus, in open contradiction of his master, to be away from
the shop, we must devote to Tobias a chapter, which will plead his
extenuation.




                              CHAPTER XV.
        TOBIAS'S ADVENTURES DURING THE ABSENCE OF SWEENEY TODD.


Tobias guessed, and guessed rightly too, that when Sweeney Todd said he
would be away half an hour, he only mentioned that short period of time,
in order to keep the lad's vigilance on the alert, and to prevent him
from taking any advantage of a more protracted absence. The very style
and manner in which he had gone out, precluded the likelihood of it
being for so short a period of time; and that circumstance set Tobias
seriously thinking over a situation which was becoming more intolerable
every day. The lad had the sense to feel that he could not go on much
longer as he was going on, and that in a short time such a life would
destroy him.

"It is beyond endurance," he said, "and I know not what to do; and since
Sweeney Todd has told me that the boy he had before went out of his
senses, and is now in the cell of a mad-house, I feel that such will be
my fate, and that I too shall come to that dreadful end, and then no one
will believe a word I utter, but consider everything to be mere raving."

After a time, as the darkness increased, he lit the lamp which hung in
the shop, and which, until it was closed for the night, usually shed a
dim ray from the window. Then he sat down to think again, and he said to
himself--

"If I could now but summon courage to ask my mother about this robbery
which Sweeney Todd imputes to her, she might assure me it was false, and
that she never did such a deed; but then it is dreadful for me to ask
her such a question, because it may be true; and then, how shocking it
would be for her to be forced to confess to me, her own son, such a
circumstance."

These were the honourable feelings which prevented Tobias from
questioning his mother as regarded Todd's accusation of her--an
accusation too dreadful to believe implicitly, and yet sufficiently
probable for him to have a strong suspicion that it might be true after
all. It is to be deeply regretted that Tobias's philosophy did not carry
him a little further, and make him see, the moment the charge was made,
that he ought unquestionably to investigate it to the very utmost. But
still we could hardly expect, from a mere boy, that acute reasoning and
power of action, which depend so much upon the knowledge of the world
and an extensive practice in the usages of society. It was sufficient if
he felt correctly--we could scarcely expect him to reason so. But upon
this occasion, above all others, he seemed completely overcome by the
circumstances which surrounded him; and from his excited manner, one
might have almost imagined that the insanity he himself predicted at the
close of his career was really not far off. He wrung his hands, and he
wept, every now and then, in sad speech, bitterly bemoaning his
situation, until at length, with a sudden resolution, he sprang to his
feet, exclaiming--

"This night shall end it. I can endure it no more. I will fly from this
place, and seek my fortune elsewhere. Any amount of distress, danger, or
death itself even, is preferable to the dreadful life I lead."

He walked some paces towards the door, and then he paused, as he said to
himself in a low tone--

"Todd will surely not be home yet awhile, and why should I then neglect
the only opportunity I may ever have of searching this house to satisfy
my mind as regards any of the mysteries that it contains?"

He paused over this thought, and considered well its danger, for
dangerous indeed it was to no small extent, but he was desperate; and
with a resolution that scarcely could have been expected from him, he
determined upon taking that step, above all others, which Todd was
almost sure to punish with death. He closed the shop door, and bolted it
upon the inside, so that he could not be suddenly interrupted, and then
he looked round him carefully for some weapon, by the aid of which he
should be able to break his way into the parlour, which the barber
always kept closed and locked in his absence. A weapon that would answer
the purpose of breaking any lock, if he, Tobias, chose to proceed so
roughly to work, was close at hand in the iron bar, which, when the
place was closed at night, secured a shutter to the door. Wrought up as
he was to almost frenzy, Tobias seized this bar, and, advancing towards
the parlour door, he with one blow smashed the lock to atoms, and the
door yielded. The moment it did so, there was a crash of glass, and when
Tobias entered the room he saw that upon its threshold lay a wine-glass
shattered to atoms, and he felt certain that it had been placed in some
artful position by Sweeney Todd as a detector, when he should return, of
any attempt that had been made upon the door of the parlour. And now
Tobias felt that he was so far committed that he might as well go on
with his work, and accordingly he lit a candle, which he found upon the
parlour table, and then proceeded to make what discoveries he could.
Several of the cupboards in the room yielded at once to his hands, and
in them he found nothing remarkable; but there was one that he could not
open; so, without a moment's hesitation, he had recourse to the bar of
iron again, and broke its lock, when the door swung open,--and to his
astonishment there tumbled out of this cupboard such a volley of hats of
all sorts and descriptions, some looped with silver, some
three-cornered, and some square, that they formed quite a museum of that
article of attire, and excited the greatest surprise in the mind of
Tobias, at the same time that they tended very greatly to confirm some
other thoughts and feelings which he had concerning Sweeney Todd. This
was the only cupboard which was fast, although there was another door
which looked as if it opened into one, but when Tobias broke that down
with the bar of iron, he found it was the door which led to the
staircase conducting to the upper part of the house--that upper part
which Sweeney Todd, with all his avarice, would never let, and of which
the shutters were kept continually closed, so that the opposite
neighbours never caught a glimpse into any of the apartments. With
cautious and slow steps, which he adopted instantaneously, although he
knew that there was no one in the house but himself, Tobias ascended the
staircase.

"I will go to the very top rooms first," he said to himself, "and so
examine them all as I come down, and then if Todd should return
suddenly, I shall have a better chance of hearing him, than as if I
began below and went upwards."

Acting upon this prudent scheme, he went up to the attics, all the doors
of which were swinging open, and there was nothing in any of them
whatever. He descended to the second floor with the like result, and a
feeling of great disappointment began to creep over him at the thought
that, after all, the barber's house might not repay the trouble of
examination. But when he reached the first floor he soon found abundant
reason to alter his opinion. The doors were fast, and he had to burst
them open; and, when he got in, he found that those rooms were partially
furnished, and that they contained a great quantity of miscellaneous
property of all kinds and descriptions. In one corner was an enormous
quantity of walking-sticks, some of which were of a very costly and
expensive character, with gold and silver chased tops to them, and in
another corner was a great number of umbrellas--in fact, at least a
hundred of them. Then there were boots and shoes lying upon the floor,
partially covered up, as if to keep them from dirt; there were thirty or
forty swords of different styles and patterns, many of them appearing to
be very firm blades, and in one or two cases the scabbards were richly
ornamented. At one end of the front and larger of these two rooms, was
an old-fashioned-looking bureau of great size, and with as much
wood-work in it as seemed required to make at least a couple of such
articles of furniture. This was very securely locked, and presented more
difficulties in the way of opening it than any of the doors had done,
for the lock was of great strength and apparent durability. Moreover it
was not so easily got at, but at length by using the bar as a sort of
lever, instead of as a mere machine to strike with, Tobias succeeded in
forcing this bureau open, and then his eyes were perfectly dazzled with
the amount of jewellery and trinkets of all kinds and descriptions that
were exhibited to his gaze. There was a great number of watches, gold
chains, silver and gold snuff-boxes, and a large assortment of rings,
shoe-buckles, and brooches. These articles must have been of great
value, and Tobias could not help exclaiming aloud--

"How could Sweeney Todd come by these articles, except by the murder of
their owners?"

This, indeed, seemed but too probable a supposition, and the more
especially so, as in a further part of this bureau a great quantity of
apparel was found by Tobias. He stood with a candle in his hand, looking
upon these various objects for more than a quarter of an hour, and then
as a sudden and a natural thought came across him of how completely a
few of them even would satisfy his wants and his mother's for a long
time to come, he stretched forth his hand towards the glittering mass,
but he drew it back again with a shudder, saying--

"No--no, these things are the plunder of the dead. Let Sweeney Todd keep
them to himself, and look upon them, if he can, with eyes of enjoyment.
I will have none of them; they would bring misfortune along with every
guinea that they might be turned into."

As he spoke, he heard St. Dunstan's clock strike nine, and he started at
the sound, for it let him know that already Sweeney Todd had been away
an hour beyond the time he said he would be absent, so that there was a
probability of his quick return now, and it would scarcely be safe to
linger longer in his house.

"I must be gone--I must be gone. I should like to look upon my mother's
face once more before I leave London for ever perhaps. I may tell her of
the danger she is in from Todd's knowledge of her secret; no--no, I
cannot speak to her of that; I must go, and leave her to those chances
which I hope and trust will work favourably for her."

Flinging down the iron bar which had done him such good service, Tobias
stopped not to close any of those receptacles which contained the
plunder that Sweeney Todd had taken most probably from murdered persons,
but he rushed down stairs into the parlour again, where the boots that
had fallen out of the cupboard still lay upon the floor in wild
disorder. It was a strange and sudden whim that took him, rather than a
matter of reflection, that induced him, instead of his own hat, to take
one of those which were lying so indiscriminately at his feet; and he
did so. By mere accident it turned out to be an exceedingly handsome
hat, of rich workmanship and material, and then Tobias, feeling
terrified lest Sweeney Todd should return before he could leave the
place, paid no attention to anything, but turned from the shop, merely
pulling the door after him, and then darting over the road towards the
Temple like a hunted hare; for his great wish was to see his mother, and
then he had an undefined notion that his best plan for escaping the
clutches of Sweeney Todd would be to go to sea. In common with all boys
of his age, who know nothing whatever of the life of a sailor, it
presented itself in the most fascinating colours. A sailor ashore and a
sailor afloat, are about as two different things as the world can
present; but, to the imagination of Tobias Ragg, a sailor was somebody
who was always dancing hornpipes, spending money, and telling wonderful
stories. No wonder, then, that the profession presented itself under
such fascinating colours to all such persons as Tobias; and as it
seemed, and seems still, to be a sort of general understanding that the
real condition of a sailor should be mystified in every possible way and
shape by both novelist and dramatist, it is no wonder that it requires
actual experience to enable those parties who are in the habit of being
carried away by just what they hear, to come to a correct conclusion.

"I will go to sea!" ejaculated Tobias. "Yes, I will go to sea!"

As he spoke these words he passed out of the gate of the Temple leading
into Whitefriars, in which ancient vicinity his mother dwelt,
endeavouring to eke out a living as best she might. She was very much
surprised (for she happened to be at home) at the unexpected visit of
her son, Tobias, and uttered a faint scream as she let fall a flat-iron
very nearly upon his toes.

"Mother," he said, "I cannot stay with Sweeney Todd any longer, so do
not ask me."

"Not stay with such a respectable man?"

"A respectable man, mother! Alas, alas, how little you know of him! But
what am I saying? I dare not speak! Oh, that fatal, fatal candlestick!"

"But how are you to live, and what do you mean by a fatal candlestick?"

"Forgive me--I did not mean to say that! Farewell, mother! I am going to
sea."

"To see what, my dear?" said Mrs. Ragg, who was much more difficult to
talk to, than even Hamlet's grave-digger. "You don't know how much I am
obliged to Sweeney Todd."

"Yes, I do, and that's what drives me mad to think of. Farewell, mother,
perhaps for ever! If I can, of course I will communicate with you, but
now I dare not stay."

"Oh! what have you done, Tobias--what have you done?"

"Nothing--nothing! but Sweeney Todd is--"

"What--what?"

"No matter--no matter! Nothing--nothing! And yet at this last moment I
am almost tempted to ask you concerning a candlestick."

"Don't mention that," said Mrs. Ragg; "I don't want to hear anything
said about it."

"It is true, then?"

"Yes; but did Mr. Todd tell you?"

"He did--he did. I have now asked the question I never thought could
have passed my lips. Farewell, mother; for ever farewell!"

Tobias rushed out of the place, leaving old Mrs. Ragg astonished at his
behaviour, and with a strong suspicion that some accession of insanity
had come over him.

"The Lord have mercy upon us!" she said, "what shall I do? I am
astonished at Mr. Todd telling him about the candlestick; it's true
enough, though, for all that. I recollect it as well as though it were
yesterday; it was a very hard winter, and I was minding a set of
chambers, when Todd came to shave the gentleman, and I saw him with my
own eyes put a silver candlestick in his pocket. Then I went over to his
shop and reasoned with him about it, and he gave it me back again, and I
brought it to the chambers, and laid it down exactly on the spot where
he took it from."

"To be sure," said Mrs. Ragg, after a pause of a few moments, "to be
sure, he has been a very good friend to me ever since, but that I
suppose is for fear I should tell, and get him hung or transported. But,
however, we must take the good with the bad, and when Tobias comes to
think of it, he will go back again to his work, I dare say; for, after
all, it's a very foolish thing for him to trouble his head whether Mr.
Todd stole a silver candlestick or not."




                              CHAPTER XVI.
             THE STRANGE ODOUR IN OLD ST. DUNSTAN'S CHURCH.


About this time, and while the incidents of our most strange and
eventful narrative were taking place, the pious frequenters of old St.
Dunstan's church began to perceive a strange and most abominable odour
throughout that sacred edifice. It was in vain that old women who came
to hear the sermons, although they were too deaf to catch a third part
of them, brought smelling bottles and other means of stifling their
noses; still that dreadful charnel-house sort of smell would make itself
most painfully and most disagreeably apparent. And the Rev. Joseph
Stillingport, who was the regular preacher, smelt it in the pulpit; and
had been seen to sneeze in the midst of a most pious discourse indeed,
and to hold to his pious mouth a handkerchief, in which was some strong
and pungent essence, for the purpose of trying to overcome the horrible
effluvia. The organ-blower and the organ-player were both nearly
stifled, for the horrible odour seemed to ascend to the upper part of
the church; although those who sat in what may be called the pit, by no
means escaped it. The churchwardens looked at each other in their pews
with contorted countenances, and were almost afraid to breathe; and the
only person who did not complain bitterly of the dreadful odour in St.
Dunstan's church, was an old woman who had been a pew-opener for many
years; but then she had lost the faculties of her nose, which, perhaps,
accounted satisfactorily for that circumstance. At length, however, the
nuisance became so intolerable, that the beadle, whose duty it was in
the morning to open the church doors, used to come up to them with the
massive key in one hand, and a cloth soaked in vinegar in the other,
just as the people used to do in the time of the great plague of London;
and when he had opened the doors, he used to run over to the other side
of the way.

"Ah, Mr. Blunt!" he used to say to the bookseller, who lived
opposite--"ah! Mr. Blunt, I is obligated to cut over here, leastways
till the _atymouspheric_ air is mixed up all along with the
_stinkifications_ which come from the church."

By this it will be seen that the beadle was rather a learned man, and no
doubt went to some mechanics' institution of those days, where he
learned something of everything but what was calculated to be of some
service to him. As might be supposed, from the fact that this sort of
thing had gone on for a few months, it began to excite some attention
with a view to a remedy; for, in the great city of London, a nuisance of
any sort or description requires to become venerable by age before any
one thinks of removing it; and after that, it is quite clear that that
becomes a good argument against removing it at all. But at last, the
churchwardens began to have a fear that some pestilential disease would
be the result if they for any longer period of time put up with the
horrible stench, and that they might be among its first victims, so they
began to ask each other what could be done to obviate it. Probably, if
this frightful stench, being suggestive, as it was, of all sorts of
horrors, had been graciously pleased to confine itself to some poor
locality, nothing would have been heard of it; but when it became
actually offensive to a gentleman in a metropolitan pulpit, and when it
began to make itself perceptible to the sleepy faculties of the
churchwardens of St. Dunstan's church, Fleet-street, so as to prevent
them even from dozing through the afternoon sermon, it became a very
serious matter indeed. But what was it, what could it be, and what was
to be done to get rid of it? These were the anxious questions that were
asked right and left, as regarded the serious nuisance, without the
fates graciously acceding any reply. But yet one thing seemed to be
generally agreed, and that was, that it did come, and must come, somehow
or other, out of the vaults from beneath the church. But then, as the
pious and hypocritical Mr. Butterwick, who lived opposite, said--

"How could that be, when it was satisfactorily proved by the present
books that nobody had been buried in the vaults for some time, and
therefore it was a very odd thing that dead people, after leaving off
smelling and being disagreeable, should all of a sudden burst out again
in that line, and be twice as bad as ever they were at first."

And on Wednesdays sometimes, too, when pious people were not satisfied
with the Sunday's devotion, but began again in the middle of the week,
that stench was positively terrific. Indeed, so bad was it, that some of
the congregation were forced to leave, and have been seen to slink into
Bell-yard, where Lovett's pie-shop was situated, and then and there
solace themselves with a pork or a veal pie, in order that their mouths
and noses should be full of a delightful and agreeable flavour, instead
of one most peculiarly and decidedly the reverse. At last there was a
confirmation to be held at St. Dunstan's church, and a great concourse
of persons assembled, for a sermon was to be preached by the bishop
after the confirmation; and a very great fuss indeed was to be made
about really nobody knew exactly what. Preparations, as newspapers say,
upon an extensive scale, and regardless of expense, were made for the
purpose of adding lustre to the ceremony, and surprising the bishop,
when he came, with a good idea that the people who attended St.
Dunstan's church were somebodies, and really worth confirming. The
confirmation was to take place at twelve o'clock, and the bells ushered
in the morning with their most pious tones, for it was not every day
that the authorities of St. Dunstan succeeded in catching a bishop, and
when they did so, they were determined to make the most of him. And the
numerous authorities, including churchwardens, and even the very beadle,
were in an uncommon fluster, and running about, and impeding each other,
as authorities always do upon public occasions. But, to those who only
look to the surface of things, and who came to admire what was grand and
magnificent in the preparations, the beadle certainly carried away the
palm, for that functionary was attired in a completely new cocked hat
and coat, and certainly looked very splendid and showy upon the
occasion. Moreover, that beadle had been well and judiciously selected,
and the parish authorities made no secret of it, when there was an
election for beadle, that they threw all their influence into the scale
of that candidate who happened to be the biggest, and consequently, who
was calculated to wear the official costume with an air that no smaller
man could have possibly aspired to on any account. At half-past eleven
o'clock the bishop made his gracious appearance, and was duly ushered
into the vestry, where there was a comfortable fire, and on the table in
which, likewise, were certain cold chickens and bottles of rare wines;
for confirming a number of people, and preaching a sermon besides, was
considered no joke, and might, for all they knew, be provocative of a
great appetite in the bishop. And with what a bland and courtly air the
bishop smiled as he ascended the steps of St. Dunstan's Church. How
affable he was to the churchwardens, and he actually smiled upon a poor
miserable charity boy, who, his eyes glaring wide open, and his muffin
cap in his hand, was taking his first stare at a real live bishop. To be
sure, the beadle knocked him down directly the bishop had passed, for
having the presumption to look at such a great personage, but then that
was to be expected fully and completely, and only proved that the
proverb, which permits a cat to look at a king, is not equally
applicable to charity boys and bishops. When the bishop got to the
vestry, some very complimentary words were uttered to him by the usual
officiating clergyman, but, somehow or other, the bland smile had left
the lips of the great personage, and, interrupting the vicar in the
midst of a fine flowing speech, he said--

"That's all very well, but what a terrible stink there is here!"

The churchwardens gave a groan, for they had flattered themselves that
perhaps the bishop would not notice the dreadful smell, or that, if he
did, he would think it was accidental, and say nothing about it; but
now, when he really did mention it, they found all their hopes scattered
to the winds, and that it was necessary to say something.

"Is this horrid charnel-house sort of smell always here?"

"I am afraid it is," said one of the churchwardens.

"Afraid!" said the bishop, "surely you know; you seem to me to have a
nose."

"Yes," said the churchwarden, in great confusion, "I have that honour,
and I have the pleasure of informing you, my Lord Bishop--I mean I have
the honour of informing you that this smell is always here."

The bishop sniffed several times, and then he said--

"It is very dreadful; and I hope that by the next time I come to St.
Dunstan's, you will have the pleasure and the honour, both, of informing
me that it has gone away."

The churchwarden bowed, and got into an extreme corner, saying to
himself--

"This is the bishop's last visit here, and I don't wonder at it, for, as
if out of pure spite, the smell is ten times worse than ever to-day."

And so it was, for it seemed to come up through all the crevices of the
flooring of the church, with a power and perseverance that was
positively dreadful.

The people coughed, and held their handkerchiefs to their noses,
remarking to each other--

"Isn't it dreadful?--did you ever know the smell in St. Dunstan's so bad
before," and everybody agreed that they never had known it anything like
so bad, for that it was positively awful--and so indeed it was.

The anxiety of the bishop to get away was quite manifest, and, if he
could have decently taken his departure without confirming anybody at
all, there is no doubt but that he would have willingly done so, and
left all the congregation to die and be--something or another. But this
he could not do, but he could cut it short, and he did so. The people
found themselves confirmed before they almost knew where they were, and
the bishop would not go into the vestry again on any account, but
hurried down the steps of the church, and into his carriage, with the
greatest precipitation in the world, thus proving that holiness is no
proof against a most abominable stench. As may be well supposed, after
this, the subject assumed a much more serious aspect, and on the
following day a solemn meeting was held of all the church authorities,
at which it was determined that men should be employed to make a
thorough and searching examination of the vaults of St. Dunstan's, with
the view of discovering, if possible, from whence particularly the
abominable stench emanated. And then it was decided that the stench was
to be put down, and that the bishop was to be apprized it was put down,
and that he might visit the church in perfect safety.




                             CHAPTER XVII.
  SWEENEY TODD'S PROCEEDINGS CONSEQUENT UPON THE DEPARTURE OF TOBIAS.


We left the barber in his own shop, much wondering that Tobias had not
responded to the call which he had made upon him, but yet scarcely
believing it possible that he could have ventured upon the height of
iniquity, which we know Tobias had really been guilty of. He paused for
a few moments, and held up the light which he had procured, and gazed
around him with inquiring eyes, for he could, indeed, scarcely believe
it possible that Tobias had sufficiently cast off his dread of him,
Sweeney Todd, to be enabled to achieve any act for his liberation. But
when he saw that the lock of the parlour-door was open, positive rage
obtained precedence over every other feeling.

"The villain!" he cried, "has he dared really to consummate an act I
thought he could not have dreamt of for a moment? Is it possible that he
can have presumed so far as to have searched the house?"

That Tobias, however, had presumed so far, the barber soon discovered,
and when he went into his parlour and saw what had actually occurred,
and that not only was every cupboard door broken open, but that likewise
the door which led to the staircase and the upper part of the house had
not escaped, he got perfectly furious, and it was some time before he
could sufficiently calm himself to reflect upon the probable and
possible amount of danger he might run in consequence of these
proceedings. When he did, his active mind at once told him that there
was not much to be dreaded immediately, for that most probably Tobias,
still having the fear before his eyes of what he might do as regarded
his mother, had actually run away; and, "in all likelihood," muttered
the barber, "he has taken with him something which would allow me to fix
upon him the stigma of robbery, but that I must see to."

Having fastened the shop-door securely, he took the light in his hands,
and ascended to the upper part of his house--that is to say, the first
floor, where alone anything was to be found. He saw at once the open
bureau, with all its glittering display of jewels, and as he gazed upon
the heap, he muttered--

"I have not so accurate a knowledge of what is here as to be able to say
if anything be extracted or not, but I know the amount of money, if I do
not know the precise number of jewels which this bureau contains."

He opened a small drawer which had entirely escaped the scrutiny of
Tobias, and proceeded to count a large number of guineas which were
there.

"These are correct," he said, when he had finished his
examination--"these are correct, and he has touched none of them."

He then opened another drawer, in which were a great many packets of
silver done up in paper, and these likewise he carefully counted, and
was satisfied they were right.

"It is strange," he said, "that he has taken nothing, but yet perhaps it
is better that it should be so, inasmuch as it shows a wholesome fear of
me. The slightest examination would have shown him these hoards of
money; and since he has not made that slight examination, nor discovered
any of them, it seems to my mind decisive upon the subject, that he has
taken nothing, and perchance I shall discover him easier than I
imagine."

[Illustration: Tobias Discovers The Barber's Hidden Plunder.]

He repaired to the parlour again, and carefully divested himself of
everything which had enabled him so successfully to impose upon John
Mundel, and replaced them by his ordinary costume, after which he
fastened up his house and sallied forth, taking his way direct to Mrs.
Ragg's humble home, in the expectation that there he would hear
something of Tobias, which would give him a clue where to search for
him, for search for him he fully intended; but what were his precise
intentions perhaps he could hardly have told himself, until he actually
found him. When he reached Mrs. Ragg's house, and made his appearance
abruptly before that lady, who seemed somehow or another to be always
ironing and always to drop the iron when any one came in, very near
their toes, he said--

"Where did your son Tobias go after he left you to-night?"

"Lor! Mr. Todd, is it you? You are as good as a conjuror, sir, for he
was here; but bless you, sir, I know no more where he is gone to, than
the man in the moon. He said he was going to sea, but I am sure I should
not have thought it, that I should not."

"To sea!--then the probability is that he would go down to the docks,
but surely not to-night. Do you not expect him back here to sleep?"

"Well, sir, that's a very good thought of yours; and he may come back
here to sleep, for all I know to the contrary."

"But you do not know it for a fact?"

"He didn't say so; but he may come, you know, sir, for all that."

"Did he tell you his reason for leaving me?"

"Indeed no, sir; he really did not, and he seemed to me to be a little
bit out of his senses."

"Ah! Mrs. Ragg," said Sweeney Todd, "there you have it. From the first
moment that he came into my service, I knew and felt confident that he
was out of his senses. There was a strangeness of behaviour about him,
which soon convinced me of that fact, and I am only anxious about him,
in order that some effort may be made to cure him of such a malady, for
it is a serious, and a dreadful one, and one which, unless taken in
time, will be yet the death of Tobias."

These words were spoken with such solemn seriousness, that they had a
wonderful effect upon Mrs. Ragg, who, like most ignorant persons, began
immediately to confirm that which she most dreaded.

"Oh, it's too true," she said, "it's too true. He did say some
extraordinary things to-night, Mr. Todd, and he said he had something to
tell, which was too horrid to speak of. Now the idea, you know, Mr.
Todd, of anybody having anything at all to tell, and not telling it at
once, is quite singular."

"It is!--and I am sure that his conduct is such you never would be
guilty of, Mrs. Ragg;--but hark! what's that?"

"It's a knock, Mr. Todd."

"Hush, stop a moment--what if it be Tobias?"

"Gracious goodness! it can't be him, for he would have come in at once."

"No; I slipped the bolt of the door, because I wished to talk to you
without observation; so it may be Tobias, you perceive, after all. But
let me hide somewhere, so that I may hear what he says, and be able to
judge how his mind is affected. I will not hesitate to do something for
him, let it cost what it may."

"There's the cupboard, Mr. Todd. To be sure there is some dirty
saucepans and a frying-pan in it, and of course it aint a fit place to
ask you to go into."

"Never mind that--never mind that; only you be careful, for the sake of
Tobias's very life, to keep secret that I am here."

The knocking at the door increased each moment in vehemence, and
scarcely had Sweeney Todd succeeded in getting into the cupboard along
with Mrs. Ragg's pots and pans, and thoroughly concealed himself, when
she opened the door; and, sure enough--Tobias, heated, tired, and
looking ghastly pale--staggered into the room.

"Mother," he said, "I have taken a new thought, and have come back to
you."

"Well, I thought you would, Tobias; and a very good thing it is that you
have."

"Listen to me: I thought of flying from England for ever, and of never
again setting foot upon its shores. I have altered that determination
completely, and I feel now that it is my duty to do something else."

"To do what, Tobias?"

"To tell all I know--to make a clean breast, mother, and, let the
consequences be what they may, to let justice take its course."

"What do you mean, Tobias?"

"Mother, I have come to a conclusion, that what I have to tell is of
such vast importance, compared with any consequences that may arise from
the petty robbery of the candlestick, which you know of, that I ought
not to hesitate a moment in revealing everything."

"But, my dear Tobias, remember that that is a dreadful secret, and one
that must be kept."

"It cannot matter--it cannot matter; and, besides, it is more than
probable that by revealing what I actually know, and which is of such
great magnitude, I may, mother, in a manner of speaking, perchance
completely exonerate you from the consequences of that transaction.
Besides, it was long ago, and the prosecutor may have mercy; but, be all
that how it may, and be the consequences what they may, I must and will
tell what I now know."

"But what is it Tobias, that you know?"

"Something too dreadful for me to utter to you alone. Go into the
Temple, mother, to some of the chambers you attend to, and ask them to
come to me, and listen to what I have got to say. They will be amply
repaid for their trouble, for they will hear that which may, perhaps,
save their own lives."

"He is quite gone," thought Mrs. Ragg, "and Mr. Todd is correct; poor
Tobias is as mad as he can be!" "Alas, alas, Tobias, why don't you try
to reason yourself into a better state of mind! You don't know a bit
what you are saying, any more than the man in the moon."

"I know I am half mad, mother, but yet I know what I am saying well; so
do not fancy that it is not to be relied upon, but go and fetch some one
at once to listen to what I have to relate."

"Perhaps," thought Mrs. Ragg, "if I were to pretend to humour him, it
would be as well, and, while I am gone, Mr. Todd can speak to him."

This was a bright idea of Mrs. Ragg's, and she forthwith proceeded to
carry it into execution, saying--

"Well, my dear, if it must be, it must be--and I will go; but I hope
while I have gone, somebody will speak to you, and convince you that you
ought to try to quiet yourself."

These words Mrs. Ragg uttered aloud, for the special benefit of Sweeney
Todd, who, she considered, would have been there to take the hint
accordingly. It is needless to say he did hear them, and how far he
profited by them, we shall quickly perceive. As for poor Tobias, he had
not the remotest idea of the close proximity of his arch enemy; if he
had, he would quickly have left that spot, where he might well to
conjecture so much danger awaited him; for although Sweeney Todd, under
the circumstances, probably felt that he dared not take Tobias's life,
still he might exchange something that could place it in his power to do
so shortly, with the least personal danger to himself. The door closed
after the retreating form of Mrs. Ragg, and as, considering the mission
she was gone upon, it was very clear some minutes must elapse before she
could return, Sweeney Todd did not feel that there was any very
particular hurry in the transaction.

"What shall I do?" he said to himself. "Shall I await his mother's
coming again, and get her to aid me, or shall I of myself adopt some
means which will put an end to trouble on this boy's account?"

Sweeney Todd was a man tolerably rapid in thought, and he contrived to
make up his mind that the best plan, unquestionably, would be to lay
hold of Tobias at once, and so prevent the possibility of any appeal to
his mother becoming effective. Tobias, when his mother left the place,
as he imagined, for the purpose of procuring some one to listen to what
he considered to be Sweeney Todd's delinquencies, rested his face upon
his hands, and gave himself up to painful and deep thought. He felt that
he had arrived at quite a crisis in his history, and that the next few
hours could not surely but be very important to him in their results;
and so they were indeed, but not certainly exactly in the way that he
all along anticipated, for he thought of nothing but of the arrest and
discomfiture of Todd, little expecting how close was his proximity to
that formidable personage.

"Surely," thought Tobias, "I shall, by disclosing all that I know about
Todd, gain some consideration for my mother, and after all, she may not
be prosecuted for the robbery of the candlestick, for how very trifling
is that affair compared to the much more dreadful things which I more
than suspect Sweeney Todd to be guilty of. He is and must be, from all
that I have seen and heard, a murderer, although how he disposes of his
victims is involved in the most complete mystery, and is to me a matter
past all human power of comprehension. I have no idea even upon that
subject whatever."

This, indeed, was a great mystery; for, even admitting that Sweeney Todd
was a murderer, and it must be allowed that as yet we have only
circumstantial evidence of that fact, we can form no conclusion from
such evidence as to how he perpetrated the deed, or how afterwards he
disposed of the body of his victim. This grand and principal difficulty
in the way of committing murder with impunity, namely, the disposal of a
corpse, certainly did not seem at all to have any effect upon Sweeney
Todd; for if he made corpses, he had some means of getting rid of them
with the most wonderful expedition as well as secrecy.

"He is a murderer," thought Tobias. "I know he is, although I have never
seen him do the deed, or seen any appearances in the shop of a deed of
blood having been committed. Yet why is it that occasionally, when a
better dressed person than usual comes into the shop, that he sends me
out on some errand to a distant part of the town?"

Tobias did not forget, too, that on more than one occasion he had come
back quicker than he had been expected, and that he had caught Sweeney
Todd in some little confusion, and seen the hat, the stick, or perhaps
the umbrella of the last customer quietly waiting there, although the
customer had gone; and even if the glaring improbability of a man
leaving his hat behind him in a barber's shop was got over, why did he
not come back for it? This was a circumstance which was entitled to all
the weight which Tobias, during his mental cogitations, could give to
it, and there could be but one possible explanation of a man not coming
back for his hat, and that was that he had not the power to do so.

"This house will be searched," thought Tobias, "and all those things,
which of course must have belonged to so many different people, will be
found, and then they will be identified, and he will be required to say
how he came by them, which, I think, will be a difficult task indeed for
Sweeney Todd to accomplish. What a relief it will be to me, to be sure,
when he is hanged, as I think he is tolerably sure to be!"

"What a relief," muttered Sweeney Todd, as he slowly opened the door,
unseen by Tobias--"what a relief it will be to me when this boy is in
his grave, as he will be soon, or else I have forgotten all my moral
learning, and turned chicken-hearted--neither of them very likely
circumstances."




                             CHAPTER XVIII.
       THE MISADVENTURE OF TOBIAS.--THE MAD-HOUSE ON PECKHAM-RYE.


Sweeney Todd paused for a moment at the cupboard door, before he made up
his mind as to whether he should pounce upon poor Tobias at once, or
adopt a more creeping, cautious mode of operation. The latter course was
by far the most congenial to his mind, and so he adopted it in a moment
or so, and stole quietly from his place of concealment, and with so
little noise, that Tobias could not have the least suspicion that any
one was in the room but himself. Treading, as if each step might involve
some serious consequences, he thus at length got completely behind the
chair on which Tobias was sitting, and stood with folded arms, and such
a hideous smile upon his face, that they together formed no inapt
representation of the Mephistopheles of the German drama.

"I shall at length," murmured Tobias, "be free from my present dreadful
state of mind, by thus accusing Todd. He is a murderer--of that I have
no doubt: it is but a duty of mine to stand forward as his accuser."

Sweeney Todd stretched out his two brawny hands, and clutched Tobias by
the head, which he turned round till the boy could see him, and then he
said--

"Indeed, Tobias; and did it never strike you that Todd was not so easily
to be overcome as you would wish him, eh, Tobias?"

The shock of this astonishing and sudden appearance of Sweeney Todd was
so great, that for a few moments Tobias was deprived of all power of
speech or action, and with his head so strangely twisted as to seem to
threaten the destruction of his neck. He glared in the triumphant and
malignant countenance of his persecutor, as he would into that of the
arch enemy of all mankind, which probably he now began to think the
barber really was. If one thing more than another was calculated to
delight such a man as Todd, it certainly was to perceive what a dreadful
effect his presence had upon Tobias, who remained for about a minute and
a half in this state before he ventured upon uttering a shriek, which,
however, when it did come, almost frightened Todd himself. It was one of
those cries which can only come from a heart in its utmost agony--a cry
which might have heralded the spirit to another world, and proclaimed,
as it very nearly did the destruction of the intellect for ever. The
barber staggered back a pace or two as he heard it, for it was too
terrific even for him, but it was for a very brief period that it had
that stunning effect upon him, and then, with a full consciousness of
the danger to which it subjected him, he sprang upon poor Tobias as a
tiger might be supposed to do upon a lamb, and clutched him by the
throat, exclaiming--

"Such another cry, and it is the last you ever live to utter, although
it cover me with difficulties to escape the charge of killing you.
Peace! I say, peace!"

This exhortation was quite needless, for Tobias could not have uttered a
word, had he been ever so much inclined to do so; the barber held his
throat with such an iron clutch, as if it had been in a vise.

"Villain," growled Todd, "villain; so this is the way in which you have
dared to disregard my injunctions. But no matter, no matter!--you shall
have plenty of leisure to reflect upon what you have done for yourself.
Fool! to think that you could cope with me--Sweeney Todd! Ha! ha!"

He burst into a laugh, so much more hideous, than his ordinary efforts
in that way, that, had Tobias heard it--which he did not, for his head
had dropped upon his breast, and he had become insensible--it would have
terrified him almost as much as Sweeney Todd's sudden appearance had
done.

"So," muttered the barber, "he has fainted, has he? Dull child, that is
all the better. For once in a way, Tobias, I will carry you--not to
oblige you, but to oblige myself. By all that's damnable, it was a
lively thought that brought me here to-night, or else I might, by the
dawn of the morning, have had some very troublesome inquiries made of
me."

He took Tobias up as easily as if he had been an infant, and strode from
the chambers with him, leaving Mrs. Ragg to draw whatever inference she
chose from his absence; but feeling convinced that she was too much
under his controul, to take any steps of a nature to give him the
smallest amount of uneasiness.

"The woman," he muttered to himself, "is a double-distilled ass, and can
be made to believe anything, so that I have no fear whatever of her. I
dare not kill Tobias, because it is necessary, in case of the matter
being at any other period mentioned, that his mother shall be in a
position to swear that she saw him after this night alive and well."

The barber strode through the Temple, carrying the boy, who seemed not
at all in a hurry to recover from the nervous and partial state of
suffocation into which he had fallen. As they passed through the gate
opening into Fleet-street, the porter, who knew the barber well by
sight, said--

"Hilloa, Mr. Todd, is that you? Why, who are you carrying?"

"Yes, it's I," said Todd, "and I am carrying my apprentice boy, Tobias
Ragg, poor fellow."

"Poor fellow!--why, what's the matter with him?"

"I can hardly tell you, but he seems to me and to his mother to have
gone out of his senses. Good night to you, good night. I'm looking for a
coach."

"Good night, Mr. Todd; I don't think you'll get one nearer than the
market--what a kind thing now of him to carry the boy! It ain't every
master would do that; but we must not judge of people by their looks,
and even Sweeney Todd, though he has a face that one would not like to
meet in a lonely place on a dark night, may be a kind-hearted man."

Sweeney Todd walked rapidly down Fleet-street, towards old Fleet Market,
which was then in all its glory, if that could be called glory which
consisted in all sorts of filth, enough to produce a pestilence within
the city of London. When there, he addressed a large bundle of great
coats, in the middle of which was supposed to be a hackney coachman of
the regular old school, and who was lounging over his vehicle, which was
as long and lumbering as a city barge.

"Jarvey," he said, "what will you take me to Peckham Rye for?"

"Peckham Rye--you and the boy--there ain't any more of you waiting round
the corner, are there--'cos, you know, that won't be fair?"

"No, no, no."

"Well, don't be in a passion, master. I only asked, you know, so you
need not be put out about it; I will take you for twelve shillings, and
that's what I call remarkably cheap, all things considered."

"I'll give half the amount," said Sweeney Todd, "and you may consider
yourself well paid."

"Half, master?--that is cutting it low; but, howsomdever, I suppose I
must put up with it, and take you. Get in, I must try and make it up by
some better fare out of somebody else."

The barber paid no heed to these renewed remonstrances of the coachman,
but got into the vehicle, carrying Tobias with him, apparently with
great care and consideration; but when the coach door closed, and no one
was observing him, he flung him down among the straw that was at the
bottom of the vehicle, and resting his immense feet upon him, he gave
one of his disagreeable laughs, as he said--

"Well, I think I have you now, Master Tobias; your troubles will soon be
over. I am really very much afraid that you will die suddenly, and then
there will be an end of you altogether, which will be a very sad thing,
though I don't think I shall go into mourning, because I have an opinion
that that only keeps alive the bitterness of regret, and that it's a
great deal better done without, Master Tobias."

The hackney coach swung about from side to side, in the proper approved
manner of hackney coaches in the olden time, when they used to be called
"bone setters," and to be thought wonderful if they made a progress of
three miles and a half an hour. This was the sort of vehicle, then, in
which poor Tobias, still perfectly insensible, was rumbled over
Blackfriars-bridge, and so on towards Peckham, which Sweeney Todd had
announced to be his place of destination. Going at the rate they did, it
was nearly two hours before they arrived upon Peckham Rye; and any one
acquainted with that locality is well aware that there are two roads,
the one to the left, and the other to the right, both of which are
pleasantly enough studded with villa residences. Sweeney Todd directed
the coachman to take the road to the left, which he accordingly did, and
they pursued it for a distance of about a mile and a half. It must not
be supposed that this pleasant district of country was then in the state
it is now, as regards inhabitants or cultivation. On the contrary, it
was rather a wild spot, on which now and then a serious robbery had been
committed; and which had witnessed some of the exploits of those
highwaymen, whose adventures, in the present day, if one may judge from
the public patronage they may receive, are viewed with such a great
amount of interest. There was a lonely, large, rambling, old-looking
house by the way side, on the left. A high wall surrounded it, which
only allowed the topmost portion of it to be visible, and that presented
great symptoms of decay, in the dilapidated character of the
chimney-pot, and the general appearance of discomfort which pervaded it.
There Sweeney Todd directed the coachman to stop, and when the vehicle,
after swinging to and fro for several minutes, did indeed at last
resolve itself into a state of repose, Sweeney Todd got out himself, and
rang a bell, the handle of which hung invitingly at the gate. He had to
wait several minutes before an answer was given to this summons, but at
length a noise proceeded from within, as if several bars and bolts were
being withdrawn; and presently the door was opened, and a huge,
rough-looking man made his appearance on the threshold.

[Illustration: The Barber Carries Off Tobias To A Private Mad-House.]

"Well! what is it now?" he cried.

"I have a patient for Mr. Fogg," said Sweeney Todd. "I want to see him
immediately."

"Oh! well, the more the merrier: it don't matter to me a bit. Have you
got him with you--and is he tolerably quiet?"

"It's a mere boy, and he is not violently mad, but very decidedly so as
regards what he says."

"Oh! that's it, is it? He can say what he likes here, it can make no
difference in the world to us. Bring him in--Mr. Fogg is in his own
room."

"I know the way: you take charge of the lad, and I will go and speak to
Mr. Fogg about him. But stay, give the coachman these six shillings, and
discharge him."

The doorkeeper of the lunatic asylum, for such it was, went out to obey
the injunctions of Sweeney Todd, while that rascally individual himself
walked along a wide passage to a door which was at the further extremity
of it.




                              CHAPTER XIX.
                           THE MADHOUSE CELL.


When the porter of the madhouse went out to the coach, his first
impression was, that the boy, who was said to be insane, was dead--for
not even the jolting ride to Peckham had been sufficient to arouse him
to a consciousness of how he was situated; and there he lay still at the
bottom of the coach alike insensible to joy or sorrow.

"Is he dead?" said the man to the coachman.

"How should I know?" was the reply; "he may be or he may not, but I want
to know how long I am to wait here for my fare?"

"There is your money, be off with you. I can see now that the boy is all
right, for he breathes, although it's after an odd fashion that he does
so. I should rather think he has had a knock on the head, or something
of that kind."

As he spoke, he conveyed Tobias within the building, and the coachman,
since he had got his six shillings, feeling that he had no further
interest in the matter, drove away at once, and paid no more attention
to it whatever. When Sweeney Todd reached the door at the end of the
passage, he tapped at it with his knuckles, and a voice cried--

"Who knocks--who knocks? Curses on you all! Who knocks?"

Sweeney Todd did not make any verbal reply to this polite request, but
opening the door he walked into the apartment, which is one that really
deserves some description. It was a large room with a vaulted roof, and
in the centre was a superior oaken table, at which sat a man
considerably advanced in years, as was proclaimed by his grizzled locks
that graced the sides of his head, but whose herculean frame and robust
constitution had otherwise successfully resisted the assaults of time. A
lamp swung from the ceiling, which had a shade over the top of it, so
that it cast a tolerably bright glow upon the table below, which was
covered with books and papers, as well as glasses and bottles of
different kinds, which showed that the madhouse-keeper was, at all
events, as far as himself was concerned, not at all indifferent to
personal comfort. The walls, however, presented the most curious aspect,
for they were hung with a variety of tools and implements, which would
have puzzled any one not initiated into the matter even to guess at
their uses. These were, however, in point of fact, specimens of the
different kinds of machinery which were used for the purpose of coercing
the unhappy persons whose evil destiny made them members of that
establishment. Those were what is "called the good old times," when all
sorts of abuses flourished in perfection, and when the unhappy insane
were actually punished as if they were guilty of some great offence.
Yes, and worse than that were they punished, for a criminal who might
have injustice done to him by any who were in authority over him, could
complain, and if he got hold of a person of higher power, his complaints
might be listened to, but no one heeded what was said by the poor
maniac, whose bitterest accusations of his keepers, let their conduct be
what it might, was only listened to and set down as a further proof of
his mental disorder. This was indeed a most awful and sad state of
things, and, to the disgrace of this country, it is a social evil
allowed until very late years to continue in full force. Mr. Fogg, the
madhouse-keeper fixed his keen eyes from beneath his shaggy brows, upon
Sweeney Todd, as the latter entered his apartment, and then he said--

"Mr. Todd, I think, unless my memory deceives me."

"The same," said the barber, making a hideous face, "I believe I am not
easily forgotten."

"True," said Mr. Fogg, as he reached a book, the edge of which was cut
into a lot of little slips, on each of which was a capital letter, in
the order of the alphabet--"true, you are not easily forgotten, Mr.
Todd."

He then opened the book at the letter T, and read from it:--

"Mr. Sweeney Todd, Fleet-street, London, paid one year's keep and burial
of Thomas Simkins, aged 15, found dead in his bed, after a residence in
the asylum of 10 months and 4 days. I think, Mr. Todd, that was our last
little transaction; what can I do now for you, sir?"

"I am rather unfortunate," said Todd, "with my boys. I have got another
here, who has shown such decided symptoms of insanity, that it becomes
absolutely necessary to place him under your care."

"Indeed!--does he rave?"

"Why, yes he does, and it's the most absurd nonsense in the world that
he raves about; for, to hear him, one would really think that, instead
of being one of the most humane of men, I was, in point of fact, an
absolute murderer."

"A murderer, Mr. Todd!"

"Yes, a murderer--a murderer to all intents and purposes; could anything
be more absurd than such an accusation?--I, that have the milk of human
kindness flowing in every vein, and whose very appearance ought to be
sufficient to convince anybody at once of my kindness of disposition."

Sweeney Todd finished his speech by making such a hideous face, that the
madhouse-keeper could not for the life of him tell what to say to it;
and then there came one of those short, disagreeable laughs which Todd
would at times utter, which, somehow or other, never appeared exactly to
come from his mouth, but always made people look up at the walls and
ceiling of the apartment in which they were, in great doubt as to whence
the remarkable sound came.

"For how long," said the madhouse-keeper, "do you think this malady will
continue?"

"I will pay," said Sweeney Todd, as he leaned over the table, and looked
in the face of his questioner, "I will pay for twelve months; but I
don't think between you and I, that the case will last anything like so
long--I think he will die suddenly."

"I shouldn't wonder if he did. Some of our patients do die very
suddenly, and, somehow or other, we never know exactly how it happens;
but it must be some sort of fit, for they are found dead in the morning
in their beds, and then we bury them privately and quietly, without
troubling anybody about it at all, which is decidedly the best way,
because it saves a great annoyance to friends and relations, as well as
prevents any extra expense which otherwise might be foolishly gone to."

"You are wonderfully correct and considerate," said Todd, "and it's no
more than what I expected from you, or what any one might expect from a
person of your great experience, knowledge, and acquirements. I must
confess I am quite delighted to hear you talk in so elevated a strain."

"Why," said Mr. Fogg, with a strange leer upon his face, "we are forced
to make ourselves useful, like the rest of the community; and we could
not expect people to send their mad friends and relatives here, unless
we took good care that their ends and views were answered by so doing.
We make no remarks, and we ask no questions. Those are the principles
upon which we have conducted business so successfully and so long; those
are the principles upon which we shall continue to conduct it, and to
merit, we hope, the patronage of the British public."

"Unquestionably--most unquestionably."

"You may as well introduce me to your patient at once, Mr. Todd, for I
suppose, by this time, he has been brought into this house."

"Certainly, certainly--I shall have great pleasure in showing him to
you."

The madhouse-keeper rose, and so did Mr. Todd, and the former, pointing
to the bottles and glasses on the table, said--

"When this business is settled, we can have a friendly glass together."

To this proposition Sweeney Todd assented with a nod, and then they both
proceeded to what was called a reception-room in the asylum, and where
poor Tobias had been conveyed and laid upon a table, when he showed
slight symptoms of recovering from the state of insensibility into which
he had fallen, and a man was sluicing water on his face by the
assistance of a hearth broom occasionally dipped into a pailful of that
fluid.

"Quite young," said the madhouse-keeper, as he looked upon the pale and
interesting face of Tobias.

"Yes," said Sweeney Todd, "he is young--more's the pity--and, of course,
we deeply regret his present situation."

"Oh, of course, of course; but see, he opens his eyes, and will speak
directly."

"Rave, you mean, rave!" said Todd; "don't call it speaking, it is not
entitled to the name. Hush! listen to him."

"Where am I?" said Tobias, "where am I? Todd is a murderer--I denounce
him."

"You hear--you hear?" said Todd.

"Mad indeed," said the keeper.

"Oh, save me from him--save me from him!" said Tobias, fixing his eyes
upon Mr. Fogg. "Save me from him; it is my life he seeks because I know
his secrets. He is a murderer--and many a person comes into his shop,
who never leaves it again in life, if at all."

"You hear him?" said Todd. "Was there ever anybody so mad?"

[Illustration: Tobias In The Hands Of The Mad-House Keepers.]

"Desperately mad," said the keeper. "Come, come, young fellow, we shall
be under the necessity of putting you in a strait waistcoat if you go on
in that way. We must do it, for there is no help in such cases if we
don't."

Todd slunk back into the dark of the apartment, so that he was not seen,
and Tobias continued, in an imploring tone--

"I do not know who you are, sir, or where I am; but let me beg of you to
cause the house of Sweeney Todd, the barber, in Fleet-street, near St.
Dunstan's church, to be searched, and you will find that he is a
murderer. There are at least a hundred hats, quantities of walking
sticks, umbrellas, watches, and rings, all belonging to unfortunate
persons who, from time to time, have met with their deaths through him."

"How uncommonly mad!" said Mr. Fogg.

"No, no," said Tobias, "I am not mad. Why call me mad, when the truth or
falsehood of what I say can be ascertained so easily? Search his house,
and if those things be not found there, say that I am mad, and have but
dreamed of them. I do not know how he kills the people. That is a great
mystery to me yet; but that he does kill them, I have no doubt--I cannot
have a doubt."

"Watson!" cried the mad-house keeper. "Hilloa! here, Watson."

"I am here, sir," said the man, who had been dashing water upon poor
Tobias's face.

"You will take this lad, Watson, as he seems extremely feverish and
unsettled. You will take him and shave his head, Watson, and put a
strait waistcoat upon him, and let him be put in one of the dark, damp
cells. We must be careful of him, and too much light encourages delirium
and fever."

"Oh! no, no!" cried Tobias; "What have I done that I should be subjected
to such cruel treatment? what have I done that I should be placed in a
cell? If this be a madhouse, I am not mad. Oh! have mercy upon me!--have
mercy upon me!"

"You will give him nothing but bread and water, Watson; and the first
symptom of his recovery, which will produce better treatment, will be
his exonerating his master from what he has said about him; for he must
be mad so long as he continues to accuse such a gentleman as Mr. Todd of
such things; nobody but a mad man or a mad boy would think of it."

"Then," said Tobias, "I shall continue mad; for if it be madness to know
and aver that Sweeney Todd, the barber, of Fleet-street, is a murderer,
mad am I, for I know it, and aver it. It is true--it is true."

"Take him away, Watson, and do as I desired you. I begin to find that
the boy is a very dangerous character, and more viciously mad than
anybody we have had here for a considerable time."

The man named Watson seized upon Tobias, who again uttered a shriek
something similar to the one which had come from his lips when Sweeney
Todd clutched hold of him in his mother's room. But they were used to
such things in that madhouse, and cared little for them, so no one
heeded the cry in the least; but poor Tobias was carried to the door
half maddened in reality by the horrors that surrounded him. Just as he
was being conveyed out, Sweeney Todd stepped up to him, and putting his
mouth close to his ear, he whispered--

"Ha! ha! Tobias! how do you feel now? Do you think Sweeney Todd will be
hung, or will you die in the cell of a madhouse?"




                              CHAPTER XX.
        THE NEW COOK TO MRS. LOVETT GETS TIRED OF HIS SITUATION.


From what we have already had occasion to record about Mrs. Lovett's new
cook, who ate so voraciously in the cellar, our readers will no doubt be
induced to believe that he was a gentleman likely enough soon to be
tired of his situation. To a starving man, and one who seemed completely
abandoned even by hope, Lovett's bake-house, with an unlimited leave to
eat as much as possible, must of course present itself in the most
desirable and lively colours: and no wonder therefore, that, banishing
all scruple, a man so placed, would take the situation, with very little
inquiry. But people will tire of good things; and it is a remarkable
well-authenticated fact that human nature is prone to be discontented.
And those persons who are well acquainted with the human mind, and who
know well how little value people set upon things which they possess,
while those which they are pursuing, and which seem to be beyond their
reach, assume the liveliest colours imaginable, adopt various means of
turning this to account. Napoleon took good care that the meanest of his
soldiers should see in perspective the possibility of grasping a
marshal's baton. Confectioners at the present day, when they take a new
apprentice, tell him to eat as much as he likes of those tempting tarts
and sweetmeats, one or two of which before had been a most delicious
treat. The soldier goes on fighting away, and never gets the marshal's
baton. The confectioner's boy crams himself with Banbury cakes, gets
dreadfully sick, and never touches one afterwards. And now, to revert to
our friend in Mrs. Lovett's bakehouse. At first everything was
delightful, and, by the aid of the machinery, he found that it was no
difficult matter to keep up the supply of pies by really a very small
amount of manual labour. And that labour also was such a labour of love,
for the pies were delicious; there could be no mistake about that. He
tasted them half cooked, he tasted them wholly, and he tasted them
over-done; hot and cold; pork and veal with seasoning, and without
seasoning, until at last he had had them in every possible way and
shape; and when the fourth day came after his arrival in the cellar, he
might have been sitting in rather a contemplative attitude with a pie
before him. It was twelve o'clock: he had heard that sound come from the
shop. Yes, it was twelve o'clock, and he had eaten nothing yet; but he
kept his eye fixed upon the pie that lay untouched before him.

"The pies are all very well," he said; "in fact, of course they are
capital pies; and now that I see how they are made, and know that there
is nothing wrong in them, I, of course, relish them more than ever; but
one can't always live upon pies; it's quite impossible one can subsist
upon pies from one end of the year to the other, if they were the finest
pies the world ever saw, or ever will see. I don't say anything against
the pies--I know they are made of the finest flour, the best possible
butter, and that the meat, which comes from God knows where, is the most
delicate looking and tender I ever ate in all my life."

He stretched out his hand and broke a small portion of the crust from
the pie that was before him, and he tried to eat it. He certainly did
succeed; but it was a great effort; and when he had done, he shook his
head, saying--

"No, no!--d--n it! I cannot eat it, and that's the fact--one cannot be
continually eating pies: it is out of the question, quite out the
question; and all I have to remark is--d--n the pies! I really don't
think I shall be able to let another one pass my lips."

He rose and paced with rapid strides the place in which he was, and then
suddenly he heard a noise; and, looking up, he saw a trap door in the
roof open, and a sack of flour begin gradually to come down.

"Hilloa, hilloa!" he cried, "Mrs. Lovett--Mrs. Lovett!"

Down came the flour, and the trap door was closed.

"Oh, I can't stand this sort of thing," he exclaimed; "I cannot be made
into a mere machine for the manufacture of pies. I cannot and will not
endure it--it is past all bearing."

For the first time almost since his incarceration, for such it really
was, he began to think that he would take an accurate survey of the
place where this tempting manufacture was carried on. The fact was, his
mind had been so intensely occupied during the time he had been there in
providing merely for his physical wants, that he had scarcely had time
to think or reason upon the probabilities of an uncomfortable
termination of his career; but now, when he had really become quite
surfeited with the pies, and tired of the darkness and gloom of the
place, many unknown fears began to creep across him, and he really
trembled, as he asked himself what was to be the end of all. It was with
such a feeling as this that he now set about a careful and accurate
survey of the place; and taking a little lamp in his hand, he resolved
upon peering into every corner of it, with a hope that surely he should
find some means by which he should effect an escape from what otherwise
threatened to be an intolerable imprisonment. The vault in which the
ovens were situated was the largest; and although a number of smaller
ones communicated with it, containing the different mechanical
contrivances for pie-making, he could not from any one of them discover
an outlet. But it was to the vault where the meat was deposited upon
stone shelves that he paid the greatest share of attention, for to that
vault he felt convinced there must be some hidden and secret means of
ingress, and therefore of egress likewise, or else how came the shelves
always so well stocked with meat as they were? This vault was larger
than any of the other subsidiary ones, and the roof was very high, and,
come into it when he would, it always happened that he found meat enough
upon the shelves, cut into large lumps, and sometimes into slices, to
make a batch of pies with. When it got there, was not so much a mystery
to him as how it got there; for, of course, as he must sleep sometimes,
he concluded, naturally enough, that it was brought in by some means
during the period that he devoted to repose. He stood in the centre of
this vault with the lamp in his hand, and he turned slowly round,
surveying the walls and the ceilings with the most critical and marked
attention, but not the smallest appearance of an outlet was observable.
In fact, the walls were so entirely filled up with the stone shelves,
that there was no space left for a door; and as for the ceiling, it
seemed perfectly entire. Then the floor was of earth; so that the idea
of a trap door opening in it was out of the question, because there was
no one on his side of it to place the earth again over it, and give it
its compact and usual appearance.

"This is most mysterious," he said; "and if ever I could have been
brought to believe that any one had the assistance of the devil himself
in conducting human affairs, I should say that by some means Mrs. Lovett
had made it worth the while of that elderly individual to assist her;
for, unless the meat gets here by some supernatural agency, I really
cannot see how it can get here at all. And yet here it is--so fresh, and
pure, and white-looking, although I never could tell the pork from the
veal myself, for they seemed to me both alike."

He now made a still narrower examination of this vault, but he gained
nothing by that. He found that the walls at the back of the shelves were
composed of flat pieces of stone, which, no doubt, were necessary for
the support of the shelves themselves; but beyond that he made no
further discovery, and he was about leaving the place, when he fancied
he saw some writing on the inner side of the door. A closer inspection
convinced him that there were a number of lines written with lead
pencil, and after some difficulty he decyphered them as follows:--

"Whatever unhappy wretch reads these lines may bid adieu to the world
and all hope, for he is a doomed man! He will never emerge from these
vaults with life, for there is a secret connected with them so awful and
so hideous, that to write it makes one's blood curdle, and the flesh to
creep upon my bones. That secret is this--and you may be assured,
whoever is reading these lines, that I write the truth, and that it is
as impossible to make that awful truth worse by any exaggeration, as it
would be by a candle at mid-day to attempt to add any new lustre to the
sunbeams."

Here, most unfortunately, the writing broke off, and our friend, who, up
to this point, had perused the lines with the most intense interest,
felt great bitterness of disappointment, from the fact that enough
should have been written to stimulate his curiosity to the highest
possible point, but not enough to gratify it.

"This is, indeed, most provoking," he exclaimed. "What can this most
dreadful secret be, which it is impossible to exaggerate? I cannot, for
a moment, divine to what it can allude."

In vain he searched over the door for some more writing--there was none
to be found, and from the long straggling pencil-mark, which followed
the last word, it seemed as if he who had been then writing had been
interrupted, and possibly met the fate that he had predicted, and was
about to explain the reason of.

"This is worse than no information. I had better have remained in
ignorance than have received so indistinct a warning; but they shall not
find me an easy victim, and, besides, what power on earth can force me
to make pies unless I like, I should wish to know?"

As he stepped out of the place in which the meat was kept into the large
vault where the ovens were, he trod upon a piece of paper that was lying
upon the ground, and which he was quite certain he had not observed
before. It was fresh and white, and clean too, so that it could not have
been long there, and he picked it up with some curiosity. That curiosity
was, however, soon turned to dismay when he saw what was written upon
it, which was to the following effect, and well calculated to produce a
considerable amount of alarm in the breast of any one situated as he
was, so entirely friendless and so entirely hopeless of any extraneous
aid in those dismal vaults, which he began, with a shudder, to suspect
would be his tomb:--

"You are getting dissatisfied, and therefore it becomes necessary to
explain to you your real position, which is simply this:--You are a
prisoner, and were such from the first moment that you set foot where
you now are; and you will find, unless you are resolved upon sacrificing
your life, that your best plan will be to quietly give into the
circumstances in which you find yourself placed. Without going into any
argument or details upon the subject, it is sufficient to inform you
that so long as you continue to make the pies, you will be safe; but if
you refuse, then the first time you are caught asleep your throat will
be cut."

This document was so much to the purpose, and really had so little of
verbosity about it, that it was extremely difficult to doubt its
sincerity. It dropped from the half-paralysed hands of that man, who, in
the depth of his distress, and urged on by great necessity, had accepted
a situation that he would have given worlds to escape from, had he been
possessed of them.

"Gracious Heaven!" he exclaimed, "and am I then indeed condemned to such
a slavery? Is it possible, that even in the heart of London, I am a
prisoner, and without the means of resisting the most frightful threats
that are uttered against me? Surely, surely this must be all a dream! It
is too terrific to be true!"

He sat down upon that low stool where his predecessor had sat before,
receiving his death-wound from the assassin who had glided in behind
him, and dealt him that crashing blow, whose only mercy was that it had
at once deprived the victim of existence. He could have wept bitterly,
wept as he there sat, for he thought over days long passed away, of
opportunities let go by with the heedless laugh of youth; he thought
over all the chances and fortunes of his life, and now to find himself
the miserable inhabitant of a cellar, condemned to a mean and
troublesome employment, without even the liberty of leaving that, to
starve if he chose, upon pain of death--a frightful death, which had
been threatened him, was indeed torment! No wonder that at times he felt
himself unnerved, and that a child might have conquered him, while at
other moments such a feeling of despair would come across him, that he
called aloud upon his enemies to make their appearance, and give him at
least the chance of a struggle for his life.

"If I am to die," he cried, "let me die with some weapon in my hand, as
a brave man ought, and I will not complain, for there is little indeed
in life now which should induce me to cling to it; but I will not be
murdered in the dark."

He sprang to his feet, and rushing up to the door, which opened from the
house into the vaults, he made a violent and desperate effort to shake
it. But such a contingency as this had surely been looked forward to and
provided against, for the door was of amazing strength, and most
effectually resisted all his efforts, so that the result of his
endeavours was but to exhaust himself, and he staggered back, panting
and despairing, to the seat he had so recently left. Then he heard a
voice, and upon looking up he saw that the small square opening in the
upper part of the door, through which he had been before addressed, was
open, and a face there appeared, but it was not the face of Mrs. Lovett.
On the contrary, it was a large and hideous male physiognomy, and the
voice that came from it was croaking and harsh, sounding most
unmusically upon the ears of the unfortunate man who was thus made a
victim to Mrs. Lovett's pie popularity.

"Continue at your work," said the voice, "or death will be your portion
as soon as sleep overcomes you, and you sink exhausted to that repose
which you will never awaken from, except to feel the pangs of death, and
to be conscious that you are weltering in your blood. Continue at your
work, and you will escape all this--neglect it, and your doom is
sealed."

[Illustration: The Stranger In Mrs. Lovett's Bakehouse.]

"What have I done that I should be made such a victim of? Let me go, and
I will swear never to divulge the fact that I have been in these vaults,
so I cannot disclose any of their secrets, even if knew them."

"Make pies," said the voice, "eat them, and be happy. How many a man
would envy your position--withdrawn from all the struggles of existence,
amply provided with board and lodging, and engaged in a pleasant and
delightful occupation; it is astonishing how you can be dissatisfied!"

Bang! went the little square orifice at the top of the door, and the
voice was heard no more. The jeering mockery of those tones, however,
still lingered upon the ear of the unhappy prisoner, and he clasped his
head in his hands with a fearful impression upon his brain that he
surely must be going mad.

"He will drive me to insanity," he cried; "already I feel a sort of
slumber stealing over me for want of exercise, and the confined air of
these vaults hinder me from taking regular repose; but now, if I close
an eye, I shall expect to find the assassin's knife at my throat."

He sat for some time longer, and not even the dread he had of sleep
could prevent a drowsiness creeping across his faculties, and this
weariness would not be shaken off by any ordinary means, until at length
he sprang to his feet, and shaking himself roughly, like one determined
to be wide awake, he said to himself, mournfully--

"I must do their bidding or die; hope may be a delusion here, but I
cannot altogether abandon it, and not until its faintest image has
departed from my breast can I lie down to sleep and say--Let death come
in any shape it may, it is welcome."

With a desperate and despairing energy he set about replenishing the
furnaces of the oven, and, when he had got them all in a good state, he
commenced manufacturing a batch of one hundred pies, which, when he had
finished and placed upon the tray, and set the machine in motion which
conducted them up to the shop, he considered to be a sort of price paid
for his continued existence, and flinging himself upon the ground, he
fell into a deep slumber.




                              CHAPTER XXI.
                       THE NIGHT AT THE MADHOUSE.


When Sweeney Todd had, with such diabolical want of feeling, whispered
the few words of mockery which we have recorded in Tobias's ear, when he
was carried out of Mr. Fogg's reception-room to be taken to a cell, the
villanous barber drew back and indulged in rather a longer laugh than
usual.

"Mr. Todd," said Fogg, "I find that you still retain your habit of
merriment; but yours ain't the most comfortable laugh in the world, and
we seldom hear anything equal to it, even from one of our cells."

"No!" said Sweeney Todd, "I don't suppose you do, and for my part I
never heard of a cell laughing yet."

"Oh! you know what I mean, Mr. Todd, well enough."

"That may be," said Todd, "but it would be just as well to say it for
all that. I think, however, as I came in you said something about
refreshment?"

"I certainly did; and, if you will honour me by stepping back to my
room, I think I can offer you, Mr. Todd, a glass of as nice wine as the
king himself could put on his table, if he were any judge of that
commodity, which I am inclined to think he is not."

"What do you expect," said Sweeney Todd, "that such an idiot should be a
judge of?--but I shall have great pleasure in tasting your wine, for I
have no hesitation in saying that my work to-night has made me thirsty."

At this moment a shriek was heard, and Sweeney Todd shrank away from the
door.

"Oh! it's nothing, it's nothing," said Mr. Fogg; "if you had resided
here as long as I have, you would get accustomed to now and then hearing
a slight noise. The worst of it is, when half a dozen of the mad fellows
get shrieking against each other in the middle of the night. Then, I
grant, it is a little annoying."

"What do you do with them?"

"We send in one of the keepers with the lash, and soon put a stop to
that. We are forced to keep the upper hand of them, or else we should
have no rest. Hark! do you not hear that fellow now?--he is generally
pretty quiet, but he has taken it into his head to be outrageous to-day;
but one of my men will soon put a stop to that. This way, Mr. Todd, if
you please, and as we don't often meet, I think when we do we ought to
have a social glass."

Sweeney Todd made several horrible faces as he followed the
madhouse-keeper, and he looked as if it would have given him quite as
much pleasure, and no doubt it would, to brain that individual, as to
drink his wine, although probably he would have preferred doing the
latter process first, and executing the former afterwards, and at his
leisure. They soon reached the room which was devoted to the use of Mr.
Fogg and his friends, and which contained the many little curiosities in
the way of madhouse discipline that were in that age considered
indispensable in such establishments. Mr. Fogg moved away with his hands
a great number of the books and papers which were on the table, so as to
leave a vacant space, and then drawing the cork of a bottle, he filled
himself a large glass of its contents, and invited Sweeney Todd to do
the same, who was by no means slow in following his example. While these
two villains are carousing, and caring nothing for the scenes of misery
with which they are surrounded, poor Tobias, in conformity with the
orders that had been issued with regard to him, was conveyed along a
number of winding passages, and down several staircases, towards the
cells of the establishment. In vain he struggled to get free from his
captor--as well might a hare have struggled in the fangs of a wolf--nor
were his cries at all heeded; although, now and then, the shrieks he
uttered were terrible to hear, and enough to fill any one with dismay.

"I am not mad," said he, "indeed I am not mad--let me go, and I will say
nothing--not one word shall ever pass my lips regarding Mr. Todd--let me
go, oh, let me go, and I will pray for you as long as I live."

Mr. Watson whistled a lively tune.

"If I promise--if I swear to tell nothing, Mr. Todd will not wish me
kept here--all he wants is my silence, and I will take any oath he
likes. Speak to him for me, I implore you, and let me go."

Mr. Watson commenced the second part of his lively tune, and by that
time he reached a door, which he unlocked, and then, setting down Tobias
upon the threshold, he gave him a violent kick, which flung him down two
steps on to the stone floor of a miserable cell, from the roof of which
continual moisture was dripping, the only accommodation it possessed
being a truss of damp straw flung into one corner.

"There," said Mr. Watson, "my lad, you can stay there and make yourself
comfortable till somebody comes to shave your head, and after that you
will find yourself quite a gentleman."

"Mercy! mercy--have mercy upon me!"

"Mercy!--what the devil do you mean by mercy? Well, that's a good joke;
but I can tell you, you have come to the wrong shop for that; we don't
keep it in stock here, and if we wanted ever so little of it, we should
have to go somewhere else for it."

[Illustration]

Mr. Watson laughed so much at his own joke, that he felt quite amiable,
and told Tobias that if he were perfectly quiet, and said "thank you"
for everything, he wouldn't put him on the strait waistcoat, although
Mr. Fogg had ordered it; "for," added Mr. Watson, "so far as that goes,
I don't care a straw what Mr. Fogg says, or what he does; he can't do
without me, damn him! because I know too many of his secrets."

Tobias made no answer to this promise, but he lay upon his back on the
floor of the cell wringing his hands despairingly, and feeling that
almost already the very atmosphere of that place seemed pregnant with
insanity, and giving himself up for lost entirely.

"I shall never--never," he said, "look upon the bright sky and the green
fields again. I shall be murdered here, because I know too much; what
can save me now? Oh, what an evil chance it was that brought me back
again to my mother, when I ought to have been far, far away by this
time, instead of being, as I know I am, condemned to death in this
frightful place. Despair seizes upon me! What noise is that--a shriek?
Yes, yes, there is some other blighted heart beside mine in this
dreadful house. Oh, Heaven! what will become of me? I feel already
stifled and sick, and faint with the air of this dreadful cell. Help,
help, help! have mercy upon me, and I will do anything, promise
anything, swear anything."

If poor Tobias had uttered his complaints on the most desolate shore
that ever a shipwrecked mariner was cast upon, they could not have been
more unheeded than they were in that house of terror. He screamed and
shrieked for aid. He called upon all the friends he had ever known in
early life, and at that moment he seemed to remember the name of every
one who had ever uttered a kind word to him; and to those persons who,
alas! could not hear him, but were far enough removed away from his
cries, he called for aid in that hour of his deep distress. At length,
faint, wearied and exhausted, he lay a mere living wreck in that damp,
unwholesome cell, and felt almost willing that death should come and
relieve him, at least from the pang of constantly expecting it! His
cries, however, had had the effect of summoning up all the wild spirits
in that building; and, as he now lay in the quiet of absolute
exhaustion, he heard from far and near smothered cries and shrieks and
groans, such as one might expect would fill the air of the infernal
regions with dismal echoes. A cold and clammy perspiration broke out
upon him, as these sounds each moment more plainly fell upon his ear,
and as he gazed upon the profound darkness of the cell, his excited
fancy began to people it with strange unearthly beings, and he could
suppose that he saw hideous faces grinning at him, and huge mis-shapen
creatures crawling on the walls, and floating in the damp, pestiferous
atmosphere of the wretched cell. In vain he covered his eyes with his
hands; those creatures of his imagination were not to be shut out from
the mind, and he saw them, if possible, more vividly than before, and
presenting themselves in more frightfully tangible shapes. Truly, if
such visions should continue to haunt him, poor Tobias was likely enough
to follow the fate of many others who had been placed in that
establishment perfectly sane, but in a short time exhibited in it as
raving lunatics.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"A nice clear cool glass of wine," said Sweeney Todd, as he held up his
glass between him and the light, "and pleasant drinking; so soft and
mild in the mouth, and yet gliding down the throat with a pleasant
strength of flavour!"

"Yes," said Mr. Fogg, "it might be worse. You see some patients, who are
low and melancholy mad, require stimulants, and their friends send them
wine. This is some that was so sent."

"Then you don't trouble the patients with it?"

"What! give a madman wine, while I am here in my senses to drink it? Oh,
dear no! that won't do on any account."

"I should certainly, Mr. Fogg, not expect such an act of indiscretion
from you, knowing you as I do to be quite a man of the world."

"Thank you for the compliment. This wine, now, was sent for an old
gentleman who had turned so melancholy, that he not only would not take
food enough to keep life and soul together, but he really terrified his
friends so by threatening suicide that they sent him here for a few
months; and, as stimulants were recommended for him, they sent this
wine, you see; but I stimulated him without it quite as well, for I
drink the wine myself and give him an infernal good kick or two every
day, and that stimulates him, for it puts him in such a devil of a
passion that I am quite sure he doesn't want any wine."

"A good plan," said Sweeney Todd, "but I wonder you don't contrive that
your own private room should be free from the annoyance of hearing such
sounds as those that have been coming upon my ears for the last five or
ten minutes."

"It's impossible; you cannot get out of the way if you live in the house
at all; and you see, as regards these mad fellows, they are quite like a
pack of wolves, and when once one of them begins howling and shouting,
the others are sure to chime in, in full chorus, and make no end of
disturbance till we stop them, as I have already told you we do, with a
strong hand."

"While I think of it," said Sweeney Todd, as he drew from his pocket a
leathern bag, "while I think of it, I may as well pay you the year's
money for the lad I have now brought you; you see I have not forgot the
excellent rule you have of being paid in advance. There is the amount."

"Ah, Mr. Todd," said the madhouse-keeper as he counted the money, and
then placed it in his pocket, "it's a pleasure to do business with a
thorough business man like yourself. The bottle stands with you, Mr.
Todd, and I beg you will not spare it. Do you know, Mr. Todd, this is a
line of life which I have often thought would have suited you; I am
certain you have a genius for such things."

"Not equal to you," said Todd; "but as I am fond, certainly, of what is
strange and out of the way, some of the scenes and characters you come
across would, I have no doubt, be highly entertaining to me."

"Scenes and characters--I believe you! During the course of a business
like ours, we come across all sorts of strange things; and if I choose
to do it, which of course I don't, I could tell a few tales which would
make some people shake in their shoes; but I have no right to tell them,
for I have been paid, and what the deuce is it to me?"

"Oh, nothing, of course nothing. But just while we are sipping our wine,
now, couldn't you tell me something that would not be betraying
anybody's confidence?"

"I could, I could; I don't mean to say that I could not, and I don't
care much if I do to you."




                             CHAPTER XXII.
           MR. FOGG'S STORY AT THE MADHOUSE TO SWEENEY TODD.


After a short pause, during which Mr. Fogg appeared to be referring to
the cells of memory, with the view of being refreshed in a matter that
had long since been a by-gone, but which he desired to place as clearly
before his listener as he could, in fact, to make, if possible, the
relation real to him, and to omit nothing during its progress that
should be told; or possibly, that amiable individual was engaged in
considering if there were any salient point that might criminate
himself, or give even a friend a handle to make use of against him; but
apparently there was nothing of the kind, for, after a loud "hem!" he
filled the glasses, saying--

"Well, now, as you are a friend, I don't mind telling you how we do
business here--things that have been done, you know, by others; but I
have had my share as well as others--I have known a thing or two, Mr.
Todd, and I may say I have done a thing or two, too."

"Well, we must live and let live," said Sweeney Todd, "there's no going
against that, you know; if all I have done could speak, why--but no
matter, I am listening to you--however, if deeds could speak, one or two
clever things would come out rather, I think."

"Ay, 'tis well they don't," said Mr. Fogg, with much solemnity, "if they
did they would be constantly speaking at times when it would be very
inconvenient to hear them, and dangerous besides."

"So it would," said Sweeney, "a still tongue makes a wise head--but then
the silent system would bring no grist to the mill, and we must speak
when we know we are right and among friends."

"Of course," said Fogg, "of course, that's the right use of speech, and
one may as well be without it, as to have it and not use it; but
come--drink, and fill again before I begin, and then to my tale. But we
may as well have a sentiment. Sentiment, you know," continued Fogg, "is
the very soul of friendship. What do you say to 'The heart that can feel
for another?'"

"With all my soul," said Sweeney Todd; "it's very touching--very
touching, indeed. 'The heart that can feel for another!'" and as he
spoke, he emptied the glass, which he pushed towards Fogg to refill.

"Well," said Fogg, as he complied, "we have had the sentiment, we may as
well have the exemplification."

"Ha! ha! ha!" said Todd, "very good, very good indeed; pray go on, that
will do capitally."

"I may as well tell you the whole matter, as it occurred; I will then
let you know all I know, and in the same manner. None of the parties are
now living, or, at least, they are not in this country, which is just
the same thing, so far as I am concerned."

"Then that is an affair settled and done with," remarked Sweeney Todd,
parenthetically.

"Yes, quite.--Well, it was one night--such a one as this, and pretty
well about the same hour, perhaps somewhat earlier than this. However,
it doesn't signify a straw about the hour, but it was quite night, a
dark and wet night too, when a knock came at the street-door--a sharp
double knock--it was. I was sitting alone, as I might have been now,
drinking a glass or two of wine; I was startled, for I was thinking
about an affair I had on hand at that very moment, of which there was a
little stir. However, I went to the door, and peeped through a grating
that I had there, and saw only a man; he had drawn his horse inside the
gate, and secured him. He wore a large Whitney riding-coat, with a nap
that would have thrown off a deluge. I fancied, or thought I could tell,
that he meant no mischief; so I opened the door at once and saw a tall,
gentlemanly man, but wrapped up so, that you could not tell who or what
he was; but my eyes are sharp, you know, Mr. Todd. We haven't seen so
much of the world without learning to distinguish what kind of person
one has to deal with?"

"I should think not," said Todd.

"'Well,' said I, 'what is your pleasure, sir?'

"The stranger paused a moment or two before he made any reply to me.

"'Is your name Fogg?' he said.

"'Yes, it is,' said I; 'my name is Fogg--what is your pleasure with me,
sir?'

"'Why,' said he, after another pause, during which he fixed his keen eye
very hard upon me--'why, I wish to have a little private conversation
with you, if you can spare so much time, upon a very important matter
which I have in hand.'

"'Walk in, sir,' said I, as soon as I heard what it was he wanted, and
he followed me in. 'It is a very unpleasant night, and it's coming on to
rain harder. I think it is fortunate you have got housed.'

"'Yes,' he replied; 'but I am tolerably well protected against the rain,
at all events.'

"He came into this very parlour, and took a seat before the fire, with
his back to the light, so that I couldn't see his face very well.
However, I was determined that I would be satisfied in these
particulars, and so, when he had taken off his hat, I stirred up the
fire, and had a blaze that illuminated the whole room, and which showed
me the sharp, thin visage of my visitor, who was a dark man, with keen
grey eyes that were very restless--'

"'Will you have a glass of wine?' said I; 'the night is cold as well as
wet.'

"'Yes, I will,' he replied; 'I am cold with riding. You have a lonely
place about here; your house, I see, stands alone too. You have not many
neighbours.'

"'No, sir,' said I, 'we hadn't need, for when any of the poor things set
to screaming, it would make them feel very uncomfortable indeed.'

"'So it would, there is an advantage in that to yourself as well as to
them. It would be disagreeable to you to know that you were disturbing
your neighbours, and they would feel equally uncomfortable in being
disturbed, and yet you must do your duty.'

"'Ay! to be sure,' said I; 'I must do my duty, and people won't pay me
for letting madmen go, though they may for keeping them; and besides
that, I think some on 'em would get their throats cut, if I did.'

"'You are right--quite right,' said he; 'I am glad to find you of that
mind, for I came to you concerning an affair that requires some delicacy
about it, since it is a female patient.'

"'Ah!' said I, 'I always pay great attention, very great attention; and
I don't recollect a case, however violent it may be, but what I can
overcome. I always make 'em acknowledge me, and there's much art in
that.'

"'To be sure, there must be.'

"'And, moreover, they wouldn't so soon crouch and shrink away from me,
and do what I tell 'em, if I did not treat them with kindness, that is,
as far as is consistent with one's duty, for I mustn't forget that.'

"'Exactly,' he replied; 'those are my sentiments exactly.'

"'And now, sir, will you inform me in what way I can serve you?'

"'Why I have a relative, a female relative, who is unhappily affected
with a brain disease; we have tried all we can do, without any effect.
Do what we will, it comes to the same thing in the end.'

"'Ah!' said I; 'poor thing--what a dreadful thing it must be to you or
any of her friends, who have the charge of her, to see her day by day an
incurable maniac. Why, it is just as bad as when a friend or relative is
dead, and you are obliged to have the dead body constantly in your
house, and before your eyes.'

"'Exactly, my friend,' said the stranger; 'exactly, you are a man of
discernment, Mr. Fogg. I see, that is truly the state of the case. You
may then guess at the state of our feelings, when we have to part with
one beloved by us.'

"As he spoke, he turned right round, and faced me, looking very hard
into my face.

"'Well,' said I, 'your's is a hard case; but to have one afflicted about
you in the manner the young lady is, is truly distressing; it's like
having a perpetual lumbago in your back.'

"'Exactly,' said the stranger. 'I tell you what, you are the very man to
do this thing for me.'

"'I am sure of it,' said I.

"'Then we understand each other, eh?' said the stranger. 'I must say I
like your appearance, it is not often such people as you and I meet.'

"'I hope it will be to our mutual advantage,' said I, 'because such
people don't meet every day, and we oughtn't to meet to no purpose; so,
in anything delicate and confidential you may command me.'

"'I see, you are a clever man,' said he; 'well, well, I must pay you in
proportion to your talents. How do you do business--by the job, or by
the year?'

"'Well,' said I, 'where it's a matter of some nicety, it may be
both--but it entirely depends upon circumstances. I had better know
exactly what it is I have to do.'

"'Why, you see, it is a young female about eighteen, and she is somewhat
troublesome--takes to screaming, and all that kind of thing. I want her
taken care of, though you must be very careful she neither runs away nor
suddenly commits any mischief, as her madness does not appear to me to
have any particular form, and would at times completely deceive the best
of us, and then suddenly she will break out violently, and snap or fly
at anybody with her teeth.'

"'Is she so bad as that?'

"'Yes, quite. So it is quite impossible to keep her at home; and I
expect it will be a devil of a job to get her here. I tell you what you
shall have; I'll pay you your yearly charge for board and care, and I'll
give you a ten-pound note for your trouble, if you'll come and assist me
in securing her, and bringing her down. It will take some trouble.'

"'Very well,' said I, 'that will do, but you must double the note and
make it twenty, if you please; it will cost something to come and do the
thing well.'

"'I see--very well--we won't disagree about a ten-pound note; but you'll
know how to dispose of her if she comes here.'

"'Oh, yes--very healthy place.'

"'But I don't know that health is a very great blessing to any one under
such circumstances; indeed, who could regret an early grave to one so
severely afflicted?'

"'Nobody ought,' said I; 'if they knew what mad people went through,
they would not, I'm sure.'

"'That is very true again, but the fact is, they don't, and they only
look at one side of the picture; for my own part, I think that it ought
to be so ordained, that when people are so afflicted, nature ought to
sink under the affliction, and so insensibly to revert to the former
state of nonentity.'

"'Well,' said I, 'that may be as you please, I don't understand all
that; but I tell you what, I hope if she were to die much sooner than
you expect, you would not think it too much trouble to afford me some
compensation for my loss.'

"'Oh dear no! and to show you that I shall entertain no such illiberal
feeling, I will give you two hundred pounds, when the certificate of her
burial can be produced. You understand me?'

"'Certainly.'

"'Her death will be of little value to me, without the legal proof,'
said the stranger; 'so she must die at her own pleasure, or live while
she can.'

"'Certainly,' said I.

"'But what terrifies me,' continued the stranger, 'most is, her
terror-stricken countenance, always staring us in our faces; and it
arose from her being terrified; indeed I think if she were thoroughly
frightened, she would fall dead. I am sure, if any wickedly-disposed
person were to do so, death would no doubt result.'

"'Ah!' said I, 'it would be a bad job; now tell me where I am to see
you, and how about the particulars.'

"'Oh, I will tell you; now, can you be at the corner of
Grosvenor-street, near Park-lane?'

"'Yes,' I replied, 'I will.'

"'With a coach too. I wish you to have a coach, and one that you can
depend upon, because there may be a little noise. I will try to avoid
it, if possible, but we cannot always do what we desire; but you must
have good horses.'

"'Now, I tell you what is my plan; that is, if you don't mind the
damages, if any happen.'

"'What are they?'

"'This:--suppose a horse falls, and is hurt, or an upset--would you
stand the racket?'

"'I would, of course.'

"'Then listen to me; I have had more of these affairs than you have, no
doubt. Well, then, I have had experience, which you have not. Now, I'll
get a trotting-horse, and a covered cart or chaise--one that will go
along well at ten miles an hour, and no mistake about it.'

"'But will it hold enough?'

"'Yes, four or five or six, and, upon a push, I have known eight to cram
in it; but then you know we were not particular how we were placed; but
still it will hold as many as a hackney coach, only not so conveniently;
but then we have nobody in the affair to drive us, and there can't be
too few.'

"'Well, that is perhaps best; but have you a man on whom you can
depend?--because if you have, why, I would not be in the affair at all.'

"'You must,' said I; 'in the first place, I can depend upon one man
best; him I must leave here to mind the place; so if you can manage the
girl, I will drive, and I know the road as well as the way to my own
mouth--I would rather have as few in it as possible.'

"'Your precaution is very good, and I think I will try and so manage it,
that there shall be only you and I acquainted with the transaction; at
all events, should it become necessary, it will be time enough to let
some other person into the secret at the moment their services are
required. That, I think, will be the best arrangement that I can come
to--what do you say?'

"'That will do very well--when we get her here, and when I have seen her
a few days, I can tell what to do with her.'

"'Exactly; and now, good night--there is the money I promised, and now
again, good night! I shall see you at the appointed time.'

"'You will,' said I--'one glass more, it will do you good, and keep the
rain out.'

"He took off a glass of wine, and then pulled his hat over his face, and
left the house. It was a dark, wet night, and the wind blew, and we
heard the sound of his horse's hoofs for some time; however, I shut the
door and went in, thinking over in my own mind what would be the gain of
my own exertions.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"Well, at the appointed hour, I borrowed a chaise cart, a covered one,
with what you call a head to it, and I trotted to town in it. At the
appointed time I was at the corner of Grosvenor-street; it was late, and
yet I waited there an hour or more before I saw any one. I walked into a
little house to get a glass of spirits to keep up the warmth of the
body, and when I came out again, I saw some one standing at my horse's
head. I immediately went up.

"'Oh, you are here,' he said.

"'Yes I am,' said I, 'I have been here the Lord knows how long. Are you
ready?'

"'Yes, I am; come,' said he, as he got into the cart--'come to the place
I shall tell you--I shall only get her into the cart, and you must do
the rest.'

"'You'll come back with me; I shall want help on the road, and I have no
one with me.'

"'Yes, I will come with you, and manage the girl, but you must drive,
and take all the casualties of the road, for I shall have enough to do
to hold her and keep her from screaming when she does awake.'

"'What! is she asleep?'

"'I have given her a small dose of laudanum, which will cause her to
sleep comfortably for an hour or two, but the cold air and disturbance
will most probably awaken her at first.'

"'Throw something over her, and keep her warm, and have something ready
to thrust into her mouth, in case she takes to screaming, and then you
are all right.'

"'Good,' he replied: 'now wait here. I am going to yon house. When I
have entered, and disappeared several minutes, you may quietly drive up,
and take your station on the other side of the lamp-post.'

"As he spoke he got out, and walked to a large house, which he entered
softly, and left the door ajar; and after he had gone in, I walked the
horse quietly up to the lamp-post, and as I placed it, the horse and
front of the cart were completely in the dark. I had scarcely got up to
the spot, when the door opened, and he looked out to see if anybody was
passing. I gave him the word, and out he came, leaving the door, and
came with what looked like a bundle of clothes, but which was the young
girl and some clothes he had brought with him.

"'Give her to me,' said I, 'and jump up and take the reins; go on as
quickly as you can.'

"I took the girl into my arms, and handed her into the back part of the
chaise, while he jumped up, and drove away. I placed the young girl in
an easy position upon some hay, and stuffed the clothes under her, so as
to prevent the jolting from hurting her.

"'Well,' said I, 'you may as well come back here, and sit beside her:
she is all right. You seem rather in a stew.'

"'Well, I have run with her in my arms, and altogether it has flurried
me.'

"'You had better have some brandy,' said I.

"'No, no! don't stop.'

"'Pooh, pooh!' I replied, pulling up, 'here is the last house we shall
come to, to have a good stiff tumbler of hot brandy and water. Come,
have you any change--about a sovereign will do, because I shall want
change on the road? Come, be quick.'

"He handed me a sovereign, saying--

"'Don't you think it's dangerous to stop--we may be watched, or she may
wake.'

"'Not a bit of it. She snores too loudly to wake just now, and you'll
faint without the cordial; so keep a good look-out upon the wench, and
you will recover your nerves again.'

"As I spoke I jumped out, and got two glasses of brandy and water, hot,
strong, and sweet, I had in about two minutes made, out of the house.

"'Here,' said I, 'drink--drink it all up--it will make your eyes start
out of your head.'

"I spoke the truth, for what with my recommendations, and his
nervousness and haste, he drank nearly half of it at a gulp.

"I shall never forget his countenance. Ha! ha! ha! I can't keep my mirth
to myself. Just imagine the girl inside a covered cart, all dark, so
dark that you could hardly see the outline of the shadow of a man, and
then imagine, if you can, a pair of keen eyes, that shone in the dark
like cat's eyes, suddenly give out a flash of light, and then turn round
in their sockets, showing the whites awfully, and then listen to the
fall of the glass, and see him grasp his throat with one hand, and
thrust the other hand into his stomach. There was a queer kind of voice
came from his throat, and then something like a curse and a groan
escaped him.

"'Damn it,' said I, 'what is the matter now?--you've upset all the
liquor--you are very nervous--you had better have another dose.'

"'No more--no more,' he said faintly and huskily, 'no more--for God's
sake no more. I am almost choked--my throat is scalded, and my entrails
on fire!'

"'I told you it was hot,' said I.

"'Yes, hot, boiling hot--go on. I'm mad with pain--push on.'

"'Will you have any water, or anything to cool your throat?' said I.

"'No, no--go on.'

"'Yes,' said I, 'but the brandy and water is hot; however, it's going
down very fast now--very fast indeed, here is the last mouthful;' and as
I said so, I gulped it down, returned with the one glass, and then paid
for the damage.

"This did not occupy five minutes, and away we came along the road at a
devil of a pace, and we were all right enough; my friend behind me got
over his scald, though he had a very sore gullet, and his intestines
were in a very uncomfortable state; but he was better. Away we rattled,
the ground rattling to the horse's hoofs and the wheels of the vehicle,
the young girl still remaining in the same state of insensibility in
which she had first been brought out. No doubt she had taken a stronger
dose of the opium than she was willing to admit. That was nothing to me,
but made it all the better, because she gave the less trouble, and made
it safer. We got here easy enough, drove slap up to the door, which was
opened in an instant, jumped out, took the girl, and carried her in.
When once these doors are shut upon any one, they may rest assured that
it is quite a settled thing, and they don't get out very easy, save in a
wooden surtout; indeed, I never lost a boarder by any other means; we
always keep one connection, and they are usually so well satisfied, that
they never take any one away from us. Well, well! I carried her indoors,
and left her in a room by herself on a bed. She was a nice girl--a
handsome girl, I suppose people would call her, and had a low, sweet,
and plaintive voice. But enough of this.

"'She's all right,' said I, when I returned to this room, 'It's all
right--I have left her.'

"'She isn't dead,' he inquired, with much terror.

"'Oh! no, no! she is only asleep, and has not woke up yet from the
effects of the laudanum. Will you now give me one year's pay in
advance?'

"'Yes,' he replied, as he handed the money, and the remainder of the
bonds. 'Now, how am I to do about getting back to London to-night?'

"'You had better remain here.'

"'Oh, no! I should go mad too, if I were to remain here; I must leave
here soon.'

"'Well, will you go to the village inn?'

"'How far is that off?'

"'About a mile--you'll reach it easy enough; I'll drive you over for the
matter of that, and leave you there. I shall take the cart there.'

"'Very well, let it be so; I will go. Well, well, I am glad it is all
over, and the sooner it is over for ever, the better. I am truly sorry
for her, but it cannot be helped. It will kill her, I have no doubt; but
that is all the better: she will escape the misery consequent upon her
departure, and release us from a weight of care.'

"'So it will,' said I 'but come, we must go at once, if going you are.'

"'Yes, yes,' he said hurriedly.

"'Well then, come along; the horse is not yet unharnessed, and if we do
not make haste, we shall be too late to obtain a lodging for the night.'

"'That is very good,' he said, somewhat wildly: 'I am quite
ready--quite.'

"We left the house, and trotted off to the inn at a good rate, where we
arrived in about ten minutes or less, and then I put up the horse, and
saw him to the inn, and came back as quick as I could on foot. 'Well,
well,' I thought, 'this will do, I have had a good day of it--paid well
for business, and haven't wanted for sport on the road.'

"Well, I came to the conclusion that if the whole affair was to speedily
end, it would be more in my pocket than if she were living, and she
would be far happier in heaven than here, Mr. Todd."

"Undoubtedly," said Mr. Sweeney Todd, "undoubtedly, that is a very just
observation of yours."

"Well, then, I set to work to find out how the matter could be managed,
and I watched her until she awoke. She looked around her, and seemed
much surprised and confused, and did not seem to understand her
position, while I remained at hand."

"She sighed deeply, and put her hand to her head, and appeared for a
time to be quite unable to comprehend what had happened to her, or where
she was. I sent some tea to her, as I was not prepared to execute my
purpose, and she seemed to recover, and asked some questions, but my man
was dumb for the occasion, and would not speak, and the result was, she
was very much frightened. I left her so for a week or two, and then, one
day, I went into her cell. She had greatly altered in her appearance,
and looked very pale.

"'Well,' said I, 'how do you find yourself, now?'

"She looked up into my face, and shuddered; but she said in a calm
voice, looking round her--

"'Where am I?'

"'You are here!' said I, 'and you'll be very comfortable if you only
take on kindly, but you will have a strait waistcoat put on you if you
do not.'

"'Good God!' she exclaimed, clasping her hands, 'have they put me
here--in--in--'

"She could not finish the sentence, and I supplied the word which she
did not utter, and then she screamed loudly--

"'Come,' said I, 'this will never do; you must learn to be quiet, or
you'll have fearful consequences.'

"'Oh mercy, mercy! I will do no wrong! What have I done that I should be
brought here?--what have I done? They may take all I have if they will
let me live in freedom. I care not where or how poor I may be. Oh,
Henry! Henry!--if you knew where I was, would you not fly to my rescue?
Yes, you would, you would!'

"'Ah,' said I, 'there is no Henry here, and you must be content to do
without one.'

"'I could not have believed that my brother would have acted such a base
part. I did not think him wicked, although I knew him to be selfish,
mean, and stern, yet I did not think he intended such wickedness; but he
thinks to rob me of all my property; yes, that is the object he has in
sending me here.'

"'No doubt,' said I.

"'Shall I ever get out?' she inquired, in a pitiful tone; 'do not say my
life is to be spent here!'

"'Indeed it is,' said I; 'while he lives, you will never leave these
walls.'

"'He shall not attain his end, for I have deeds about me that he will
never be able to obtain; indeed, he may kill me, but he cannot benefit
by my death.'

"'Well,' said I, 'it serves him right. And how did you manage that
matter? how did you contrive to get the deeds away?'

"'Never mind that; it is a small deed, and I have secured it. I did not
think he would have done this thing; but he may yet relent. Will you aid
me? I shall be rich, and can pay you well.'

"'But your brother,' said I.

"'Oh, he is rich without mine, but he is over-avaricious; but say you
will help me--only help me to get out, and you shall be no loser by the
affair.'

"'Very well,' said I. 'Will you give me this deed as a security that you
will keep your word?'

"'Yes,' she replied, drawing forth the deed--a small parchment--from her
bosom. 'Take it; and now let me out. You shall be handsomely rewarded.'

"'Ah!' said I; 'but you must allow me first to settle this matter with
my employers. You must really be mad. We do not hear of young ladies
carrying deeds and parchments about them when they are in their senses.'

"'You do not mean to betray me?' she said, springing up wildly and
rushing towards the deed, which I carefully placed in my breast
coat-pocket.

"'Oh dear no! but I shall retain the deed, and speak to your brother
about this matter.'

"'My God! my God!' she exclaimed, and then she sank back on her bed, and
in another moment she was covered with blood. She had burst a
blood-vessel. I sent for a surgeon and physician, and they both gave it
as their opinion that she could not be saved, and that a few hours would
see the last of her. This was the fact. She was dead before another half
hour, and then I sent to the authorities for the purpose of burial; and,
producing the certificate of the medical men, I had no difficulty, and
she was buried all comfortably without any trouble.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"'Well,' thought I, 'this is a very comfortable affair; but it will be
more profitable than I had any idea of, and I must get my first reward
first, and if there should be any difficulty, I have the deed to fall
back upon. He came down next day, and appeared with rather a long face.

"'Well,' said he, 'how do matters go on here?'

"'Very well,' said I, 'how is your throat?'

"I thought he cast a malicious look at me, as much as to imply he laid
it all to my charge.

"'Pretty well,' he replied; 'but I was ill for three days. How is the
patient?'

"'As well as you could possibly wish,' said I.

"'She takes it kindly, eh? Well, I hardly expected it--but no matter.
She'll be a long while on hand, I perceive. You haven't tried the
frightening system yet, then?'

"'Hadn't any need,' I replied, putting the certificate of her burial in
his hand, and he jumped as if he had been stung by an adder, and turned
pale; but he soon recovered, and smiled complaisantly as he said--

"'Ah! well, I see you have been diligent, but I should have liked to
have seen her, to have asked her about a missing deed; but no matter.'

"'Now about the two hundred pounds,' said I.

"'Why,' said he, 'I think one will do when you come to consider what you
have received, and the short space of time and all: you had a year's
board in advance.'

"'I know I had; but because I have done more than you expected, and in a
shorter time, instead of giving me more, you have the conscience to
offer me less.'

"'No, no, not the--the--what did you call it?--we'll have nothing said
about that,--but here is a hundred pounds, and you are well paid.'

"'Well,' said I, taking the money, 'I must have five hundred pounds at
any rate, and unless you give it me, I will tell other parties where a
certain deed is to be found.'

"'What deed?'

"'The one you were alluding to. Give me four hundred more, and you shall
have the deeds.'

"After much conversation and trouble he gave it to me, and I gave him
the deed, with which he was well pleased, but looked hard at the money,
and seemed to grieve at it very much.

"Since that time I have heard that he was challenged by his sister's
lover, and they went out to fight a duel, and he fell--and died. The
lover went to the continent, where he has since lived.

"Ah," said Sweeney Todd, "you have had decidedly the best of this
affair: nobody gained anything but you."

"Nobody at all that I know of, save distant relations, and I did very
well; but then, you know, I can't live upon nothing: it costs me
something to keep my house and cellar, but I stick to business, and so I
shall as long as business sticks to me."




                             CHAPTER XXIV.
 COLONEL JEFFERY MAKES ANOTHER EFFORT TO COME AT SWEENEY TODD'S SECRET.


If we were to say that Colonel Jeffery was satisfied with the state of
affairs as regarded the disappearance of his friend Thornhill, or that
he made up his mind now contentedly to wait until chance, or the mere
progress of time, blew something of a more defined nature in his way, we
should be doing that gentleman a very great injustice indeed. On the
contrary, he was one of those chivalrous persons who when they do
commence anything, take the most ample means to bring it to a
conclusion, and are not satisfied that they have made one great effort,
which, having failed, is sufficient to satisfy them. Far from this, he
was a man who, when he commenced any enterprise, looked forward to but
one circumstance that could possibly end it, and that was its full and
complete accomplishment in every respect; so that in this affair of Mr.
Thornhill, he certainly did not intend by any means to abandon it. But
he was not precipitate. His habits of military discipline, and the long
life he had led in camps, where anything in the shape of hurry and
confusion is much reprobated, made him pause before he decided upon any
particular course of action; and this pause was not one contingent upon
a belief, or even a surmise in the danger of the course that suggested
itself, for such a consideration had no effect whatever upon him; and if
some other mode had suddenly suggested itself, which, while it placed
his life in the most imminent peril, would have seemed more likely to
accomplish his object, it would have been at once most gladly welcomed.
And now, therefore, he set about thinking deeply over what could
possibly be done further in a matter that as yet appeared to be involved
in the most profound of possible mysteries. That the barber's boy, who
had been addressed by him, and by his friend, the captain, knew
something of an extraordinary character, which fear prevented him from
disclosing, he had no doubt, and, as the colonel remarked--

"If fear keeps that lad silent upon the subject, fear may make him
speak; and I do not see why we should not endeavour to make ourselves a
match for Sweeney Todd in such a matter."

"What do you propose then?" said the captain.

"I should say that the best plan would be, to watch the barber's shop,
and take possession of the boy, as we may chance to find an opportunity
of so doing."

"Carry him off?"

"Yes, certainly; and as in all likelihood his fear of the barber is but
a visionary affair after all, it can easily, when we have him to
ourselves, be dispelled; and then, when he finds that we can and will
protect him, we shall hear all he has to say."

After some further conversation, the plan was resolved upon; and the
captain and the colonel, after making a careful "reconnoissance," as
they called it, of Fleet-street, found that by taking up a station at
the window of a tavern, which was nearly opposite to the barber's shop,
they should be able to take such effectual notice of whoever went in and
came out, that they would be sure to see the boy some time during the
course of the day. This plan of operations would no doubt have been
greatly successful, and Tobias would have fallen into their hands, had
he not, alas! for him, poor fellow, already been treated by Sweeney Todd
as we have described by being incarcerated in that fearful madhouse on
Peckham Rye, which was kept by so unscrupulous a personage as Fogg. And
we cannot but consider that it was most unfortunate for the happiness of
all those persons in whose fate we take so deep an interest--and in whom
we hope, as regards the reader, we have likewise awakened a feeling of
great sympathy--if Tobias had not been so infatuated as to make the
search he did of the barber's house, but had waited even for twenty-four
hours before doing so; in that case, not only would he have escaped the
dreadful doom which had awaited him, but Johanna Oakley would have been
saved from much danger which afterwards befel her. But we must not
anticipate; and the fearful adventures which it was her doom to pass
through, before she met with the reward of her great virtue, and her
noble perseverance will speak for themselves, trumpet-tongued indeed. It
was at a very early hour in the morning that the two friends took up
their station at the public-house so nearly opposite to Sweeney Todd's,
in Fleet street; and then, having made an arrangement with the landlord
of the house, that they were to have undisturbed possession of the room
as long as they liked, they both sat at the window, and kept an eye upon
Todd's house. It was during the period of time there spent, that Colonel
Jeffery first made the captain acquainted with the fact of his great
affection for Johanna, and that in her he thought he had at length fixed
his wandering fancy, and found, really, the only being with whom he
thought he could, in this world taste the sweets of domestic life, and
know no regret.

"She is all," he said, "in beauty that the warmest imagination can
possibly picture, and along with these personal charms, which certainly
are most peerless, I have seen enough of her to feel convinced that she
has a mind of the purest order that ever belonged to any human being in
the world."

"With such sentiments and feelings towards her, the wonder would be,"
said the captain, "if you did not love her, as you now avow you do."

"I could not be insensible to her attractions. But, understand me, my
dear friend, I do not, on account of my own suddenly-conceived
partiality for this young and beautiful creature, intend to commit the
injustice of not trying might and main, and with heart and hand, to
discover if, as she supposes, it be true that Thornhill and Mark
Ingestrie be one and the same person; and when I say that I love her
with a depth and a sincerity of affection that makes her happiness of
greater importance to me than my own--you know, I think, enough of me to
feel convinced that I am speaking only what I really feel."

"I can," said the captain, "and I do give you credit for the greatest
possible amount of sincerity, and I feel sufficiently interested myself
in the future fate of this fair young creature to wish that she may be
convinced her lover is no more, and may so much better herself, as I am
quite certain she would, by becoming your wife; for all we can hear of
this Ingestrie seems to prove that he is not the most stable-minded of
individuals the world ever produced, and perhaps not exactly the sort of
man--however, of course, she may think to the contrary, and he may in
all sincerity think so likewise--to make such a girl as Johanna Oakley
happy."

"I thank you for the kind feeling towards me, my friend, which has
dictated that speech, but--"

"Hush!" said the captain, suddenly, "hush! look at the barber!"

"The barber? Sweeney Todd?"

"Yes, yes, there he is; do you not see him? There he is, and he looks as
if he had come off a long journey. What can he have been about, I
wonder? He is draggled in mud!"

Yes, there was Sweeney Todd, opening his shop from the outside with a
key, that after a vast amount of fumbling, he took from his pocket; and,
as the captain said, he did indeed look as if he had come off a long
journey, for he was draggled with mud, and his appearance altogether was
such as to convince any one that he must have been out in most of the
heavy rain which had fallen during the early part of the morning upon
London and its suburbs. And this was just the fact, for after staying
with the madhouse-keeper in the hope that the bad weather which had set
in would be alleviated, he had been compelled to give up all chance of
such a thing, and as no conveyance of any description was to be had, he
enjoyed the pleasure, if it could be called such, of walking home up to
his knees in the mud of that dirty neighbourhood. It was, however, some
satisfaction to him to feel that he had got rid of Tobias, who, from
what he had done as regarded the examination of the house, had become
extremely troublesome indeed, and perhaps the most serious enemy that
Sweeney Todd had ever had.

"Ha!" he said, as he came within sight of his shop in
Fleet-street,--"ha! Master Tobias is safe enough; he will give me no
more trouble, that is quite clear. What a wonderfully convenient thing
it is to have such a friend as Fogg, who for a consideration will do so
much towards ridding one of an uncomfortable encumbrance. It is possible
enough that that boy might have compassed my destruction. I wish I dared
now chance, with the means I have for the sale of the string of pearls,
joined to my other resources, leaving business, and so not be obliged to
run the risk and have the trouble of another boy."

Yes, Sweeney Todd would have been glad now to shut up his shop in
Fleet-street at once and for ever, but he dreaded that when John Mundel
found that his customer did not come back to him to redeem the pearls,
that he (John Mundel) would proceed to sell them, and that then their
beauty and great worth would excite much attention, and some one might
come forward who knew more about their early history than he did.

"I must keep quiet," he thought,--"I must keep quiet; for although I
think I was pretty well disguised, and it is not at all likely that any
one--no, not even the acute John Mundel himself--would recognise in
Sweeney Todd, the poor barber of Fleet-street, the nobleman who came
from the queen to borrow £8,000 upon a string of pearls; yet there is a
remote possibility of danger; and should there be a disturbance about
the precious stones, it is better that I should remain in obscurity
until that disturbance is completely over."

This was no doubt admirable policy on the part of Todd, who, although he
found himself a rich man, had not, as many people do when they make that
most gratifying and interesting discovery, forgotten all the prudence
and tact that made him one of that most envied class of personages. He
was some few minutes before he could get the key to turn in the lock of
his street door, but at length he effected that object and disappeared
from before the eyes of the colonel and his friend into his own house,
and the door was instantly again closed upon him.

"Well," said Colonel Jeffery, "what do you think of that?"

"I don't know what to think, further than that your friend Todd has been
out of town, as the state of his boots abundantly testifies."

"They do, indeed, and he has the appearance of having been a
considerable distance, for the mud that is upon his boots is not London
mud."

"Certainly not; it is quite of a different character altogether. But
see, he is coming out again."

Sweeney Todd strode out of his house, bareheaded now, and proceeded to
take down the shutters of his shop, which, there being but three, he
accomplished in a few seconds of time, and walked in again with them in
his hand, along with the iron bar which had secured them, and which he
had released from the inside. This was all the ceremony that took place
at the opening of Sweeney Todd's shop, and the only surprise our
friends, who were at the public-house window, had upon the subject was,
that having a boy, he, Todd, should condescend to make himself so useful
as to open his own shop. And nothing could be seen of the lad, although
the hour, surely, for his attendance must have arrived; and Todd,
equally surely, was not the sort of man to be so indulgent to a boy,
whom he employed to make himself generally useful, as to allow him to
come when all the dirty work of the early morning was over. But yet such
to all appearance would seem to be the case, for presently Todd appeared
with a broom in his hand, sweeping out his shop with a rapidity and a
vengeance which seemed to say, that he did not perform that operation
with the very best grace in the world.

"Where can the boy be?" said the captain. "Do you know, little reason as
I may really appear to have for such a supposition, I cannot help in my
own mind connecting Todd's having been out of town somehow with the fact
of that boy's non-appearance this morning."

"Indeed!--the coincidence is curious, for such was my own thought
likewise upon the occasion; and the more I do think of it, the more I
feel convinced that such must be the case, and that our watch will be a
fruitless one completely. Is it likely--for possible enough it is--that
the villain has found out that we have been asking some questions of the
boy, and has thought proper to take his life?"

"Do not let us go too far," said the captain, "in mere conjecture;
recollect that as yet, let us suspect what we may, we know nothing, and
that the mere facts of our not being able to trace Thornhill beyond the
shop of this man, will not be sufficient to found an action upon."

"I know all that, and I feel how very cautious we must be; and yet to my
mind the whole of the circumstances have been day by day assuming a most
hideous air of probability, and I look upon Todd as a murderer already."

"Shall we continue our watch?"

"I scarcely see its utility. Perchance we may see some proceedings which
may interest us; but I have a powerful impression that we certainly
shall not see the boy we want. But, at all events, the barber, you
perceive, has a customer already."

As they looked across the way, they saw a well dressed looking man, who,
from a certain air and manner which he had, could be detected not to be
a Londoner. He rather resembled some substantial yeoman, who had come to
town to pay or to receive money, and, as he came near to Sweeney Todd's
shop he might have been observed to stroke his chin, as debating in his
mind the necessity or otherwise of a shave. The debate, if it were
taking place in his mind, ended by the ayes having it, for he walked
into Todd's shop, being most unquestionably the first customer which he
had had that morning. Situated as the colonel and his friend were, they
could not see into Todd's shop, even if the door had been opened, but
they saw that after the customer had been in for a few moments, it was
closed, so that, had they been close to it, all the interior of the
shaving establishment would have been concealed. They felt no great
degree of interest in this man, who was a commonplace personage enough,
who had entered Sweeney Todd's shop; but when an unreasonable time had
elapsed, and he did not come out, they did begin to feel a little
uneasy. And when another man, went in and was only about five minutes
before he emerged, shaved, and yet the first man did not come, they knew
not what to make of it, and looked at each other for some few moments in
silence. At length the colonel spoke--and he did so in a tone of
excitement, saying--

"My friend, have we waited here for nothing now? What can have become of
that man whom we saw go into the barber's shop; but who, I suppose, we
feel ourselves to be in a condition to take our oaths never came out?"

"I could take my oath; and what conclusion can we come to?"

"None, but that he met his death there; and that, let his fate be what
it may, it is the same which poor Thornhill has suffered. I can endure
this no longer. Do you stay here, and let me go alone."

"Not for worlds--you would rush into an unknown danger; you cannot know
what may be the powers of mischief that man possesses. You shall not go
alone, colonel, you shall not indeed; but something must be done."

"Agreed; and yet that something surely need not be of the desperate
character you meditate."

"Desperate emergencies require desperate remedies; and yet I think that
in this case everything is to be lost by precipitation, and nothing is
to be gained. We have to do with one who, to all appearance, is keen and
subtle, and if anything is to be accomplished contrary to his wishes, it
is not to be done by that open career, which for its own sake, under
ordinary circumstances, both you and I would gladly embrace."

"Well, well," said the colonel, "I do not and will not say but you are
right."

"I know I am--I am certain I am; and now hear me: I think we have gone
quite far enough unaided in this transaction, and that it is time we
drew some others into the plot."

"I do not understand what you mean."

"I will soon explain. I mean, that if in the pursuit of this enterprise,
which grows each moment to my mind more serious, anything should happen
to you and me, it is absolutely frightful to think that there would then
be an end of it."

"True, true; and as for poor Johanna and her friend Arabella, what could
they do?"

"Nothing, but expose themselves to great danger. Come, now, colonel, I
am glad to see that we understand each other better about this business;
you have heard, of course, of Sir Richard Blunt?"

"Sir Richard Blunt--Blunt--oh, you mean the magistrate?"

"I do; and what I propose is that we have a private and confidential
interview with him about the matter--that we make him possessed of all
the circumstances, and take his advice what to do. The result of placing
the affair in such hands will, at all events, be that if, in anything we
may attempt, we may by force or fraud be overpowered, we shall not fall
wholly unavenged."

"Reason backs your proposition."

"I knew it would, when you came to reflect. Oh, Colonel Jeffery, you are
too much a creature of impulse."

"Well," said the colonel, half jestingly, "I must say that I do not
think the accusation comes well from you, for I have certainly seen you
do some rather impulsive things, I think."

"We won't dispute about that; but since you think with me upon the
matter, you will have no objection to accompany me at once to Sir
Richard Blunt's?"

"None in the least; on the contrary, if anything is to be done at all,
for Heaven's sake let it be done quickly. I am quite convinced that some
fearful tragedy is in progress, and that, if we are not most prompt in
our measures, we shall be too late to counteract its dire influence upon
the fortunes of those in whom we have become deeply interested."

"Agreed, agreed! Come this way, and let us now for a brief space, at all
events, leave Mr. Todd and his shop to take care of each other, while we
take an effectual means of circumventing him. Why do you linger?"

"I do linger. Some mysterious influence seems to chain me to the spot."

"Some mysterious fiddlestick! Why, you are getting superstitious,
colonel."

"No, no! Well, I suppose I must come with you. Lead the way, lead the
way; and believe me that it requires all my reason to induce me to give
up a hope of making some important discovery by going to Sweeney Todd's
shop."

"Yes, you might make an important discovery; and only suppose now that
the discovery you did make was that he murdered some of his customers.
If he does so, you may depend that such a man takes good care to do the
deed effectually, and you might make the discovery just a little too
late. You understand that?"

"I do, I do. Come along, for I positively declare, that if we see
anybody else go into the barber's, I shall not be able to resist rushing
forward at once, and giving an alarm."

It was certainly a good thing that the colonel's friend was not quite so
enthusiastic as he was, or from what we happen actually to know of
Sweeney Todd, and from what we suspect, the greatest amount of danger
might have befallen Jeffery, and instead of being in a position to help
others in unravelling the mysteries connected with Sweeney Todd's
establishment, he might himself have been past all help, and most
absolutely one of the mysteries. But such was not to be.




                              CHAPTER XXV.
          TOBIAS MAKES AN ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE FROM THE MADHOUSE.


We cannot find it in our hearts to force upon the mind of the reader the
terrible condition of poor Tobias. No one, certainly, of all the
_dramatis personæ_ of our tale, is suffering so much as he; and,
consequently, we feel it to be a sort of duty to come to a consideration
of his thoughts and feelings as he lay in that dismal cell, in the
madhouse at Peckham Rye. Certainly Tobias Ragg was as sane as any
ordinary Christian need wish to be, when the scoundrel, Sweeney Todd,
put him into the coach to take him to Mr. Fogg's establishment; but if
by any ingenious process the human intellect can be toppled from its
throne, certainly that process must consist in putting a sane person
into a lunatic asylum. To the imagination of a boy, too, and that boy
one of vivid imagination, as was poor Tobias, a madhouse must be
invested with a world of terrors. That enlarged experience which enables
persons of more advanced age to shake off much of the unreal, which
seemed so strangely to take up its abode in the mind of the young
Tobias, had not reached him; and no wonder, therefore, that to him his
present situation was one of acute and horrible misery and suffering.

                  *       *       *       *       *

He lay for a long time in the gloomy dungeon-like cell into which he had
been thrust, in a kind of stupor, which might or might not be the actual
precursor of insanity, although, certainly, the chances were all in
favour of being so. For many hours he neither moved hand nor foot, and
as it was a part of the policy of Mr. Fogg to leave well alone, as he
said, he never interfered, by any intrusive offers of refreshment, with
the quiet or the repose of his patients. Tobias, therefore, if he had
chosen to remain as still as an Indian fakir, might have died in one
position, without any remonstrances from any one. It would be quite an
impossibility to describe the strange visionary thoughts and scenes that
passed through the mind of Tobias during this period. It seemed as if
his intellect was engulphed in the charmed waters of some whirlpool, and
that all the different scenes and actions which, under ordinary
circumstances, would have been clear and distinct, were mingled together
in inextricable confusion. In the midst of all this, at length, he began
to be conscious of one particular impression or feeling, and that was,
that some one was singing in a low, soft voice, very near to him. This
feeling, strange as it was in such a place, momentarily increased in
volume, until at length it began in its intensity to absorb almost every
other; and he gradually awakened from the sort of stupor that had come
over him. Yes some one was singing. It was a female voice, he was sure
of that, and as his mind became more occupied with that one subject of
thought, and his perceptive faculties became properly exercised, his
intellect altogether assumed a healthier tone. He could not distinguish
the words that were sung, but the voice itself was very sweet and
musical; and as Tobias listened, he felt as if the fever of his blood
was abating, and that healthier thoughts were taking the place of those
disordered fancies that had held sway within the chambers of his brain.

"What sweet sounds!" he said. "Oh! I do hope that singing will go on. I
feel happier to hear it; I do so hope it will continue. What sweet
music! Oh, mother, mother, if you could but see me now!"

He pressed his hands over his eyes, but he could not stop the gush of
tears that came from them, and which would trickle through his fingers.
Tobias did not wish to weep; but those tears, after all the horrors of
the night, did him a world of good, and he felt wonderfully better after
they had been shed. Moreover, the voice kept singing without
intermission.

"Who can it be," thought Tobias, "that don't tire with so much of it."

Still the singer continued; but now and then Tobias felt certain that a
very wild note or two was mingled with the ordinary melody; and that
bred a suspicion in his mind, which gave him a shudder to think of,
namely, that the singer was mad.

"It must be so," said he. "No one in their senses could or would
continue for so long a period of time such strange snatches of song.
Alas! alas! it is some one who is really mad, and confined for life in
this dreadful place; for life do I say, am not I too confined for life
here? Oh! help! help! help!"

Tobias called out in so loud a tone, that the singer of the sweet
strains that had for a time lulled him to composure, heard him, and the
strains which had before been redolent of the softest and sweetest
melody, suddenly changed to the most terrific shrieks that can be
imagined. In vain did Tobias place his hands over his ears, to shut out
the horrible sounds. They would not be shut out, but ran, as it were,
into every crevice of his brain, nearly driving him distracted by their
vehemence. But hoarser tones soon came upon his ears, and he heard the
loud, rough voice of a man say--

"What, do you want the whip so early this morning? The whip--do you
understand that?"

These words were followed by the lashing of what must have been a heavy
carter's whip, and then the shrieks died away in deep groans, every one
of which went to the heart of poor Tobias.

"I can never live amid all these horrors," he said. "Oh, why don't you
kill me at once? it would be much better, and much more merciful. I can
never live long here. Help! help! help!"

When he shouted this word "help," it was certainly not with the most
distant idea of getting any help, but it was a word that came at once
uppermost to his tongue; and so he called it out with all his might,
that he should attract the attention of some one; for the solitude, and
the almost total darkness of the place he was in, was beginning to fill
him with new dismay. There was a faint light in the cell, which made him
know the difference between day and night; but where that faint light
came from he could not tell, for he could see no grating or opening
whatever; but yet that was in consequence of his eyes not being fully
accustomed to the obscurity of the place; otherwise he would have seen
that close up to the roof there was a narrow aperture, certainly not
larger than any one could have passed a hand through, although of some
four or five feet in length; and from a passage beyond that, there came
the dim borrowed light which made darkness visible in Tobias's cell.
With a kind of desperation, heedless of what might be the result, Tobias
continued to call aloud for help; and after about a quarter of an hour,
he heard the sound of a heavy footstep. Some one was coming; yes, surely
some one was coming, and he was not to be left to starve to death. Oh,
how intently he now listened to every sound, indicative of the near
approach of whoever it was who was coming to his prison-house. Now he
heard the lock move, and a heavy bar of iron was let down with a
clanging sound.

"Help! help!" he cried again, "help! help!" for he feared that whoever
it was they might even yet go away again after making so much progress
to get at him. The cell door was flung open, and the first intimation
that poor Tobias got of the fact of his cries having been heard,
consisted in a lash with a whip, which, if it had struck him as fully as
it was intended to do, would have done him serious injury.

"So, do you want it already?" said the same voice he had before heard.

"Oh no--mercy! mercy!" said Tobias.

"Oh, that's it now, is it? I tell you what it is, if we have any
disturbance here, this is the persuader to silence that we always use:
what do you think of that for an argument, eh?"

As he spoke, the man gave the whip a loud smack in the air, and
confirmed the truth of the argument, by inducing poor Tobias to absolute
silence; indeed the boy trembled so that he could not speak.

"Well, now, my man," added the fellow, "I think we understand each
other. What do you want?"

"Oh, let me go," said Tobias, "let me go. I will tell nothing. Say to
Mr. Todd that I will do what he pleases, and tell nothing, only let me
go out of this dreadful place. Have mercy upon me--I am not at all
mad--indeed I am not."

The man closed the door, as he whistled a lively tune.




                             CHAPTER XXVI.
              THE MADHOUSE YARD, AND TOBIAS'S NEW FRIEND.


This sudden retreat of the man was unexpected by Tobias, who at least
thought it was the practice to feed people, even if they were confined
to such a place; but the unceremonious departure of the keeper, without
so much as mentioning anything about breakfast, began to make Tobias
think that the plan by which he was to be got rid of was starvation; and
yet that was impossible, for how easy it was to kill him if they felt so
disposed.

"Oh, no, no," he repeated to himself, "surely they will not starve me to
death."

As he uttered these words, he heard the plaintive singing commence
again; and he could not help thinking that it sounded like some requiem
for the dead, and that it was a sort of signal that his hours were
numbered. Despair again began to take possession of him, and despite the
savage threats of the keeper, he would again have loudly called for
help, had he not become conscious that there were footsteps close at
hand. By dint of listening most intently he heard a number of doors
opened and shut, and sometimes when one was opened there was a shriek,
and the lashing of the whips, which very soon succeeded in drowning all
other noises. It occurred to Tobias, and correctly too, for such was the
fact, that the inmates of that most horrible abode were living, like so
many wild beasts, in cages fed. Then he thought how strange it was that
even for any amount of money human beings could be got to do the work of
such an establishment. And by the time Tobias had made this reflection
to himself, his own door was once more opened upon its rusty hinges.
There was the flash of a light, and then a man came in with a water-can
in his hand, to which there was a long spout, and this he placed to the
mouth of Tobias, who fearing that if he did not drink then he might be a
long time without, swallowed some not over-savoury ditch water, as it
seemed to him, which was thus brought to him. A coarse, brown-looking,
hard loaf was then thrown at his feet, and the party was about to leave
his cell, but he could not forbear speaking, and in a voice of the most
supplicating earnestness he said--

"Oh, do not keep me here. Let me go, and I will say nothing of Todd. I
will go to sea at once if you will let me out of this place, indeed I
will; but I shall really go mad here!"

"Good that, Watson, ain't it?" said Mr. Fogg, who happened to be one of
the party.

"Very good, sir. Lord bless you, the cunning of 'em is beyond anything
in the world, sir; you'd be surprised at what they say to me sometimes."

"But I'm not mad--indeed I'm not mad!" cried Tobias.

"Oh," said Fogg, "it's a bad case I'm afraid; the strongest proof of
insanity in my opinion, Watson, is the constant reiteration of the
statement that he is not mad on the part of a lunatic. Don't you think
it is so, Mr. Watson?"

"Oh, of course, sir, of course."

"Ah! I thought you would be of that opinion; but I suppose as this is a
mere lad, we may do without chaining him up; and, besides, you know that
to-day is inspection day, when we get an old fool of a superannuated
physician to make us a visit."

"Yes, sir," said Watson, with a grin, "and a report that all is well
conducted."

"Exactly. Who shall we have this time, do you think? I always give a ten
guinea fee."

"Why, sir, there's old Dr. Popplejoy, he's 84 years old, they say, and
sand blind; he'll take it as a great compliment, he will, and no doubt
we can humbug him easily."

"I dare say we may; I'll see to it; and we will have him at twelve
o'clock, Watson. You will take care to have everything ready, of course,
you know; make all the usual preparations."

Tobias was astonished that before him they chose thus to speak so
freely, but despairing as he was, he little knew how completely he was
in the power of Mr. Fogg, and how utterly he was shut out from all human
sympathy. Tobias said nothing; but he could not help thinking that,
however old and stupid the physician whom they mentioned might be,
surely there was a hope that he would be able to discover Tobias's
perfect sanity. But the wily Mr. Fogg knew perfectly well what he was
about, and when he retired to his own room, he wrote the following note
to Dr. Popplejoy, who was a retired physician, who had purchased a
country house in the neighbourhood. The note will speak for itself,
being as fine a specimen of hypocrisy as we can ever expect to lay
before our readers--

"The Asylum, Peckham.

"SIR,--Probably you may recognise my name as that of the keeper of a
lunatic asylum in this neighbourhood. Consistent with a due regard for
the safety of that most unhappy class of the community submitted to my
care, I am most anxious, with the blessing of Divine Providence, to
ameliorate as far as possible, by kindness, that most shocking of all
calamities--insanity. Once a year it is my custom to call in some
experienced, able, and enlightened physician to see my patients (I
enclose a fee)--a physician who has nothing to do with the
establishment, and therefore cannot be biassed. If you, sir, would do me
the favour at about twelve o'clock to-day, to make a short visit of
inspection, I shall esteem it a great honour, as well as a great favour.

"Believe me to be, sir, with the most profound respect, your most
obedient and humble servant,

"O. D. FOGG."

"To Dr. Popplejoy, &c."

This note, as might be expected, brought the old purblind, superannuated
Dr. Popplejoy to the asylum, and Mr. Fogg received him in due form, and
with great gravity, saying, almost with tears in his eyes--

"My dear sir, the whole aim of my existence now, is to endeavour to
soften the rigours of the necessary confinement of the insane, and I
wish this inspection of my establishment to be made by you in order that
I may thus for a time stand clear with the world--with my own conscience
I am, of course, always clear; and if your report be satisfactory about
the treatment of the unhappy persons I have here, not the slightest
breath of slander can touch me."

"Oh yes, yes," said the old garrulous physician; "I--I--very good--eugh,
eugh--I have a slight cough."

"A very slight one, sir. Will you, first of all, take a look at one of
the sleeping chambers of the insane?"

The doctor agreed, and Mr. Fogg led him into a very comfortable
sleeping-room, which the old gentleman declared was very satisfactory
indeed, and when they returned to the apartment into which they had
already been, Mr. Fogg said--

"Well then, sir, all we have to do is to bring in the patients, one by
one, to you as fast as we can, so as not to occupy more of your valuable
time than necessary; and any questions you ask will, no doubt, be
answered, and I, being by, can give you the heads of any case that may
excite your especial notice."

"Exactly, exactly. I--I--quite correct. Eugh--eugh!"

The old man was placed in a chair of state, reposing on some very
comfortable cushions; and take him altogether, he was so pleased with
the ten guineas and the flattery of Mr. Fogg--for nobody had given him a
fee for the last fifteen years--that he was quite ready to be the
foolish tool of the madhouse-keeper in almost any way that he chose to
dictate to him. We need not pursue the examination of the various
unfortunates who were brought before old Dr. Popplejoy; it will suffice
for us if we carry the reader through the examination of Tobias, who is
our principal care, without, at the same time, detracting from the
genial sympathy we must feel for all who, at that time, were subject to
the tender mercies of Mr. Fogg. At about half-past twelve the door of
Tobias's cell was opened by Mr. Watson, who, walking in, laid hold of
the boy by the collar, and said--

"Hark you, my lad! you are going before a physician, and the less you
say the better. I speak to you for your own sake; you can do yourself no
good, but you can do yourself a great deal of harm. You know we keep a
cart-whip here. Come along."

Tobias said not a word in answer to this piece of altogether gratuitous
advice, but he made up his mind that, if the physician was not
absolutely deaf, he should hear him. Before, however, the unhappy boy
was taken into the room where old Dr. Popplejoy was waiting, he was
washed and brushed down generally, so that he presented a much more
respectable appearance than he would have done had he been ushered in in
his soiled state, as he was taken from the dirty mad-house cell.

"Surely, surely," thought Tobias, "the extent of cool impudence can go
no further than this; but I will speak to the physician, if my life
should be sacrificed for so doing. Yes, of that I am determined."

In another minute he was in the room, face to face with Mr. Fogg and Dr.
Popplejoy.

"What--what?--eugh! eugh!" coughed the old doctor; "a boy, Mr. Fogg, a
mere boy. Dear me! I--I--eugh! eugh! eugh! My cough is a little
troublesome I think, to-day--eugh! eugh!"

"Yes, sir," said Fogg, with a deep sigh, and making a pretence to dash a
tear from his eye; "here you have a mere boy. I am always affected when
I look upon him, doctor. We were boys ourselves once, you know, and to
think that the divine spark of intelligence has gone out in one so
young, is enough to make any feeling heart throb with agony. This lad
though, sir, is only a monomaniac. He has a fancy that some one named
Sweeney Todd is a murderer, and that he can discover his bad practices.
On all other subjects he is sane enough; but upon that, and upon his
presumed freedom from mental derangement, he is furious."

"It is false, sir, it is false!" said Tobias, stepping up. "Oh, sir, if
you are not one of the creatures of this horrible place, I beg that you
will hear me, and let justice be done."

"Oh, yes--I--I--eugh! Of course--I--eugh!"

"Sir, I am not mad, but I am placed here because I have become dangerous
to the safety of criminal persons."

"Oh, indeed! Ah--oh--yes."

"I am a poor lad, sir, but I hate wickedness; and because I found out
that Sweeney Todd was a murderer, I am placed here."

"You hear him, sir," said Fogg; "just as I said."

"Oh, yes, yes. Who is Sweeney Todd, Mr. Fogg?"

"Oh, sir, there is no such person in the world."

"Ah, I thought as much--I thought as much--a sad case, a very sad case,
indeed. Be calm, my little lad, and Mr. Fogg will do all that can be
done for you, I'm sure."

"Oh! how can you be so foolish, sir," cried Tobias, "as to be deceived
by that man, who is making a mere instrument of you to cover his own
villany? What I say to you is true, and I am not mad!"

"I think, Dr. Popplejoy," said Fogg, with a smile, "it would take rather
a cleverer fellow than I am to make a fool of you; but you perceive,
sir, that in a little while the boy would get quite furious, that he
would. Shall I take him away?"

"Yes, yes--poor fellow!"

"Hear me--oh, hear me," shrieked Tobias. "Sir, on your death-bed you may
repent this day's work--I am not mad--Sweeney Todd is a murderer--he is
a barber in Fleet-street--I am not mad!"

"It's melancholy, sir, is it not?" said Fogg, as he again made an effort
to wipe away a tear from his eyes. "It's very melancholy."

"Oh! very, very."

"Watson, take away poor Tobias Ragg, but take him very gently, and stay
with him a little, in his nice comfortable room, and try to soothe him;
speak to him of his mother, Watson, and get him round if you can. Alas,
poor child! my heart quite bleeds to see him. I am not fit exactly for
this life, doctor, I ought to be made of sterner stuff, indeed I ought."

                  *       *       *       *       *

"Well," said Mr. Watson, as he saluted poor Tobias with a kick outside
the door, "what a deal of good you have done!"

The boy's patience was exhausted; he had borne all that he could bear,
and this last insult maddened him. He turned with the quickness of
thought, and sprang at Mr. Watson's throat. So sudden was the attack,
and so completely unprepared for it was that gentleman, that down he
fell in the passage, with such a blow of his head against the stone
floor that he was nearly insensible; and, before anybody could get to
his assistance, Tobias had so pommelled and clawed his face, that there
was scarcely a feature discernible, and one of his eyes seemed to be in
fearful jeopardy. The noise of this assault soon brought Mr. Fogg to the
spot, as well as old Dr. Popplejoy, and the former tore Tobias from his
victim, whom he seemed intent upon murdering.




                             CHAPTER XXVII.
        THE CONSULTATION OF COLONEL JEFFERY WITH THE MAGISTRATE.


The advice which his friend had given to Colonel Jeffery was certainly
the very best that could have been tendered to him; and, under the whole
of these circumstances, it would have been something little short of
absolute folly to have ventured into the shop of Sweeney Todd without
previously taking every possible precaution to ensure the safety of so
doing. Sir Richard was within when they reached his house, and, with the
acuteness of a man of business, he at once entered into the affair. As
the colonel, who was the spokesman, proceeded, it was evident that the
magistrate became deeply interested. Colonel Jeffery concluded by
saying--

"You will thus, at all events, perceive that there is great mystery
somewhere."

"And guilt, I should say," replied the magistrate.

"You are of that opinion, Sir Richard?"

"I am, most decidedly."

"Then what would you propose to do? Believe me, I do not ask out of any
idle curiosity, but from a firm faith, that what you set about will be
accomplished in a satisfactory manner."

"Why, in the first place, I shall certainly go and get shaved at Todd's
shop."

"You will venture that?"

"Oh, yes; but do not fancy that I am so headstrong and foolish as to run
any unnecessary risks in the matter--I shall do no such thing: you may
be assured that I will do all in my power to provide for my own safety;
and if I did not think I could do that most effectually, I should not be
at all in love with the adventure; but, on the contrary, carefully avoid
it to the best of my ability. We have before heard something of Mr.
Todd."

"Indeed!--and of a criminal character?"

"Yes; a lady once in the street took a fancy to a pair of shoe-buckles
of imitation diamonds that Todd had on, when he was going to some city
entertainment; she screamed out, and declared that they had belonged to
her husband, who had gone out one morning, from his house in
Fetter-lane, to get himself shaved. The case came before me, but the
buckles were of too common a kind to enable the lady to persevere in her
statement; and Todd, who preserved the most imperturbable coolness
throughout the affair, was, of course, discharged."

"But the matter left a suspicion upon your mind?"

"It did; and more than once I have resolved in my own mind what means
could be adopted of coming at the truth: other affairs, however, of more
immediate urgency have occupied me, but the circumstances you detail
revive all my former feelings upon the subject; and I shall now feel
that the matter has come before me in a shape to merit immediate
attention."

This was gratifying to Colonel Jeffery, because it not only took a great
weight off his shoulders, but it led him to think, from the well-known
tact of the magistrate, that something certainly would be accomplished,
and that very shortly too, towards unravelling the secret that had as
yet only appeared to be more complicated and intricate the more it was
inquired into. He made the warmest acknowledgments to the magistrate for
the courtesy of his reception, and then took his leave. As soon as the
magistrate was alone, he rang a small hand-bell that was upon the table,
and the summons was answered by a man, to whom he said--

"Is Crotchet here?"

"Yes, your worship."

"Then, tell him I want him at once, will you?"

The messenger retired, but he presently returned, bringing with him
about as rough a specimen of humanity as the world could have produced.
He was tall and stout, and his face looked as if, by repeated injuries,
it had been knocked out of all shape, for the features were most
strangely jumbled together indeed, and an obliquity of vision, which
rendered it always a matter of doubt who and what he was looking at, by
no means added to his personal charms.

"Sit down, Crotchet," said the magistrate, "and listen to me without a
word of interruption."

If Mr. Crotchet had no other good quality on earth, he still had that of
listening attentively, and he never opened his mouth while the
magistrate related to him what had just formed the subject matter of Mr.
Jeffery's communication; indeed, Crotchet seemed to be looking out of
the window all the while; but then Sir Richard knew the little
peculiarities of his visual organs. When he concluded his statement, Sir
Richard said--

"Well, Crotchet, what do you think of all that? What does Sweeney Todd
do with his customers?"

Mr. Crotchet gave a singular and peculiar kind of grin, as he said,
still looking apparently out of the window, although his eyes were
really fixed upon the magistrate--

"He _smugs_ 'em."

"What?"

"Uses 'em up, yer worship; it's as clear to me as mud in a wine-glass,
that it is. Lor' bless you! I've been thinking he did that 'ere sort of
thing a deuce of a while, but I didn't like to interfere too soon, you
see."

"What do you advise, Crotchet? I know I can trust to your sagacity in
such a case."

"Why, your worship, I'll think it over a bit in the course of the day,
and let your worship know what I think. It's a awkward job rather, for a
wariety of reasons, but howsomdever there's always a something to be
done, and if we don't do it, I'll be hung if I know who can, that's
all!"

"True, true, you are right there; and, perhaps, before you see me again,
you will walk down Fleet-street, and see if you can make any
observations that will be of advantage in the matter. It is an affair
which requires great caution indeed."

"Trust me, yer worship: I'll do it, and no mistake. Lor' bless you, it's
easy for anybody now to go lounging about Fleet-street, without being
taken much notice of; for the fact is, the whole place is agog about the
horrid smell as has been for never so long in the old church of St.
Dunstan."

"Smell--smell--in St. Dunstan's church! I never heard of that before,
Crotchet."

"Oh, Lor' yes, it's enough to pison the devil himself, Sir Richard; and
t'other day when the blessed bishop went to _'firm_ a lot of people, he
as good as told 'em they might all be damned first, afore he 'firm
nobody in such a place."

The magistrate was in a deep thought for a few minutes, and then he said
suddenly--

"Well, well, Crotchet, you turn the matter over in your mind and see
what you can make of it; I will think it over likewise. Do you
hear?--mind you are with me at six this evening punctually; I do not
intend to let the matter rest, and you may depend, that from this moment
I will give it my greatest attention."

"Wery good, yer worship; wery good indeed; I'll be here, and something
seems to strike me uncommon forcible that we shall unearth this fox very
soon, yer worship."

"I sincerely hope so."

Mr. Crotchet took his leave, and when he was alone the magistrate rose
and paced his apartment for some time with rapid strides, as if he was
much agitated by the reflections that were passing through his mind. At
length he flung himself into a chair with something like a groan, as he
said--

"A horrible idea forces itself upon my consideration--most horrible!
most horrible! most horrible! Well, well, we shall see--we shall see. It
may not be so: and yet what a hideous probability stares me in the face!
I will go down at once to St. Dunstan's and see what they are really
about. Yes, yes, I shall not get much sleep I think now, until some of
these mysteries are developed. A most horrible idea, truly!"

The magistrate left some directions at home concerning some business
calls which he fully expected in the course of the next two hours, and
then he put on a plain, sad-coloured cloak and a hat destitute of all
ornament, and left his house with a rapid step. He took the most direct
route towards St. Dunstan's church, and finding the door of the sacred
edifice yielded to the touch, he at once entered it; but he had not
advanced many steps before he was met and accosted by the beadle, who
said, in a tone of great dignity and authority--

"This ain't Sunday, sir; there ain't no service here to-day."

"I don't suppose there is," replied the magistrate; "but I see you have
workmen here. What is it you are about?"

"Well, of all the impudence that ever I came near, this is the
worstest--to ask a beadle what he is about; I beg to say, sir, this is
quite private, and there's the door."

"Yes, I see it, and you may go out at it just as soon as you think
proper."

"Oh, _conwulsions_! oh, _conwulsions_! This to a beadle."

"What is all this about?" said a gentlemanly-looking man, stepping
forward from a part of the church where several masons were employed in
raising some of the huge flag-stones with which it was paved. "What
disturbance is this?"

"I believe, Mr. Antrobus, you know me," said the magistrate.

"Oh, Sir Richard, certainly. How do you do?"

"Gracious," said the beadle, "I've put my blessed foot in it. Lor' bless
us, sir, how should I know as you was Sir Richard? I begs as you won't
think nothing o' what I said. If I had a knowed you, in course I
shouldn't have said it, you may depend, Sir Richard--I humbly begs your
pardon."

"It's of no consequence--I ought to have announced myself; and you are
perfectly justified in keeping strangers out of the church, my friend."

The magistrate walked up the aisle with Mr. Antrobus, who was one of the
churchwardens; and as he did so, he said, in a low, confidential tone of
voice--

"I have heard some strange reports about a terrible stench in the
church. What does it mean? I suppose you know all about it, and what it
arises from?"

"Indeed I do not. If you have heard that there is a horrible smell in
the church after it has been shut up for some time, and upon the least
change in the weather, from dry or wet, or cold or warm, you know as
much as we know upon the subject. It is a most serious nuisance, and, in
fact, my presence here to-day is to try and make some discovery of the
cause of the stench; and you see we are going to work our way into some
of the old vaults that have not been opened for some time, with a hope
of finding out the cause of this disagreeable odour."

"Have you any objection to my being a spectator?"

"None in the least."

"I thank you. Let us now join the workmen, and I can only now tell you
that I feel the strongest possible curiosity to ascertain what can be
the meaning of all this, and shall watch the proceedings with the
greatest amount of interest."

"Come along then; I can only say, for my part, that, as an individual, I
am glad you are here, and as a magistrate, likewise, it gives me great
satisfaction to have you."




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.
             TOBIAS'S ESCAPE FROM MR. FOGG'S ESTABLISHMENT.


The rage into which Mr. Fogg was thrown by the attack which the
desperate Tobias had made upon his representative, Mr. Watson, was so
great, that, had it not been for the presence of stupid old Dr.
Popplejoy in the house, no doubt he would have taken some most exemplary
vengeance upon him. As it was, however, Tobias was thrown into his cell
with a promise of vengeance as soon as the coast was clear. These were a
kind of promises which Mr. Fogg was pretty sure to keep, and when the
first impulse of his passion had passed away, poor Tobias, as well
indeed he might, gave himself up to despair.

"Now all is over," he said; "I shall be half murdered! Oh, why do they
not kill me at once? There would be some mercy in that. Come and murder
me at once, you wretches! You villains, murder me at once!"

In his new excitement, he rushed to the door of the cell, and banged at
it with his fists, when to his surprise it opened, and he found himself
nearly falling into the stone corridor from which the various cell doors
opened. It was evident that Mr. Watson thought he had locked him in, for
the bolt of the lock was shot back, but had missed its hold--a
circumstance probably arising from the state of rage and confusion Mr.
Watson was in, as a consequence of Tobias's daring attack upon him. It
almost seemed to the boy as if he had already made some advance towards
his freedom, when he found himself in the narrow passage beyond his cell
door, but his heart for some minutes beat so tumultuously with the
throng of blissful associations connected with freedom, that it was
quite impossible for him to proceed. A slight noise, however, in another
part of the building roused him again, and he felt that it was only now
by a great coolness and self-possession, as well as great courage, that
he could at all hope to turn to account the fortunate incident which had
enabled him, at all events, to make that first step towards liberty.

"Oh, if I could but get out of this dreadful place," he thought; "if I
could but once again breathe the pure fresh air of heaven, and see the
deep blue sky, I think I should ask for no other blessings."

Never do the charms of nature present themselves to the imagination in
more lovely guise than when some one with an imagination full of such
beauties, and a mind to appreciate the glories of the world, is shut up
from real, actual contemplation. To Tobias now the thought of green
fields, sunshine and flowers, was at once rapture and agony.

"I must," he said, "I must--I will be free."

A thorough determination to do anything, we are well convinced, always
goes a long way towards its accomplishment; and certainly Tobias now
would cheerfully have faced death in any shape, rather than he would
again have been condemned to the solitary horrors of the cell, from
which he had by such a chance got free. He conjectured the stupid old
Dr. Popplejoy had not left the house, by the unusual quiet that reigned
in it, and he began to wonder if, while that quiet subsisted, there was
the remotest chance of his getting into the garden, and then scaling the
wall, and so reaching the open common. While this thought was
establishing itself in his mind, and he was thinking that he would
pursue the passage in which he was until he saw where it led to, he
heard the sound of footsteps, and he shrank back. For a few seconds they
appeared as if they were approaching where he was; and he began to dread
that the cell would be searched, and his absence discovered, in which
case there would be no chance for him but death. Suddenly, however, the
approaching footsteps paused, and then he heard a door banged shut. It
was still, even now, some minutes before Tobias could bring himself to
traverse the passage again, and when he did, it was with a slow and
stealthy step. He had not, however, gone above thirty paces, before he
heard the indistinct murmur of voices, and being guided by the sound, he
paused at a door on his right hand, which he thought must be the one he
had heard closed but a few minutes previously. It was from the interior
of the room which that was the door of, that the sound of voices came,
and as it was a matter of the very first importance to Tobias to
ascertain in what part of the house his enemies were, he placed his ear
against the panel, and listened attentively. He recognised both the
voices: they were those of Watson and Fogg. It was a very doubtful and
ticklish situation that poor Tobias was now in, but it was wonderful
how, by dint of strong resolution, he had stilled the beating of his
heart and the general nervousness of his disposition. There was but a
frail door between him and his enemies, and yet he stood profoundly
still and listened. Mr. Fogg was speaking.

"You quite understand me, Watson, I think," he said, "as concerns that
little viper, Tobias Ragg; he is too cunning, and much too dangerous to
live long. He almost staggered old superannuated Popplejoy."

"Oh, confound him!" replied Watson, "and he's quite staggered me."

"Why, certainly your face is rather scratched."

"Yes, the little devil! but it's all in the way of business, that, Mr.
Fogg, and you never heard me grumble at such little matters yet; and
I'll be bound never will, that's more."

"I give you credit for that, Watson; but between you and I, I think the
disease of that boy is of a nature that will carry him off very
suddenly."

"I think so too," said Watson, with a chuckle.

"It strikes me forcibly that he will be found dead in his bed some
morning, and I should not in the least wonder if that were to-morrow
morning: what's your opinion, Watson?"

"Oh, damn it, what's the use of all this round-about nonsense between
us? the boy is to die, and there's an end of it, and die he shall during
the night--I owe him a personal grudge, of course, now."

"Of course you do--he has disfigured you."

"Has he? Well, I can return the compliment; and I say, Mr. Fogg, my
opinion is, that it's very dangerous having these medical inspections
you have such a fancy for."

"My dear fellow, it is dangerous, that I know as well as you can tell
me, but it is from that danger we gather safety. If anything in the
shape of a disturbance should arise about any patient, you don't know of
what vast importance a report from such a man as old Dr. Popplejoy might
be."

"Well, well, have it your own way. I shall not go near Master Tobias for
the whole day, and shall see what starvation and solitude does towards
taming him down a bit."

"As you please; but it is time you went your regular rounds."

"Yes, of course."

Tobias heard Watson rise. The crisis was a serious one. His eye fell
upon a bolt that was outside the door, and, with the quickness of
thought, he shot it into its socket, and then made his way down the
passage towards his cell, the door of which he shut close. His next
movement was to run to the end of the passage and descend some stairs. A
door opposed him, but a push opened it, and he found himself in a small,
dimly-lighted room, in one corner of which, upon a heap of straw, lay a
woman, apparently sleeping. The noise which Tobias made in entering the
cell, for such it was, roused her up, and she said--

"Oh! no, no; not the lash! not the lash! I am quiet. God, how quiet I
am, although the heart within is breaking. Have mercy upon me!"

"Have mercy upon me," said Tobias, "and hide me if you can."

"Hide you! hide you! God of Heaven, who are you?"

"A poor victim, who has escaped from one of the cells, and I--"

"Hush!" said the woman; and she made Tobias shrink down in the corner of
the cell, cleverly covering him up with the straw, and then lying down
herself in such a position that he was completely screened. The
precaution was not taken a moment too soon, for, by the time it was
completed, Watson had burst open the door of the room which Tobias had
bolted, and stood in the narrow passage.

"How the devil," he said, "came that door shut, I wonder?"

"Oh! save me," whispered Tobias.

"Hush! hush! He will only look in," was the answer. "You are safe. I
have been only waiting for some one who could assist me, in order to
attempt an escape. You must remain here until night, and then I will
show you how it may be done. Hush!--he comes." Watson did come, and
looked into the cell, muttering an oath, as he said--

"Oh, you have enough bread and water till to-morrow morning, I should
say; so you need not expect to see me again till then."

"Oh! we are saved! we shall escape," said the poor creature, after
Watson had been gone some minutes.

"Do you think so?"

"Yes, yes! Oh, boy, I do not know what brought you here, but if you have
suffered one-tenth part of the cruelty and oppression that I have
suffered, you are indeed to be pitied."

"If we are to stay here," said Tobias, "till night, before making any
attempt to escape, it will, perhaps, ease your mind, and beguile the
time, if you were to tell me how you came here."

"God knows! it might--it might."

Tobias was very urgent upon the poor creature to tell her story, to
beguile the tedium of the time of waiting, and after some amount of
persuasion she consented to do so.

"You shall now hear," she said to Tobias, "if you will listen, such a
catalogue of wrongs, unredressed and still enduring, that would indeed
drive any human being mad; but I have been able to preserve so much of
my mental faculties as will enable me to recollect and understand the
many acts of cruelty and injustice that I have endured here for many a
long and weary day. My persecutions began when I was very young--so
young that I could not comprehend their cause, and used to wonder why I
should be treated with greater rigour or with greater cruelty than
people used to treat those who were really disobedient and wayward
children. I was scarcely seven years old when a maiden aunt died; she
was the old person whom I remember as having been uniformly kind to me;
though I can only remember her indistinctly, yet I know she was kind to
me; I know also I used to visit her, and she used to look upon me as her
favourite, for I used to sit at her feet upon a stool, watching her as
she sat amusing herself by embroidering, silent and motionless
sometimes, and then I asked her some questions which she answered. This
is the chief feature of my recollection of my aunt: she soon after died,
but while she lived, I had no unkindness from anybody; it was only after
that that I felt the cruelty and coolness of my family. It appeared that
I was a favourite with my aunt above all others, either in our family or
any other; she loved me, and promised that when she died, she would
leave me provided for, and that I should not be dependent upon any one.
Well, I was, from the day after the funeral, an altered being. I was
neglected, and no one paid any attention to me whatsoever; I was thrust
about, and nobody appeared to care even if I had the necessaries of
life. Such a change I could not understand. I could not believe the
evidence of my own senses; I thought it must be something that I did not
understand; perhaps my poor aunt's death had caused this distress and
alteration in people's demeanour to me. However, I was a child, and
though I was quick enough at noting all this, yet I was too young to
feel acutely the conduct of my friends. My father and mother were
careless of me, and let me run where I would; they cared not when I was
hurt, they cared not when I was in danger. Come what would, I was left
to take my chance. I recollect one day when I had fallen from the top to
the bottom of some stairs and hurt myself very much; but no one
comforted me; I was thrust out of the drawing-room, because I cried. I
then went to the top of the stairs, where I sat weeping bitterly for
some time. At length, an old servant came out of one of the attics, and
said--

"'Oh! Miss Mary, what has happened to you, that you sit crying so
bitterly on the stair head? Come in here!'

"I arose and went into the attic with her, when she set me on a chair,
and busied herself with my bruises, and said to me--

"'Now, tell me what are you crying about, and why did they turn you out
of the drawing-room--tell me now?'

"'Ay,' said I, 'they turned me out because I cried when I was hurt. I
fell all the way down stairs, but they don't mind.'

"'No, they do not, and yet in many families they would have taken more
care of you than they do here!'

"'And why do you think they would have done so?' I inquired.

"'Don't you know what good fortune has lately fallen into your lap? I
thought you knew all about it.'

"'I don't know anything, save they are very unkind to me lately.'

"'They have been very unkind to you, child, and I am sure I don't know
why, nor can I tell you why they have not told you of your fortune.'

"'My fortune,' said I; 'what fortune?'

"'Why, don't you know that when your poor aunt died you were her
favourite?'

"'I know my aunt loved me,' I said; 'she loved me, and was kind to me;
but since she has been dead, nobody cares for me.'

"'Well, my child, she has left a will behind her which says that all her
fortune shall be yours; when you are old enough you shall have all her
fine things; you shall have all her money and her house.'

"'Indeed!' said I; 'who told you so?'

"'Oh, I have heard it from those who were present at the reading of the
will, that you are, when you are old enough, to have all. Think what a
great lady you will be then! You will have servants of your own.'

"'I don't think I shall live till then.'

"'Oh yes, you will--or at least I hope so.'

"'And if I should not, what will become of all those fine things that
you have told me of? Who'll have them?'

"'Why, if you do not live till you are of age, your fortune will go to
your father and mother, who take all.'

"'Then they would sooner I should die than live?'

"'What makes you think so?' she inquired.

"'Why,' said I, 'they don't care anything for me now, and they will have
my fortune if I were dead--so they don't want me.'

"'Ah, my child!' said the old woman, 'I have thought of that more than
once; and now you can see it. I believe that it will be so. There has
many a word been spoken truly enough by a child before now, and I am
sure you are right--but do you be a good child, and be careful of
yourself, and you will always find that Providence will keep you out of
any trouble.'

"'I hope so,' I said.

"'And be sure you don't say who told you about this.'

"'Why not,' I inquired; 'why may I not tell who told me about it?'

"'Because,' she replied, 'if it were known that I told you anything
about it, as you have not been told by them, they might discharge me,
and I should be turned out.'

"'I will not do that,' I replied; 'they shall not learn who told me,
though I should like to hear them say the same thing.'

"'You may hear them do so one of these days,' she replied, 'if you are
not impatient: it will come out one of these days--two may know of it.'

"'More than my father and mother?'

"'Yes, more--several.'

"No more was said then about the matter; but I treasured it up in my
mind. I resolved that I would act differently, and not have anything to
do with them--that is, I would not be more in their sight than I could
help--I would not be in their sight at all, save at meal times--and when
there was any company there I always appeared. I cannot tell why; but I
think it was because I sometimes attracted the attention of others, and
I hoped to be able to hear something respecting my fortune; and in the
end I succeeded in doing so, and then I was satisfied--not that it made
any alteration in my conduct, but I felt I was entitled to a fortune.
How such an impression became imprinted upon a girl of eight years of
age, I know not: but it took hold of me, and I had some kind of notion
that I was entitled to more consideration than I was treated to.

"'Mother,' said I one day to her.

"'Well, Mary, what do you want to tease me about now?'

"'Didn't Mrs. Carter the other day say that my aunt left me a fortune?'

"'What is the child dreaming about?' said my mother. 'Do you know what
you are talking about, child?--you can't comprehend.'

"'I don't know, mother, but you said it was so to Mrs. Carter.'

"'Well, then, what if I did, child?'

"'Why, you must have told the truth or a falsehood.'

"'Well, Miss Impudence!--I told the truth, what then?'

"'Why, then I am to have a fortune when I grow up, that's all I mean,
mother, and then people will take care of me. I shall not be forgotten,
but everything will be done for me, and I shall be thought of first.'

"My mother looked at me very hard for a moment or two, and then, as if
she was actuated by remorse, she made an attempt to speak, but checked
herself, and then anger came to her aid, and she said--

"'Upon my word, miss! what thoughts have you taken into your fancy now?
I suppose we shall be compelled to be so many servants to you! I am sure
you ought to be ashamed of yourself--you ought, indeed!'

"'I didn't know I had done wrong,' I said.

"'Hold your tongue, will you, or I shall be obliged to flog you!' said
my mother, giving me a sound box on the ears that threw me down. 'Now,
hold your tongue and go up stairs, and give me no more insolence.'

"I arose and went up stairs, sobbing as if my heart would break. I
cannot recollect how many bitter hours I spent there, crying by
myself--how many tears I shed upon this matter, and how I compared
myself to other children, and how much my situation was worse than
theirs by a great deal. They, I thought, had their companions--they had
their hours of play. But what companions had I? and what had I in the
way of relaxation? What had I to do save to pine over the past, the
present, and the future? My infantile thoughts and hours were alike
occupied by the sad reflections that belonged to a more mature age than
mine; and yet I was so. Days, weeks, and months passed on--there was no
change, and I grew apace; but I was always regarded by my family with
dislike, and always neglected. I could not account for it in any other
way than they wished me dead. It may appear very dreadful--very dreadful
indeed--but what else was I to think? The old servant's words came upon
my mind full of their meaning--if I died before I was one-and-twenty,
they would have all my aunt's money.

"'They wish me to die,' I thought, 'they wish me to die; and I shall
die--I am sure I shall die! But they will kill me--they have tried it by
neglecting me, and making me sad. What can I do--what can I do?'

"These thoughts were the current matter of my mind, and how often do
they recur to my recollection now I am in this dull, dreadful place! I
can never forget the past. I am here because I have rights elsewhere,
which others can enjoy, and do enjoy. However, that is an old evil. I
have thus suffered long. But to return. After a year had gone by--two, I
think, must have passed over my head--before I met with anything that
was at all calculated to injure me. I must have been near ten years old,
when, one evening, I had no sooner got into bed, than I found I had been
put into damp--I may say wet sheets. They were so damp that I could not
doubt but this was done on purpose. I am sure no negligence ever came to
anything so positive and so abominable in all my life. I got out of bed
and took them off, and then wrapped myself up in the blankets and slept
till morning, without awaking any one. When morning came, I inquired who
put the sheets there?

"'What do you mean, minx?' said my mother.

"'Only that somebody was bad and wicked enough to put positively wet
sheets in the bed; it could not have been done through carelessness--it
must have been done through sheer wilfulness. I'm quite convinced of
that.'

"'You will get yourself well thrashed if you talk like that,' said my
mother. 'The sheets are not damp; there are none in the house that are
damp.'

"'These are wet.'

"This reply brought her hand down heavily upon my shoulder, and I was
forced upon my knees. I could not help myself, so violent was the blow.

"'There,' added my mother, 'take that, and that, and answer me if you
dare.'

"As she said this she struck me to the ground, and my head came in
violent contact with the table, and I was rendered insensible. How long
I continued so I cannot tell. What I first saw when I awoke was the
dreariness of one of the attics into which I had been thrust, and thrown
upon a small bed without any furniture. I looked around and saw nothing
that indicated comfort, and upon looking at my clothes there were traces
of blood. This, I had no doubt, came from myself. I was hurt, and upon
putting my hand to my head, found that I was much hurt, as my head was
bound up. At that moment the door was opened, and the old servant came
in.

"'Well, Miss Mary,' she said, 'and so you have come round again? I
really began to be afraid you were killed. What a fall you must have
had!'

"'Fall,' said I; 'who said it was a fall?'

"'They told me so.'

"'I was struck down.'

"'Struck, Miss Mary! Who could strike you? And what did you do to
deserve such a severe chastisement? Who did it?'

"'I spoke to my mother about the wet sheets.'

"'Ah! what a mercy you were not killed! If you had slept in them, your
life would not have been worth a farthing. You would have caught cold,
and you would have died of inflammation, I am sure of it. If anybody
wants to commit murder without being found out, they have only to put
them into damp sheets.'

"'So I thought, and I took them out.'

"'You did quite right--quite right.'

"'What have you heard about them?' said I.

"'Oh! I only went into the room in which you sleep, and I at once found
how damp they were, and how dangerous it was; and I was going to tell
your mamma, when I met her, and she told me to hold my tongue, but to go
down and take you away, as you had fallen down in a fit, and she could
not bear to see you lying there.'

"'And she didn't do anything for me?'

"'Oh, no, not as I know of, because you were lying on the floor
bleeding. I picked you up, and brought you here.'

"'And has she not inquired after me since?'

"'Not once.'

"'And don't know whether I am yet sensible or not?'

"'She does not yet know that.'

"'Well,' I replied, 'I think they don't care much for me, I think not at
all, but the time may come when they will act differently.'

"'No, miss, they think, or affect to think, that you have injured them;
but that cannot be, because you could not be cunning enough to dispose
your aunt to leave you all, and so deprive them of what they think they
are entitled to.'

"'I never could have believed half so much.'

"'Such, however, is the case.'

"'What can I do?'

"'Nothing, my dear, but lie still till you get better, and don't say any
more; but sleep, if you can sleep, will do you more good than anything
else now for an hour or so, so lie down and sleep.'

                  *       *       *       *       *

"The old woman left the room, and I endeavoured to compose myself to
sleep; but could not do so for some time, my mind being too actively
engaged in considering what I had better do, and I determined upon a
course of conduct by which I thought to escape much of my present
persecution. It was some days, however, before I could put it in
practice, and one day I found my father and mother together, and I said
to her--

"'Mother, why do you not send me to school?'

"'You--send you to school! did you mean you, miss?'

"'Yes, I meant myself, because other people go to school to learn
something, but I have not been sent at all.'

"'Are you not contented?'

"'I am not,' I answered, 'because other people learn something; but at
the same time, I should be more out of your way, since I am more trouble
to you, as you complain of me; it would not cost more than living at
home.'

"'What is the matter with the child?' asked my father.

"'I cannot tell,' said my mother.

"'The better way will be to take care of her, and confine her to some
part of the house, if she does not behave better.'

"'The little minx will be very troublesome.'

"'Do you think so?'

"'Yes, decidedly.'

"'Then we must adopt some more active measures, or we shall have to do
what we do not wish. I am amused at her asking to be sent to school! Was
ever there heard of such wickedness? Well, I could not have believed
such ingratitude could have existed in human nature.'

"'Go out of the room, you hussy,' said my mother; 'go out of the room,
and don't let me hear a word from you more.'

"'I left the room terrified at the storm I had raised up against me. I
knew not that I had done wrong, and went up crying to my attic alone,
and found the old servant, who asked what was the matter. I told her all
I had said, and what had been the result, and how I had been abused.

"'Why, you should let things take their own course, my dear.'

"'Yes, but I can learn nothing.'

"'Never mind; you will have plenty of money when you grow older, and
that will cure many defects; people who have money never want for
friends.'

"'But I have them not, and yet I have money.'

"'Most certainly--most certainly, but you have it not in your power, and
you are not old enough to make use of it, if you had it.'

"'Who has it?' I inquired.

"'Your father and mother.'

"No more was said at that time, and the old woman left me to myself, and
I recollect I long and deeply pondered over this matter, and yet could
see no way out of it, and resolved that I would take things as easily as
I could; but I feared that I was not likely to have a very quiet life;
indeed, active cruelty was exercised against me. They would lock me up
in a room a whole day at a time, so that I was debarred the use of my
limbs. I was even kept without food, and on every occasion I was knocked
about, from one to the other, without remorse--every one took a delight
in tormenting me, and in showing me how much they dared do. Of course
servants and all would not treat me with neglect and harshness if they
did not see it was agreeable to my parents. This was shocking cruelty;
but yet I found that this was not all. Many were the little contrivances
made and invented to cause me to fall down stairs--to slip--to trip, or
do anything that might have ended in some fatal accident, which would
have left them at liberty to enjoy my legacy, and no blame would be
attached to them for the accident, and I should most likely get blamed
for what was done, and from which I had been the sufferer--indeed, I
should have been deemed to have suffered justly. On one occasion, after
I had been in bed some time, I found it was very damp, and upon
examination I found the bed itself had been made quite wet, with the
sheets put over it to hide it. This I did not discover until it was too
late, for I caught a violent cold, and it took me some weeks to get over
it, and yet I escaped eventually, though after some months' illness. I
recovered, and it evidently made them angry because I did live. They
must have believed me to be very obstinate; they thought me obdurate in
the extreme--they called me all the names they could imagine, and
treated me with every indignity they could heap upon me. Well, time ran
on, and in my twelfth year I obtained the notice of one or two of our
friends, who made some inquiries about me. I always remarked that my
parents disliked any one to speak to, or take any notice of me. They did
not permit me to say much--they did not like my speaking; and on one
occasion, when I made some remark respecting school, she replied--

"'Her health is so bad that I have not yet sent her, but shall do so by
and by, when she grows stronger.'

"There was a look bent upon me that told me at once what I must expect,
if I persisted in my half-formed resolve of contradicting all that had
been said. When the visitor went I was well aware of what kind of a life
I should have had, if I did not absolutely receive some serious injury.
I was terrified, and held my tongue. Soon after that I was seized with
violent pains and vomiting. I was very ill, and the servant being at
home only, a doctor was sent for, who at once said I had been poisoned,
and ordered me to be taken care of. I know how it was done: I had some
cake given me--it was left out for me; and that was the only thing I had
eaten, and it astonished me, for I had not had such a thing given me for
years, and that is why I believe the poison was put in the cake, and I
think others thought so too. However, I got over that after a time,
though I was a long while before I did so; but at the same time I was
very weak, and the surgeon said that had I been a little longer without
assistance, or had I not thrown it up, I must have sunk beneath the
effects of a violent poison. He advised my parents to take some measures
to ascertain who it was that had administered the poison to me; but
though they promised compliance, they never troubled themselves about
it--but I was for a long time very cautious of what I took, and was in
great fear of the food that was given to me. However, nothing more of
that character took place, and at length I quite recovered, and began to
think in my own mind that I ought to take some active steps in the
matter, and that I ought to seek an asylum elsewhere. I was now nearly
fifteen years of age, and could well see how inveterate was the dislike
with which I was regarded by my family: I thought that they ought to use
me better, for I could remember no cause for it. I had given no deadly
offence, nor was there any motive why I should be treated thus with
neglect and disdain. It was, then, a matter of serious consideration
with me, as to whether I should not go and throw myself upon the
protection of some friend, and beg their interference in my behalf; but
then there was no one whom I felt that would do so much for me--no one
from whom I expected so great an act of friendship. It was hardly to be
expected from any one that they should interfere between me and my
parents; they would have had their first say, and I should have
contradicted all they said, and should have appeared in a very bad light
indeed. I could not say they had neglected my education--I could not say
that, because there I had been careful myself, and I had assiduously
striven when alone to remedy this defect, and had actually succeeded; so
that, if I were examined, I should have denied my own assertions by
contrary facts, which would injure me. Then again, if I were neglected I
could not prove any injury, because I had all the means of existence;
and all I could say would either be attributed to some evil source, or
it was entirely false--but at the same time I felt that I had great
cause of complaint, and none of gratitude. I could hold no communion
with any one--all alike deserted me, and I knew none who could say aught
for me if I requested their good-will. I had serious thoughts of
possessing myself of some money, and then leaving home, and staying away
until I had arrived at age; but this I deferred doing, seeing that there
were no means, and I could not do more than I then did--that is, to live
on without any mischief happening, and wait for a few years more. I
contracted an acquaintance with a young man who came to visit my
father--he came several times, and paid me more civility and attention
than any one else ever did, and I felt that he was the only friend I
possessed. It is no wonder I looked upon him as being my best and my
only friend. I thought him the best and the handsomest man I ever
beheld. This put other thoughts into my head. I did not dress as others
did, much less had I the opportunity of becoming possessed of many of
those little trinkets that most young women of my age had. But this made
no alteration in the good opinion of the young gentleman, who took no
notice of that, but made me several pretty presents. These were
treasures to me, and I must say I gloated over them, and often, when
alone, I have spent hours in admiring them; trifling as they were, they
made me happier. I knew now one person who cared for me, and a
delightful feeling it was too. I shall never know it again--it is quite
impossible. Here, among the dark walls and unwholesome cells, we have no
cheering ray of life or hope--all is dreary and cold; a long and
horrible punishment takes place, to which there is no end save with
life, and in which there is no one mitigating circumstance--all is bad
and dark. God help me!"

                  *       *       *       *       *

"However, my dream of happiness was soon disturbed. By some means my
parents had got an idea of this, and the young man was dismissed the
house, and forbidden to come to it again. This he determined to do, and
more than once we met, and then in secret I told him all my woes. When
he had heard all I said, he expressed the deepest commiseration, and
declared I had been most unjustly and harshly treated, and thought that
there was not a harder or harsher treatment than that which I had
received. He then advised me to leave home.

"'Leave home,' I said; 'where shall I fly? I have no friend.'

"'Come to me, I will protect you; I will stand between you and all the
world; they shall not stir hand or foot to your injury.'

"'But I cannot, dare not to do that; if they found me out, they would
force me back with all the ignominy and shame that could be felt from
having done a bad act; not any pity would they show me.'

"'Nor need you; you would be my wife--I mean to make you my wife.'

"'You?'

"'Yes! I dreamed not of anything else. You shall be my wife; we will
hide ourselves, and remain unknown to all until the time shall have
arrived when you are of age--when you can claim all your property, and
run no risk of being poisoned or killed by any other means.'

"'This is a matter,' said I, 'that ought to be considered well before
adopting anything so violent and so sudden.'

"'It does; and it is not one that I think will injure by being reflected
upon by those who are the principal actors; for my own part my mind is
made up, and I am ready to perform my share of the engagement.'

"I resolved to consider the matter well in my own mind, and felt every
inclination to do what he proposed, because it took me away from home,
and because it would give me one of my own. My parents had become
utterly estranged from me: they did not act as parents, they did not act
as friends, they had steeled my heart against them; they never could
have borne any love to me, I am sure of it, who could have committed
such great crimes against me. As the hour drew near, that in which I was
likely to become an object of still greater hatred and dislike to them,
I thought I was often the subject of their private thoughts, and often
when I entered the room my mother and father, and the rest, would
suddenly leave off speaking, and look at me, as if to ascertain if I had
overheard them say anything. On one occasion I remember very well I
heard them conversing in a low tone. The door happened to have opened of
itself, the hasp not having been allowed to enter the mortise. I heard
my name mentioned: I paused and listened.

"'We must soon get rid of her,' said my mother.

"'Undoubtedly,' he replied; 'if we do not, we shall have her about our
ears: she'll get married, or some infernal thing, and then we shall have
to refund.'

"'We could prevent that.'

"'Not if her husband were to insist upon it, we could not; but the only
plan I can now form is, what I told you of already.'

"'Putting her into a madhouse?'

"'Yes: there, you see, she will be secured, and cannot get away.
Besides, those who go there die in a natural way before many years.'

"'But she can speak.'

"'So she may; but who attends to the ravings of a mad woman? No, no;
depend upon it, that is the best plan: send her to a lunatic asylum--a
private madhouse. I can obtain all that is requisite in a day or two.'

"'Then we will consider that settled?'

"'Certainly.'

"'In a few days, then?'

"'Before next Sunday; because we can enjoy ourselves on that day without
any restraint, or without any uncomfortable feelings of uncertainty
about us.'

                  *       *       *       *       *

"I waited to hear no more: I had heard enough to tell me what I had to
expect. I went back to my own room, and having put on my bonnet and
shawl I went out to see the individual to whom I have alluded, and saw
him. I then informed him of all that had taken place, and heard him
exclaim against them in terms of rising indignation.

"'Come to me,' he said; 'come to me at once.'

"'Not at once.'

"'Don't stop a day.'

"'Hush!' said I, 'there's no danger; I will come the day after
to-morrow; and then I will bid adieu to all these unhappy moments, to
all these persecutions; and in three years' time I shall be able to
demand my fortune, which will be yours.'

                  *       *       *       *       *

"We were to meet the next day but one, early in the morning; there was
not, in fact, to be more than thirty hours elapse before I was to leave
home--if home I could call it--however, there was no time to be lost. I
made up a small bundle and had all in readiness before I went to bed,
and placed in security, intending to rise early, and let myself out and
leave the house. That, however, was never to happen. While I slept, at a
late hour of the night, I was awakened by two men standing by my
bedside, who desired me to get up and follow them. I refused, and they
pulled me rudely out of bed. I called out for aid, and exclaimed against
the barbarity of their proceedings.

"'It is useless to listen to her,' said my father, 'you know what a mad
woman will say!'

"'Ay, we do,' replied the men, 'they are the cunningest devils we ever
heard. We have seen enough of them to know that.'

"To make the matter plain, I was seized, gagged, and thrust into a
coach, and brought here, where I have remained ever since."




                             CHAPTER XXIX.
                   TOBIAS'S RAPID JOURNEY TO LONDON.


There was something extremely touching in the tone, and apparently in
the manner in which the poor persecuted one detailed the story of her
wrongs, and she had a tribute of a willing tear from Tobias.

"After the generous confidence you have had in me," he said, "I ought to
tell you something of myself."

"Do so," she replied, "we are companions in misfortune."

"We are indeed."

Tobias then related to her at large all about Sweeney Todd's villanies,
and how at length he, Tobias, had been placed where he was for the
purpose of silencing his testimony of the evil and desperate practices
of the barber. After that, he related to her what he had overheard about
the intention to murder him that very night, and he concluded by
saying--

"If you have any plan of escape from this horrible place, let me implore
you to tell it to me, and let us put it into practice to-night, and if
we fail, death is at any time preferable to continued existence here."

"It is--it is--listen to me."

"I will indeed," said Tobias: "you will say you never had such attention
as I will now pay to you."

"You must know, then, that this cell is paved with flag-stones, as you
see, and that the wall here at the back forms likewise part of the wall
of an old wood-house in the garden, which is never visited."

"Yes, I understand."

"Well, as I have been here so long, I managed to get up one of the
flag-stones that forms the flooring here, and to work under the wall
with my hands--a slow labour, and one of pain, until I made a regular
kind of excavation, one end of which is here, and the other in the
wood-house."

"Glorious!" said Tobias. "I see--I see--go on."

"I should have made my escape if I could, but the height of the garden
wall has always been the obstacle. I thought of tearing this miserable
quilt into strips, and making a sort of rope of it; but then how was I
to get it on the wall? you, perhaps will, with your activity and youth,
be able to accomplish that."

"Oh, yes, yes! you're right enough there; it is not a wall shall stop
me."

They waited until, from a church clock in the vicinity, they heard ten
strike, and they began operations. Tobias assisted his new friend to
raise the stone in the cell, and there, immediately beneath, appeared
the excavation leading to the wood-house, just sufficiently wide for one
person to creep through. It did not take long to do that, and Tobias
took with him a piece of work, upon which he had been occupied for the
last two hours, namely the quilt torn up into long pieces, twisted and
tied together, so that it formed a very tolerable rope, which Tobias
thought would sustain the weight of his companion. The wood-house was a
miserable-looking hole enough, and Tobias at once thought that the door
of it was fastened, but by a little pressure it came open; it had only
stuck through the dampness of the woodwork at that low point of the
garden. And now they were certainly both of them at liberty, with the
exception of surmounting the wall, which rose frowningly before him in
all its terrors. There was a fine cool fresh air in the garden, which
was indeed most grateful to the senses of Tobias, and he seemed doubly
nerved for anything that might be required of him after inhaling that
delicious, cool fresh breeze. There grew close to the wall one of those
beautiful mountain-ash trees, which bend over into such graceful
foliage, and which are so useful in the formation of pretty
summer-houses. Tobias saw that if he ascended to the top of this tree
there would not be much trouble in getting from there to the wall.

"We shall do it," he said, "we shall succeed."

"Thank God, I hear you say so," replied his companion.

Tobias tied one end of the long rope they had made of the quilt to his
waist, so that he might carry it up with him, and yet leave him free use
of his hands and feet, and then he commenced ascending the tree. In
three minutes he was on the wall. The moon shone sweetly. There was not
a tree or house in the vicinity that was not made beautiful now, in some
portions of it, by the sweet, soft light that poured down upon them,
Tobias could not resist pausing a moment to look around him on the
glorious scene; but the voice of her for whom he was bound to do all
that was possible, aroused him.

"Oh, Tobias!" she said, "quick, quick--lower the rope; oh, quick!"

"In a moment--in a moment," he cried.

The top of the wall was here and there armed with iron spikes, and some
of these formed an excellent grappling place for the torn quilt. In the
course of another minute Tobias had his end of it secure.

"Now," he said, "can you climb up by it, do you think? Don't hurry about
it. Remember, there is no alarm, and for all we know we have hours to
ourselves yet."

"Yes, yes--oh, yes--thank God!" he heard her say.

Tobias was not where he could, by any exertion of strength, render her
now the least assistance, and he watched the tightening of the frail
support by which she was gradually climbing to the top of the wall with
the most intense and painful interest that can be imagined.

"I come--I come," she said, "I am saved."

"Come slowly--for God's sake, do not hurry."

"No, no."

At this moment Tobias heard the frail rope giving way; there was a
tearing sound--it broke, and she fell. Lights, too, at that unlucky
moment, flashed from the house, and it was now evident an alarm had been
given. What could he do? if two could not be saved he might himself be
saved. He turned, and flung his feet over the wall; he hung by his hands
as low as he could, and then he dropped the remainder of the distance.
He was hurt, but in a moment he sprang to his feet, for he felt that
safety could only lie in instant and rapid flight. The terror of pursuit
was so strong upon him that he forgot his bruises.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"Thank Heaven," exclaimed Tobias, "I am at last free from that horrible
place. Oh, if I can but reach London now, I shall be safe; and as for
Sweeney Todd, let him beware, for a day of retribution for him cannot be
far off."

So saying, Tobias turned his steps towards the city, and at a hard trot,
soon left Peckham Rye far behind him as he pursued his route.




                              CHAPTER XXX.
             MRS. LOVETT'S COOK MAKES A DESPERATE ATTEMPT.


There are folks who can and who will bow like reeds to the decrees of
evil fortune, and with a patient, ass-like placidity, go on bearing the
ruffles of a thankless world without complaining, but Mrs. Lovett's new
cook was not one of those. The more destiny seemed to say to him--"Be
quiet!" the more he writhed, and wriggled, and fumed, and could not be
quiet. The more fate whispered in his ears--"You can do nothing," the
more intent he was upon doing something, let it be what it might. And he
had a little something, in the shape of a respite too, now, for had he
not baked a batch of pies, and sent them up to the devouring fangs of
the lawyers' clerks in all their gelatinous, beauty and gushing
sweetness, to be devoured. To be sure he had, and therefore having, for
a space, obeyed the behests of his task-mistress, he could sit with his
head resting upon his hands and think. Thought! What a luxury! Where is
the Indian satrap--where the arch Inquisitor--where the grasping,
dishonest, scheming employer who can stop a man from thinking?--and as
Shakspeare, says of sleep,

    "From that sleep, what dreams may come?"

so might he have said of thought,

    From that thought what acts may come?

Now we are afraid that, in the first place, the cook, in spite of
himself, uttered some expression concerning Mrs. Lovett of neither an
evangelical or a polite character, and with these we need not trouble
the reader. They acted as a sort of safety-valve to his feelings, and
after consigning that fascinating female to a certain warm place, where
we may fancy everybody's pie might be cooked on the very shortest
notice, he got a little more calm.

"What shall I do?--what shall I do?"

Such was the rather vague question he asked of himself. Alas! how often
are those four simple words linked together, finding but a vain echo in
the over-charged heart. What shall I do? Ay, what!--small power had he
to do anything, except the quietest thing of all--that one thing which
Heaven in its mercy has left for every wretch to do if it so pleases
him--to die! But, somehow or another, a man upon the up-hill side of
life is apt to think he may do something rather than that, and our cook,
although he was about as desperate a cook as the world ever saw, did not
like yet to say die. Now, in that curious combination of passions,
impulses, and prejudices in the mind of this man it would be a hard case
if some scheme of action did not present itself, even in circumstances
of the greatest possible seeming depression, and so, after a time, the
cook did think of something to do.

"Many of these pies," he said to himself, "are not eaten in the shop,
_ergo_ they are eaten out of the shop, and possibly at the respective
houses of the purchasers--what more feasible mode of disclosing my
position, and 'the secrets of my prison-house,' can there be than the
enclosing a note in one of Mrs. Lovett's pies?"

After reviewing all the _pros_ and _cons_ of this scheme, there only
appeared a few little difficulties in the way, but, although they were
rather serious, they were not insurmountable. In the first place, it was
possible enough that the unfortunate pie in which the note might be
enclosed might be eaten in the shop, in which event the note might go
down the throat of some hungry lawyer's clerk, and it might be handed to
Mrs. Lovett, with a "God bless me, ma'am, what's this in the pie?" and
then Mrs. Lovett might, by a not very remote possibility, say to
herself--"This cook is a scheming, long-headed sort of a cook, and
notwithstanding he does his duty by the pies, he shall be sent upon an
errand to another and a better world," and in that case the delectable
scheme of the note could only end in the total destruction of the
unfortunate who conceived it. Objection the second was, that, although
nothing is so easy as to say--"Oh, write a note all about it," nothing
is so difficult as to write a note about anything without paper, ink,
and a pen. The cook rubbed his forehead, and cried--

"D----n it!"

This seemed to have the desired effect, for he at once recollected that
he was supplied with a thin piece of paper for the purpose of laying
over the pies if the oven should by chance be over heated, and so
subject them to an over-browning process.

"Surely," he thought, "I shall be able to make a substitute for a pen,
and as for ink, a little coal and water, or--ah, I have it, black from
my lights, of course. Ha--ha! How difficulties vanish when a man has
thoroughly made up his mind to overcome them. Ha--ha! I write a note--I
post it in a pie--some lawyer sends his clerk for a pie, and he gets
_that_ pie. He opens it and sees the note--he reads it--he flies to a
police-office, and gets a private interview with a magistrate--a couple
of Bow-street runners walk down to Bell Yard, and seize Mrs. Lovett--I
hear a row in the shop, and cry--'Here I am--I am here--make haste--here
I am--here I am!' Ha--ha--ha--ha--ha--ha!"

"Are you mad?"

The cook started to his feet--

"Who spoke--who spoke?"

"I," said Mrs. Lovett, looking through the ingenious little wicket at
the top of the door. "What do you mean by that laughing? If you have
gone mad, as one cook once did, death will be a relief to you. Only
convince me of that fact, and in two hours you sleep the long sleep."

"I beg your pardon, ma'am, I am not at all mad."

"Then why did you laugh in such a way that it reached even my ears
above?"

"Why, ma'am, are you not a widow?"

"Well?"

"Well then, you could not have possibly looked at me as you ought to
have done, or you would have seen that I am anything but a bad looking
fellow, and as I am decidedly single, what do you say to taking me for
better or for worse? The pie business is a thriving one, and, of course,
if I had an interest in it, I should say nothing of affairs down below
here."

"Fool!"

"Thank you, madam, for the compliment, but I assure you, the idea of
such an arrangement made me laugh, and at all events, provided I do my
duty, you don't mind my laughing a little at it?"

Mrs. Lovett disdained any further conversation with the cook, and closed
the little wicket. When she was gone he took himself seriously to task
for being so foolish as to utter his thoughts aloud, but yet he did not
think he had gone so far as to speak loud enough about the plan of
putting the letter in a pie for her to hear that.

"Oh, no--no, I am safe enough. It was the laughing that made her come. I
am safe as yet!"

Having satisfied himself fully upon this point, he at once set to work
to manufacture his note. The paper, as he had said, was ready at hand.
To be sure, it was of a thin and flimsy texture, and decidedly brown,
but a man in his situation could be hardly supposed to stand upon
punctilios. After some trouble he succeeded in making an apology for a
pen by the aid of a piece of stick, and he manufactured some very
tolerable ink, at least, as good as the soot and water commonly sold in
London for the best "japan," and then he set about writing his note. As
we have an opportunity of looking over his shoulder, we give the note
verbatim.

"SIR--(OR MADAM)--I am a prisoner beneath the shop of Mrs. Lovett, the
pie female, in Bell Yard. I am threatened with death if I attempt to
escape from my now enforced employment. Moreover, I am convinced that
there is some dreadful secret connected with the pies, which I can
hardly trust my imagination to dwell upon, much less here set it down.
Pray instantly, upon receipt of this, go to the nearest police-office
and procure me immediate aid, or I shall soon be numbered with the dead.
In the sacred names of justice and humanity, I charge you to do this."

The cook did not, for fear of accidents, put his name to this epistle.
It was sufficient, he thought, that he designated his condition, and
pointed out where he was. This note he folded into a close flat shape,
and pressed it with his hands, so that it would take up a very small
portion of room in a pie, and yet, from its size and nature, if the pie
fell into the hands of some gourmand who commenced eating it violently,
he could not fail to feel that there was a something in his mouth more
indigestible than the delicate mutton or veal and the flaky crust of
which Mrs. Lovett's delicacies were composed. Having proceeded thus far,
he concluded that the only real risk he ran was, that the pie might be
eaten in the shop, and the enclosure, without examination, handed over
to Mrs. Lovett merely as a piece of paper which had insinuated itself
where it had no right to be. But as no design whatever can be carried
out without some risk or another, he was not disposed to give up his,
because some contingency of that character was attached to it. The
prospect of deliverance from the horrible condition to which he was
reduced, now spread over his mind a pleasing calm, and he set about the
manufacture of a batch of pies, so as to have it ready for the oven when
the bell should ring.--Into one of them he carefully introduced his
note. Oh, what an eye he kept upon that individual pie. How often he
carefully lifted the upper crust, to have a peep at the little missive
which was about to go upon an errand of life or death.--How he tried to
picture to his mind's eye the sort of person into whose hands it might
fall, and then how he thought he would listen for any sounds during the
next few hours, which should be indicative of the arrest of Mrs. Lovett,
and the presence of the police in the place. He thought, then, that if
his laugh had been sufficiently loud when merely uttered to himself, to
reach the ears of Mrs. Lovett, surely his shout to the police would be
heard above all other sounds, and at once bring them to his aid. Tingle!
tingle! tingle! went a bell. It was the signal for him to get a batch of
pies ready for the oven.

"Good," he said, "it is done."

He waited until the signal was given to him to put them in to be cooked,
and then, after casting one more look at the pie that contained his
note, in went the batch to the hot air of the oven, which came out upon
his face like the breath of some giant in a highly febrile state.

"'Tis done," he said. "'Tis done, and I am saved!"

He sat down and covered his face with his hands, while delicious dreamy
thoughts of freedom came across his brain. Green fields, trees, meadows
and uplands, and the sweet blue sky, all appeared before him in bright
and beautiful array.

"Yes," he said. "Yes, I shall see them all once again.--Once again I
shall look, perchance, upon the bounding deep blue sea. Once again I
shall feel the sun of a happier clime than this fanning my cheek. Oh,
liberty, liberty, what a precious boon art thou!"

Tingle! tingle! tingle! He started from his dream of joy. The pies are
wanted; Mrs. Lovett knew well enough how long they took in doing, and
that by this time they should be ready to be placed upon the ascending
trap. Down it came. Open went the oven door, and in another minute the
note was in the shop. The cook placed his hand upon his heart to still
its tumultuous beating as he listened intently. He could hear the sound
of feet above--only dimly though, through that double roof. Once he
thought he heard high words, but all died away again, and nothing came
of it.--All was profoundly still. The batch of pies surely were sold
now, and in a paper bag he told himself his pie, _par excellence_, had
gone perhaps to the chambers of some attorney, who would be rejoiced to
have a finger in it; or to some briefless barrister, who would be
rejoiced to get his name in the papers, even if it were only connected
with a story of a pie. Yes, the dream of freedom still clung to the
imagination of the cook, and he waited, with every nerve thrilling with
expectation, the result of his plan. One, two, three hours had passed
away, and nothing came of the pie or the letter. All was as quiet and as
calm as though the malignant fates had determined that there he was to
spend his days for ever, and gradually as in a frigid situation the
narrow column of mercury in a thermometer will sink, sank his
spirits--down--down--down!

"No--no," he said. "No hope. Timidity or incredulity has consigned my
letter to the flames, perhaps, or some wide-mouthed, stupid idiot has
actually swallowed it. Oh that it had choked him by the way. Oh that it
had actually stuck in his throat.--It is over, I have lost hope again.
This horrible place will be my charnel-house--my family vault!
Curses!--No--no. What is the use of swearing? My despair is past
that--far past that--"

"Cook!" said a voice.

He sprang up, and looked to the wicket. There was Mrs. Lovett gazing in
at him.

"Cook!"

"Well--well.--Fiend in female shape, what would you with me? Did you not
expect to find me dead?"

"Certainly not. Here is a letter for you."

"A--a--letter?"

"Yes. Perhaps it is an answer to the one you sent in the pie, you know."

The unfortunate grasped his head, and gave a yell of despair. The
letter--for indeed Mrs. Lovett had one--was dropped upon the ground
floor from the opening through which she conversed with her prisoner,
and then, without another word, she withdrew from the little orifice,
and left him to his meditation.

"Lost!--lost!--lost!" he cried. "All is lost. God, is this
enchantment? Or am I mad, and the inmate of some cell in an abode of
lunacy, and all this about pies and letters merely the delusion of my
overwrought fancy? Is there really a pie--a Mrs. Lovett--a Bell
Yard--a letter--a--a--a--damn it, is there such a wretch as I myself,
in this vast bustling world, or is all a wild and fathomless
delusion?"

He cast himself upon the ground, as though from that moment he gave up
all hope and desire to save himself. It seemed as though he could have
said--

"Let death come in any shape he may, he will find me an unresisting
victim. I have fought with fate, and am, like thousands who have
preceded me in such a contest--beaten!"

A kind of stupor came over him, and there he lay for more than two
hours; but youth will overcome much, and the mind, like some depressed
spring, will, in the spring of life, soon recover its rebound; so it was
with the unhappy cook. After a time he rose and looked about him.

"No," he said, "it is no dream. It is no dream!"

He then saw the letter lying upon the ground, which Mrs. Lovett had with
such irony cast unto him.

"Surely," he said, "she might have been content to tell me she had
discovered my plans, without adding this practical sneer to it."

He lifted the letter from the floor, and found it was addressed "To Mrs.
Lovett's Cook, Bell Yard, Temple Bar;" and what made it all the more
provoking was, that it seemed to have come regularly through the post,
for there were the official seal and blue stamp upon it. Curiosity
tempted him to open it, and he read as follows:--

"SIR--Having, in a most delicious pie, received the extraordinary
communication which you inserted in it, I take the earliest opportunity
of replying to you. The character of a highly respectable and pious
woman is not, sir, to be whispered away in a pie by a cook. When the
whole bench of bishops were proved, in black and white, to be the
greatest thieves and speculators in the known world, it was their
character that saved them, for, as people justly enough reasoned,
bishops should be pious and just--therefore, a bishop cannot be a thief
and a liar! Now, sir, apply this little mandate to Mrs. Lovett, and
assure yourself; but no one will believe anything you can allege against
a female with so fascinating a smile, and who attends to her religious
duties so regularly. Reflect, young man, on the evil that you have tried
to do, and for the future learn to be satisfied with the excellent
situation you have. The pie was very good."

I am, you bad young man,
A Parishioner of St. Dunstan's,
SWEENEY TODD."

"Now was there ever such a piece of cool rascality as this?" cried the
cook, "Sweeney Todd--Todd--Todd. Who the devil is he? This is some
scheme of Mrs. Lovett's to drive me mad."

He dashed the letter upon the floor.

"Not another pie will I make! No--no--no. Welcome death--welcome that
dissolution which may be my lot, rather than the continued endurance of
this terrible imprisonment. Am I, at my time of life, to be made the
slave of such a demon in human shape as this woman? Am I to grow old and
grey here, a mere pie machine? No--no, death a thousand times rather!"

Tears! yes, bitter scalding tears came to his relief, and he wept
abundantly, but those tears were blessed, for as they flowed, the worst
bitterness of his heart flowed with them, and he suddenly looked up,
saying--

"I am only twenty-four."

There was magic in the sound of those words. They seemed in themselves
to contain a volume of philosophy. Only twenty-four. Should he, at that
green and unripe age, get rid of hope? Should he, at twenty-four only,
lie down and say--"Let me die!" just because things had gone a little
adverse, and he was the enforced cook of Mrs. Lovett?

"No--no," he said. "No, I will endure much, and I will hope much.
Hitherto, it is true, I have been unsuccessful in what I have attempted
for my release, but the diabolical cunning, even of this woman, may fail
her at some moment, and I may have my time of revenge. No--no, I need
not ask for revenge, justice will do--common justice. I will keep myself
alive. Hope shall be my guiding star. They shall not subdue the proud
spirit they have succeeded in caging, quite so easily, I will not give
up, I live and have youthful blood in my veins, I will not despair.
Despair? No--Hence, fiend!--I am as yet only twenty-four. Ha--ha! Only
twenty-four."




                             CHAPTER XXXI.
                    SHOWS HOW TOBIAS GOT TO LONDON.


We will now take a peep at Tobias. On--on--on, like the wind, went the
poor belated boy from the vicinity of that frightful prison-house at
Peckham. Terror was behind him--terror with dishevelled locks was upon
his right hand, and terror shrieking in his ear was upon his left.
On--on, he flew like a whirlwind. Alas, poor Tobias, will your young
intellects yet stand these trials? We shall see! Through the deep mud of
the Surrey roads--past pedestrians--past horsemen, and past coaches flew
poor Tobias, on--on. He had but one thought, and that was to place miles
and miles of space between him and Mr. Fogg's establishment. The
perspiration poured down his face--his knees shook under him--his heart
beat as though in some wild pulsation it would burst, but he passed on
until he saw afar off the old Bridge of London. The route to Blackfriars
he had by some chance avoided. Many, who for the last two miles of
Tobias's progress, had seen him, had tried to stop him. They had called
after him, but he had heeded them not. Some fast runners had pursued him
for a short distance, and then given up the chase in despair. He reached
the bridge.

"Stop that boy!" cried a man, "he looks mad!"

"No--no," shrieked Tobias, "I am not mad! I am not mad!"

A man held out his arms to stop him, but Tobias dashed past him like a
flash of lightning, and was off again.

"Stop him!" cried twenty voices. "Stop thief!" shouted some who could
not conceive that anybody was to be stopped on any other account.

"No, no," gasped Tobias, as he flew onwards--"not mad, not mad!"

[Illustration: The Flight Of Tobias From Peckham Mad-House.]

His feet failed him. He reeled a few more paces like a drunken man, and
then fell heavily upon some stone steps, where he lay bathed in
perspiration. Blood too gushed from his mouth. A gentleman's horse was
standing at the door, and the man came out to mount him at that moment,
and he saw the rapidly collecting crowd. With the reins of his steed in
his hand, he pushed his way through the mob, saying--

"What is it? what is it?"

"A mad boy, sir," said some. "Only look at him. Did you ever see the
like. He looks as if he had run a hundred miles."

"Good God!" cried the gentleman. "It is he! It is he!"

"Who, sir? who, sir?"

"A poor lad that I know, I will take charge of him. My name is Jeffery,
I am Colonel Jeffery. A couple of guineas to any strong man who will
carry him to the nearest surgeon's. Alas! poor boy, what a state is this
to meet him in."

It was quite astonishing the numbers of strong men that there were all
of a sudden in the crowd, who were each anxious and willing to earn the
colonel's two guineas. There was danger of a fight arising upon the
subject, when one man, after knocking down two others and threatening
the remainder, stepped up, and lifting Tobias as though he had been an
infant, exclaimed--

"Ale does it! ale does it! Come on, my little 'un."

All gave way before the gigantic proportions of no other than our old
friend Big Ben the Beef Eater, who, as chance would have it, was upon
the spot, and who, without a thought of the colonel's two guineas, only
heard that a poor sick boy had to be carried to the nearest medical man.
Tobias could not be in better hands than Ben's, for the latter carried
him much more carefully than ever nursemaid carried a child out of sight
of its mother.

"Follow me," said Colonel Jeffery, as he saw in the distance a
party-coloured lamp, which hung over a door appertaining to a chemist.
"Follow, and I will reward you."

"Doesn't want it," said Ben. "It's ale as does it."

"What?"

"Ale does it. Here you is. Come on."

Colonel Jeffery was rather surprised at the droll customer he had picked
up in the street, but provided he carried Tobias in safety, which
by-the-bye he (the colonel) would not have scrupled to do himself, had
he not been encumbered by his horse, it was all one to him, and that he
saw Ben was effectually doing. Tobias had shown some slight symptoms of
vitality before being lifted from the step of the door close to which he
had fallen, but by the time they all reached the chemist's shop, he was
in a complete state of insensibility. Of course the usual crowd that
collects on such occasions followed them, and during the walk the
colonel had time to think, and the result of those thoughts was, that it
would be a most desirable thing to keep the knowledge to himself that
Tobias _was_ Tobias. He had, in order to awe the mob from any
interference with him, announced who he was, but had not announced
Tobias. At least if he had uttered his name, he felt certain that it was
in an interjectional sort of way, and not calculated to awaken any
suspicion.

"I will keep it to myself," he thought, "that Tobias is in my
possession, otherwise if such a fact should travel round to Sweeney
Todd, there's no saying to what extent it might put that scoundrel upon
his guard."

By the time the colonel had arrived at this conclusion the whole party
had reached the chemist's, and Big Ben walked in with Tobias, and placed
him at once upon the top of a plate-glass counter, which had upon it a
large collection of trumpery scent bottles and wonderful specifics for
everything, through which Tobias went with a crash.

"There he is!" said Ben--"ale does it."

"Fire! murder! my glass case!" cried the chemist, "Oh, you monster!"

"Ale does it. What do you mean, eh?"

Big Ben backed a pace or two and went head and shoulders through a glass
case of similar varieties that was against the wall.

"Gracious bless the beasteses," said Ben, "is your house made of glass?
What do you mean by it, eh? A fellow can't turn round here without going
through something. You ought to be persecuted according to law, that you
ought."

Now this learned chemist had in the glass case against which Big Ben had
tumbled a skeleton, which, from the stunning and terrible look it had in
his shop, brought him many customers, and it was against this remnant of
humanity that Big Ben's head met, after going through the glass as a
preparatory step. By some means or another Ben caught his head under the
skeleton's ribs, and the consequence was that out he hooked him from the
glass case, and the first intimation Ben had of anything unusual,
consisted of seeing a pair of bony legs dangling down on each side of
him. So unexpected a phenomenon gave Ben what he called a "blessed
turn," and out he bounced from the shop, carrying the skeleton for all
the world like what is called pick-a-back, for the wires that supplied
the place of cartilages held it erect, and so awful a sight surely was
never seen in the streets of London as Big Ben with a skeleton upon his
back. People fled before--some turned in at shop doors; and an old lady
with a large umbrella and a pair of gigantic pattens went clean through
a silversmith's window. But we must leave Ben and the skeleton to get on
as well as they can _en route_ to the Tower, while we turn our attention
to Tobias.

"Are you a surgeon?" cried Colonel Jeffery.

"A--a surgeon? No, I'm only a druggist; but is that any reason why a
second Goliath should come into my shop and destroy everything?"

Colonel Jeffery did not wait for anything more, but snatching Tobias
from the remnants of the plate glass, he ran to the door with him, and
handing him to the first person he saw there, he cried--

"When I am mounted give me the boy."

"Yes, sir."

He sprang upon his horse; Tobias was handed to him like a bale of goods,
and laying him comfortably as he could upon the saddle before him, off
set the colonel at a good round trot through Finsbury to his own house.
Colonel Jeffery had no sort of intention that the chemist should be a
sufferer, but in his hurry to be off with Tobias, and speedily get
medical advice for him, he forgot to say so, and accordingly there stood
the man of physic then fairly bewildered by the events of the last few
moments, during which his stock in trade had been materially damaged and
a valuable amount of glass broken, to say nothing of the singular and
most unexpected abduction of his friend the skeleton.

"Here's a pretty day's work!" he said. "Here's a pretty day's work! More
mischief done than enough, and the worst of it is, my wife will hear of
it, and then there will be a deal of peace in the house. Oh, dear--oh,
dear--was there ever such an unfort--I knew it--"

A good rap upon his head from a pair of bellows wielded by a little
meagre-faced woman, that he was big enough to have swallowed, confined
his words. While all this was going on, Colonel Jeffery had ridden fast,
and passing through Finsbury and up the City-road, had reached his house
in the fashionable--but now quite the reverse, as the man says in the
play--district of Pentonville.

"This is a prize," thought the colonel, "worth the taking. It will go
hard with me but I will extract from this boy all that he knows of
Sweeney Todd, and we shall see how far that knowledge will go towards
the confirmation of my suspicions regarding him."

He carried Tobias himself to a comfortable bed-room, and immediately
sent for a medical practitioner of good repute in the neighbourhood, who
happening fortunately to be at home, obeyed the summons immediately. He
sent likewise for his friend the captain, whom he knew would be
overjoyed to hear of what he would call the capture of Tobias Ragg. The
medical man made his appearance first, as being much closer at hand, and
the colonel led him to the apartment of the invalid boy, saying to him
as he went--

"I know nothing of what is the matter with this lad--I have been very
anxious to see him on account of certain information that he possesses,
and only found him this morning upon a door step in the street, in the
state you see him."

"Is he very ill?"

"I am afraid he is."

The medical man followed the colonel to the room in which poor Tobias
lay, and after gazing upon him for a few moments, and opening with his
fingers the closed eyelids of Tobias, he shook his head.

"I wish I knew," he said, "what has produced this state. Can you not
inform me, sir?"

"Indeed I cannot, but I suspect that the boy's imagination has been
cruelly acted upon by a man, whom you will excuse me from naming just at
present, but whom I sincerely hope to bring to justice shortly."

"The boy's brain, no doubt, is in a bad condition. I do not take upon
myself to say that, as an organ, it is diseased, but fractionally it is
damaged. However, we must do the best we can to recover him from this
condition of collapse in which he is."

"Can you form any opinion as to his probable recovery?"

"Indeed I cannot, but he is young, and youth is a great thing. The best
that can be done shall be done."

"I thank you. Spare nothing for the lad, and pay him every attention, as
though he were a son or a brother of my own; I long to hear him speak,
and to convince him that he is really among friends, who are not only
willing to protect him, but have likewise the power to do so."

The medical man bowed, as he said--

"May I ask his name, sir?"

He had his tablets in his hand ready to book the name of Tobias, but the
colonel was so very much afraid that Sweeney Todd might by some means
learn that Tobias was in his house, and so take an alarm, that he would
not trust even the medical man, who, no doubt, had no other motive in
asking the name than merely to place it in his list of calls.

"Smith," said the colonel.

The medical man gave a short dry sort of cough, as he wrote "Master
Smith" upon his tablets, and then promising to return in half an hour,
he took his leave. At the expiration of half an hour Tobias was put
under a course of treatment. His head was shaved, and a blister clapped
upon the back of his neck. The room was darkened, and strict quiet was
enjoined.

"As soon as he betrays any signs of consciousness, pray send for me,
sir," said the surgeon.

"Certainly."

In the course of the day the captain made his appearance, and Colonel
Jeffery detailed to him all that had taken place, only lamenting that,
after so happily getting possession of Tobias, he should be in so sorry
a condition. The captain expressed a wish to see him, and they both went
to the chamber, where a woman had been hired to sit with Tobias, in
order to give the first intimation of his stirring. Of course, as it was
her duty, and what she was specially hired for, to keep wide awake, she
was fast asleep, and snoring loud enough to awaken any one much worse
than poor Tobias. But that was to to be expected.

"Oh," said the captain, "this is a professional nurse."

"A professional devil!" said the colonel. "How did you know that?"

"By her dropping off so comfortably to sleep, and her utter neglect of
her charge. I never knew one that did not do so, and, in good truth, I
am inclined to think it is the very best thing they can do, for if they
are not asleep they are obnoxiously awake."

The colonel took a pin from his cravat, and rather roughly inserted its
point into the fat arm of the nurse. She started up, exclaiming--

"Drat the fleas, can't a mortal sleep in peace for them?"

"Madam," said the colonel, "how much is owing to you for sleeping here a
few hours?"

"Lord bless me, sir, is this you? The poor soul has never so much as
stirred. How my heart bleeds continually for him, to be sure. Ah, dear
me, we are all born like sparks, and keep continually flying upward, as
the psalm says."

"How much do I owe you?"

"Here to-day, and gone to-morrow. Bless his innocent face."

The colonel rung the bell, and a strapping footman made his appearance.

"You will see this woman to the door, John," he said, "and pay her for
being here about three hours."

"Why, you mangy skin-flint," cried the woman. "What do you--"

She was cut short in her vituperative eloquence by John, who handed her
down stairs with such dispatch that a pint bottle of gin rolled out of
her pocket and was smashed, filling the house with an odour that was
quite unmistakeable.

"What do you propose to do?" said the captain.

"Why, as we have dined, if you have no objection we will sit here and
keep this poor benighted one company for awhile. He is better with no
one than such as she whom I have dislodged; but before night he shall
have a more tender and less professional nurse. You know more of the
world, after all, than I do, captain."




                             CHAPTER XXII.
                      TOBIAS HAS A MIND DISEASED.


With a bottle of claret upon the table between them, Colonel Jeffery and
his old friend sat over the fire in the bed-room devoted to the use of
poor Tobias Ragg. Alas! poor boy, kindness and wealth that now
surrounded him came late in the day. Before he first crossed the
threshold of Sweeney Todd's odious abode, what human heart could have
more acutely felt genuine kindness than Tobias's, but his destiny had
been an evil one. Guilt has its victims, and Tobias was in all senses
one of the victims of Sweeney Todd.

"I am sufficiently, perhaps superstitious, you will call it," said
Colonel Jeffery in a low tone of voice, "to think that my meeting with
this boy was not altogether accidental."

"Indeed?"

"No. Many things have happened to me during life--although I admit that
they may be all accounted for as natural coincidences, curious only at
the best but still suggestive of something very different, and make me
at times a convert to the belief in an interfering special Providence,
and this is one of them."

"It is a dangerous doctrine, my friend."

"Think you so?"

"Yes. It is much better and much safer both for the judgment and
imagination to account naturally for all those things which admit of a
natural explanation, than to fall back upon a special Providence, and
fancy that it is continually interfering with the great and immutable
laws that govern the world. I do not--mark me--deny such a thing, but I
would not be hasty in asserting it. No man's experience can have been
without numerous instances such as you mention."

"Certainly not."

"Then I should say to you, as St. Paul said to the Athenians--'In all
things I find you superstitious.' What's that?"

A faint moan had come upon both their ears, and after listening for a
few moments another made itself heard, and they fancied, by the
direction of the sound, that Tobias's lips must have uttered it. Placing
his finger against his mouth to indicate silence, the colonel stepped up
to the bedside, and hiding behind the curtains, he said, in the softest
and kindest voice he could assume--

"Tobias! Tobias! fear nothing now you are with friends, Tobias; and,
above all, you are perfectly free from the power of Sweeney Todd."

"I am not mad! I am not mad!" shouted Tobias with a shrill vehemence
that made both the colonel and his friend start.

"Nay, who says you are mad, Tobias? We know you are not mad, my lad.
Don't alarm yourself about that, we know you are not mad."

"Mercy! mercy! I will say nothing--nothing. How fiend-like he looks. Oh,
Mr. Todd, spare me, and I will go far, far away, and die somewhere else,
but do not kill me now, I am yet such--such a boy only, and my poor
father is dead--dead--dead!"

"Ring the bell," said Jeffery to his friend, "and tell John to go for
Mr. Chisolm, the surgeon. Come--come, Tobias, you still fancy you are
under the power of Todd, but it is not so--you are quite safe here."

"Hush! hush! mother--oh, where are you, mother--did you leave me here,
mother? Say you took, in a moment of thoughtlessness, the silver
candlestick! Is Todd to be a devil, because you were thoughtless once?
Hide me from him--hide me--hide! hide! I am not mad. Hark! I hear
him--one--two--three--four--five--six steps, and all Todd's. Each one
leaves blood in its track. Look at him now! His face changes--'tis a
fox's--a serpent's--hideous--hideous--God--God! I am mad--mad--mad!"

The boy dashed his head from side to side, and would have flung himself
from the bed had not Colonel Jeffery advanced and held him.

"Poor fellow," he said, "this is very shocking. Tobias! Tobias!"

"Hush! I hear--poor thing, did they say you was mad too?--Hide me
in the straw! There--there--what a strange thing it is for all the
air to be so full of blood. Do we breathe blood, and only fancy it
air? Hush! not a word--he comes with a serpent's face--oh, tell me
why does God let such beings ever riot upon the beautiful
earth--one--two--three--four--five--six--Hiss--hiss! Off--off! I
am not mad--not mad. Ha! ha! ha!"

An appalling shriek concluded this paroxysm, and for a few moments
Tobias was still. The medical man at this time entered the room.

"Oh," he said, "we have roused him up again, have we." Medical men are
rather fond of the plural identifying style of talking.

"Yes," said Colonel Jeffery, "but he had better have slept the sleep of
death than have awakened to be what he is, poor fellow."

"A little--eh?"

The doctor tapped his forehead.

"Not a little."

"Far away over the sea!" said Tobias, "oh, yes--in any ship, only do
not kill me, Mr. Todd--let me go and I will say nothing, I will work
and send my poor mother hard-earned gold, and your name shall never
pass our lips. Oh, no--no--no, do not say that I am mad. Do you see
these tears? I have--I have not cried so since my poor father called
me to him and held me in a last embrace of his wasted arms, saying,
'Tobias, my darling, I am going--going far from you. God's blessing be
upon you, poor child.' I thought my heart would break then, but it did
not, I saw him put from the face of the living into the grave, and I
did not quite break my heart then, but it is broken--broken now! Mad!
mad! oh, no, not mad--no--no, but the last--but the last. I tell you,
sir, that I am--am--am _not_ mad. Why do you look at me, I am not
mad--one--two--three--four--five--six. God--God--God! I am mad--mad.
Ha! ha! ha! There they come, all the serpents, and Todd is their king.
How the shadows fly about--they shrink--I cannot shrink. Help! God!
God! God!"

"This is horrible," said Colonel Jeffery.

"It is appalling, from the lips of one so young," said the captain.

The medical man rubbed his hands together as he said--

"Why, a-hem! it certainly is strangely indicative of a considerable
amount of mental derangement, but we shall be able, I dare say, to
subdue that. I think, if he could be persuaded to swallow a little
draught I have here, it would be beneficial, and allay this irritation,
which is partly nervous."

"There cannot be much difficulty," said the colonel, "in making him
swallow anything, I should think."

"Let us try."

They held Tobias up while the doctor poured the contents of a small
phial into his mouth. Nature preferred performing the office of
deglutition to choking, and it was taken. The effect of the opiate was
rapid, and after some inarticulate moans and vain attempts to spring
from the bed, a deep sleep came over poor Tobias.

"Now, gentlemen," said Mr. Chisolm, "I beg to inform you that this is a
bad case."

"I feared as much."

"A very bad case. Some very serious shock indeed has been given to the
lad's brain, and if he at all recovers from it, he will be a long time
doing so. I do not think those violent paroxysms will continue, but they
may leave a kind of fatuity behind them which may be exceedingly
difficult to grapple with."

"In that case, he will not be able to give me the information I desire,
and all I can do is to take care that he is kindly treated somewhere,
poor lad. Poor fellow, his has been a hard lot. He evidently has a mind
of uncommon sensibility, as is manifest from his ravings."

"Yes, and that makes the case worse. However, we must hope for the best,
and I will call again in the morning."

"Will he awake soon?"

"Not for six or eight hours at least, and when he does, it is very
unlikely that those paroxysms will again ensue. He will be quiet
enough."

"Then it will be scarcely necessary, during that time, to watch him,
poor fellow?"

"Not at all. Of course, when he awakens it will be very desirable that
some one should be here to speak to him; for, finding himself in a
strange place, he will otherwise naturally be terrified."

All this was promised by the colonel, and the medical man left the
house, evidently with very slender hopes in his own mind of the recovery
of Tobias. The colonel and his friend retired to another room, and then,
after a consultation, they agreed that it was highly proper they should
inform Sir Richard Blunt of what had taken place, for although poor
Tobias was in no present condition to give any information, yet his
capture, if it might be called by such a term, was so important an event
that it would be unpardonable to keep it from the magistrate. They
accordingly went together to his house, and luckily finding him at home,
they at once communicated to him their errand. He listened to them with
the most profound attention, and when they had concluded, he said--

"Gentlemen, it will be everything, if this lad recovers sufficiently to
be a witness against his rascal of a master, for that is just what we
want. However, from the account you give me of him, I am very much
afraid the poor fellow's mind is too severely affected."

"That, too, is our fear."

"Well, we must do the best we can, and I should advise that when he
awakens some one should be by him with whose voice, as a friendly sound,
he will be familiar."

"Who can we get?"

"His poor mother."

"Ah, yes, I will set about that at once."

"Leave it to me," said Sir Richard Blunt, "leave that to me--I know
where to find Mrs. Ragg, and what's best to say to her in the case. Let
me see, in about four hours from now probably Tobias may be upon the
point of recovery."

"Most probably."

"Then, sir, expect me at your house in that time with Mrs. Ragg. I will
take care that the old lady's mind is put completely at ease, so that
she will aid us in any respect to bring about the recovery of her son,
who no doubt has suffered severely from some plan of Todd's to put him
out of the way. That seems to me to be the most likely solution to the
mystery of his present condition."

"Todd, I am convinced," said Colonel Jeffery, "would stop at no
villany."

"Certainly not. My own belief is, that he is so steeped to the lips in
crime, that he sees no other mode of covering his misdeeds already done
than by the commission of new ones. But his career is nearly at an end,
gentlemen."

The colonel and the captain took the rising of the magistrate from his
chair as a polite hint that he had something else to do than to gossip
with them any longer, and they took their leave, after expressing again
to him how much they appreciated his exertions.

"If the mystery of the fate of my unhappy friend," said the colonel, "is
ever cleared up, it will be by your exertion, Sir Richard, and he and I,
and society at large, will owe to you a heavy debt of gratitude for
unmasking so horrible a villain as Sweeney Todd, for that he is such no
one can doubt."




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.
                   JOHANNA WALKS ABROAD IN DISGUISE.


But, amid all the trials, and perplexities, and anxieties that beset the
dramatis personæ of our story, who suffered like Johanna? What heart
bled as hers bled? What heart heaved with sad emotion as hers heaved?
Alas! poor Johanna, let the fate of Mark Ingestrie be what it might, he
could not feel the pangs that tore thy gentle heart. Truly might she
have said--

    "Man's love is of his life a thing apart
    'Tis woman's whole existence,"

for she felt that her joy--her life itself, was bartered for the
remembrance of how she had been loved by him whose fate was involved in
one of the most painful and most inscrutable of mysteries. Where could
she seek for consolation, where for hope? The horizon of her young life
seemed ever darkening, and the more she gazed upon it with the fond hope
of singing--

    "The first faint star of coming joy,"

the more confounded her gentle spirit became by the blackness of
despair. It is sad indeed that the young, the good, and the gentle,
should be the grand sufferers in this world, but so it is. The exquisite
capacity to feel acutely is certain to find ample food for agony. If
human nature could wrap itself up in the chill mantle of selfishness,
and be perfectly insensible to all human feeling, it might escape, but
such cannot be done by those who, like the fine and noble-minded Johanna
Oakley, sympathise with all that is beautiful and great in creation.
Already the pangs of hope deferred were feeding upon the damask of her
cheeks. The lily had usurped the rose, and although still exquisitely
beautiful, it was the pale beauty of a statue that she began to show to
those who loved her. In the street people would turn to gaze after her
with admiration blended with pity. They already looked upon her as half
an angel, for already it seemed as though she had shaken off much of her
earthly lurements, and was hastening to

    "Rejoin the stars."

[Illustration: The Schoolfellows, Johanna And Arabella.]

Let us look at her as she lies weeping upon the breast of her friend
Arabella Wilmot. The tears of the two young girls are mingling together,
but the one is playing the part of comforter, while the other mourns
over much.

"Now, Johanna," sobbed Arabella, "you talk of doing something to save
Mark Ingestrie, if he be living, or to bring to justice the man whom you
suspect to be his murderer. Let me ask you what you can hope to do, if
you give way to such an amount of distress as this?"

"Nothing--nothing."

"And are you really to do nothing? Have you not agreed, Johanna, to make
an attempt, in the character of a boy, to find out the secret of
Ingestrie's disappearance, and have not I provided for you all that you
require to support the character? Courage, courage, courage.--Oh, I
could tell you such stories of fine ladies dressing as pages, and
following gallant knights to the field of battle, that you would feel as
though you could go through anything."

"But the age of chivalry is gone."

"Yes, and why--because folks will not be chivalric. To those who will,
the age of chivalry comes back again in all its glory."

"Listen to me, Arabella: if I really thought that Mark was no more, and
lost to me for ever, I could lie down and die, leaving to Heaven the
punishment of those who have taken his life, but in the midst of all my
grief--in the moments of my deepest depression, the thought clings to
me, that he lives yet. I do not know how it is, but the thought of Mark
Ingestrie dead, is but a vague one, compared to the thought of Mark
Ingestrie suffering."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, and at times it seems as if a voice whispered to me, that he was
yet to be saved, if there existed a heart fair enough and loving enough
in its strength to undertake the task. It is for that reason, and not
from any romantic love of adventure, or hope of visiting with punishment
a bad man, that my imagination clings to the idea of going in boy's
apparel to Fleet-street, to watch, and perchance to enter that house to
which he last went, and from which, according to all evidence, he never
emerged."

"And you are really bold enough?"

"I hope so--I think, if I am not, God will help me."

A sob that followed these words, sufficiently testified how much in need
of God's help poor Johanna was, but after a few minutes she succeeded in
recovering herself from her emotion, and she said more cheerfully--

"Come, Arabella, we talked of a rehearsal of my part; but I shall be
more at ease when I go to act it in reality, and with danger. I shall be
able to comport myself well, with only you for a companion, and such
chance passengers as the streets of the city may afford for my
audience."

"I am glad," said Arabella, "that you keep in this mind. Now come and
dress yourself, and we will go out together. You will be taken for my
brother, you know."

In the course of a quarter of an hour, Johanna presented the appearance
of as good-looking a lad of about fourteen as the world ever saw, and if
she could but have imparted a little more confidence and boyish bustle
to her gait and manner, she would have passed muster under the most
vigilant scrutiny. But as it was, nothing could be more unlikely than
that any one should penetrate her disguise, for what is not suspected,
is seldom seen very readily.

"You will do capitally," said Arabella, "I must take your arm, you know.
We will not go far."

"Only to Fleet Street."

"Fleet Street. You surely will not go so far as that?"

"Yes, Arabella. Now that I have attired myself in these garments for a
special purpose, let me do a something towards the carrying it out. By
walking that distance I shall accustom myself to the road; and,
moreover, a dreadful kind of fascination drags me to that man's shop."

Arabella, if the truth must be told, shook a little as they, after
watching an opportunity, emerged into the street, for although the
spirit of romantic adventure had induced her to give the advice to
Johanna that she had, her own natural feminine sensibilities shrunk from
the carrying of it out. Ashamed, however, of being the first to condemn
her own suggestion, she took the arm of Johanna, and those two young
creatures were in the tide of human life that ebbs and flows in the
great city. The modest walk and gentle demeanour of the seeming young
boy won Johanna many a passing glance as she and Arabella proceeded down
Ludgate Hill towards Fleet Street, but it was quite clear that no one
suspected the disguise which, to do Arabella justice, in its general
arrangement was very perfect, and as Johanna wore a cap, which concealed
much of the upper part of her face, and into which was gathered all her
hair, she might have really deceived those who were the most intimate
with her, so that it was no wonder she passed unobserved with mere
strangers. In this way, then, they reached Fleet Street without
obstruction, and Johanna's heart beat rapidly as they approached the
shop of Sweeney Todd.

"It will be imprudent to stop for even a moment at his door or window,"
said Arabella, "for, remember, you have no opportunity of varying your
disguise."

"I will not stop. We will pass rapidly on, but--but it is something to
look upon the doorstep over which the shadow of Mark has last passed."

In another moment they were on a level with the shop. Johanna cast a
glance at the window, and then shrunk back with affright as she saw,
occupying one of the upper panes of glass, the hideous face of Todd. He
was not looking at her though, for with an awful squint that revealed
all the whites of his eyes--we were going to say, but the dirty yellows
would have been much nearer the truth--he seemed to be observing
something up the street.

"Come on--come on," whispered Johanna.

Arabella had not happened to observe this apparition of Todd in the
window, and she looked round to see what occasioned Johanna's sudden
terror, when a young Temple clerk, who chanced to be a few paces behind
them, immediately, with the modesty peculiar to his class, imagined the
glance of the blooming girl to be a tribute to his attractions. He
kissed the end of a faded glove, and put on what he considered a
first-class fascinating aspect.

[Illustration: Johanna's Alarm At The Sight Of Sweeney Todd.]

"Come on--come on," said Arabella now in her turn.

Johanna, of course, thought that Arabella too had caught sight of the
hideous and revolting countenance of Sweeney Todd, and so they both
hastened on together.

"Don't look back," said Arabella.

"Is he following?"

"Oh, yes--yes."

Johanna thought she meant Todd, while Arabella really meant the Temple
gent, but, notwithstanding the mutual mistake, they hurried on, and the
clerk taking that as quite sufficient encouragement, pursued them,
putting his cravat to rights as he did so, in order that when he came up
to them, he should present the most fascinating aspect possible.

"No--no." said Johanna, as she glanced behind. "You must have been
mistaken, Arabella. He is not pursuing us."

"Oh, I am so glad."

Arabella looked back, and the Temple gent kissed his dilapidated glove.

"Oh, Johanna," she said, "how could you tell me he was not following,
when there he is."

"What, Todd?"

"No. That impertinent ugly puppy with the soiled cravat."

"And you meant him?"

"To be sure."

"Oh, what a relief, I was flying on, fancying that Todd was in pursuit
of us, and yet my judgment ought at once to have told me that that could
not be the case, knowing nothing of us. How our fears overcome all
reason. Do you know that strange-looking young man?"

"Know him? Not I."

"Well, my darling," said the gent, reaching to within a couple of paces
of Arabella, "how do you do to-day?--a-hem! Are you going far? Ain't you
afraid that somebody will run away with such a pretty gal as you--'pon
soul, you are a charmer."

"Cross," whispered Arabella, and the two young girls at once crossed
Fleet Street. It was not then so difficult an operation to get from one
side of that thoroughfare to the other as it is now. The gent was by no
means disconcerted at this evident wish to get out of his way, but he
crossed likewise, and commenced a series of persecution, which such
animals call gallantry, and which, to any respectable young female, are
specially revolting.

"Now, my dear," he said, "St. Dunstan's is just going to strike the
hour, and you will see the clubs hit the bells if you look, and I shall
expect a kiss when it's all over."

"You are impertinent," said Johanna.

"Come, that's a good joke--why, you little whipper snapper, I suppose
you came out to take care of your sister. Here's a penny to go and buy
yourself a cold pie at Mrs. Lovett's. I'll see to your sister while you
are gone. Oh, you need not look so wild about it. Did you never hear of
a gent talking to a pretty gal in the street?"

"Often," said Johanna, "but I never heard of a gentleman doing so."

"Upon my word, you are as sharp as a needle, so I'll just pull your ears
to teach you better manners, you young rascal--come--come, it's no use
your kicking."

"Help--help!" cried Arabella.

They were now just opposite the principal entrance to the Temple, and as
Arabella cried "help," who should emerge from under the gateway but Ben
the Beef Eater. The fact is, that he was on his way to the Tower just
previous to the meeting with Colonel Jeffery and Tobias. Arabella, who
had twice or thrice seen him at the Oakley's, knew him at once.

"Oh, sir," she cried, "I am Johanna's friend, Miss Wilmot, and
this--this gent won't leave me and my cousin here alone."

The gent made an effort to escape, but Ben caught him by the hinder part
of his apparel, and held him tight.

"Is this him?"

"Yes--yes."

"Oh dear no--oh dear no, my good sir. It's that fellow there, with the
white hat. There he goes, up Chancery Lane. My dear sir, you are quite
mistaken; I wanted to protect the young lady, and as for the lad, bless
his heart. I--oh dear, it wasn't me."

Still holding the gent by the first grasp he had taken of him, Ben
suddenly crossed the road to where a parish pump stood, at the corner of
Bell Yard, and holding him under the spout with one hand, he worked the
handle with the other, despite the shrieks and groans of his victim, who
in a few moments was rendered so limp and wet, that when Ben let him go,
he fell into the sink below the pump, and there lay, until some small
boys began pelting him. During the confusion and laughter of the
bystanders, Arabella and Johanna rapidly retreated towards the City
again, for they thought Ben might insist upon escorting them, and that,
in such a case, it was possible enough the disguise of Johanna, good as
it was, might not suffice to save her from the knowledge of one so well
acquainted with her.

"Let us cross, Arabella," she said. "Let us cross, if it be but for one
moment, to hear what the subject of the conversation between Todd and
that man is."

"If you wish it, Johanna."

"I do, I do."

They crossed, and once again passed the shop of Todd, when they heard
the man say--

"Well, if he has gone he has gone, but I think it is the strangest thing
I ever heard of."

"So do I," said Todd.

Without lingering, and so perhaps exciting Todd's attention and
suspicion, they could hear no more, but Johanna had heard enough to give
the spur to imagination, and when they had again crossed Fleet-street,
and were making their way rapidly up Ludgate-hill, she whispered to
Arabella--

"Another! another!"

"Another what, Johanna? You terrify me by that tone. Oh, be calm. Be
calm, I pray you. Some one will observe your agitation."

"Another victim," continued Johanna. "Another victim--another victim.
Did you not hear what the man said? Was it not suggestive of another
murder? Oh, Heaven preserve my reason, for each day, each hour, brings
to me such accumulating proof of horrors, that I fear I shall go mad."

"Hush! hush! Johanna--Johanna!"

"My poor, poor Mark--"

"Remember that you are in the street, Johanna, and for my sake, I pray
you to be calm. Those tears and that flushed cheek will betray you. Oh,
why did I ever advise you to come upon such an enterprise as this? It is
my fault, all my fault."

The terror and the self-accusation of Arabella Wilmot did more to bring
Johanna to a reasonable state than anything else, and she made an effort
to overcome her feelings, saying--

"Forgive me--forgive me, my dear friend--I, only, am to blame. But at
the moment I was overcome by the thought that, in the heart of London,
such a system of cold-blooded murder--"

She was unable to proceed, and Arabella, holding her arm tightly within
her own, said--

"Do not attempt to say another word until we get home. There, in my
chamber, you can give free vent to your feelings, but let the danger, as
well as the impropriety of doing so in the open street, be present to
your mind. Say no more now, I implore you; say no more."

This was prudent advice, and Johanna had sufficient command of herself
to take it, for she uttered not one other word until they were both
almost breathless with the haste they had made to Arabella's chamber.
Then, being no longer under the restraint of locality or circumstances,
the tears of Johanna burst forth, and she wept abundantly. Arabella's
romantic reading did sometimes, as it would appear, stand her in good
stead, and upon this occasion she did not attempt to stem the torrent of
grief that was making its way from the eyes of her fair young friend.
She told herself that with those tears a load of oppressive grief would
be washed from Johanna's spirit, and the result fully justified her
prognostications. The tears subsided into sobs, and the sobs to sighs.

"Ah, my dear friend," she said, "how much have you to put up with from
me. What a world of trouble I am to you."

"No," said Arabella, "that you are not, Johanna; I am only troubled when
I see you overcome with too excessive grief, and then, I confess, my
heart is heavy."

"It shall not be so again. Forgive me this once, dear Arabella."

Johanna flung herself into her friend's arms, and while they kissed each
other, and Arabella was about commencing a hopeful kind of speech, a
servant girl, with open mouth and eyes, looked into the room, transfixed
with amazement.

"Well, Miss Bella," she cried at last, "you is fond of boys!"

Arabella started, and so did Johanna.

"Is that you, Susan?"

"Yes, Miss Bella, it is me. Well I never! The idea! I shall never get
the better of this here! Only to think of you, Miss Bella, having a boy
at your time of life."

"What do you mean, Susan? How dare you use such language to me? Get you
gone!"

"Oh, yes, I'm a-going in course; but if I had anybody in the house, it
shouldn't be a little impudent looking boy with no whiskers."

"She must know all," whispered Johanna.

"No, no," said Arabella, "I will not, feeling my innocence, be forced
into making a confidant of a servant. Let her go."

"But she will speak."

"Let her speak."

Susan left the room, and went direct to the kitchen, holding up her
hands all the way, and giving free expression to her feelings as she did
so--

"Well, the _idea_ now, of a little stumpy looking boy, when there's sich
a lot of nice young men with whiskers to be had just for the wagging of
one's little finger. Only to think of it. Sitting in her lap too, and
them a kissing one another like--like--coach horses. Well I never. Now
there's Lines's, the cheesemonger's, young man as I has in of a night,
he is somebody, and such loves of whiskers I never seed in my born days
afore; but I is surprised at Miss Bella, that I is--a shrimp of a boy in
her lap! Oh dear, oh dear!"




                             CHAPTER XXXIV.
           MR. FOGG FINDS THAT ALL IS NOT GOLD THAT GLITTERS.


We feel that we ought not entirely to take leave of that unfortunate,
who failed in escaping with Tobias Ragg, from Mr. Fogg's establishment
at Peckham, without a passing notice. It will be recollected that Tobias
had enough to do to get away himself, and that he was in such a state of
mind that it was quite a matter of new mechanical movement of his limbs
that enabled him to fly from the madhouse. Horror of the place, and
dread of the people who called it theirs, had lighted up the glare of a
partial insanity in his brain, and he flew to London, we admit, without
casting another thought upon the wretched creature who had fallen in the
attempt to free herself from those fiends in human shape who made a
frightful speculation in the misery of their fellow creatures. The alarm
was already spread in the madhouse, and Mr. Fogg himself arrived at the
spot where the poor creature lay stunned and wounded by her fall.

"Watson! Watson!" he cried.

"Here," said that official, as he presented himself.

"Take this carcase up, Watson. I'm afraid Todd's boy is gone."

"Ha! ha!"

"Why do you laugh?"

"Why where's the odds if he has. I tell you what it is, Fogg, I haven't
been here so long without knowing what's what. If that boy ever recovers
his senses enough to tell a rational tale, I'll eat him. However, I'll
soon go and hunt him up. We'll have him again."

"Well, Watson, you give me hopes, for you have upon two different
occasions brought back runaways. Bring the woman in and--and, Watson?

"Aye, aye."

"I think I would put her in No. 10."

"Ho! ho!--No. 10. Then she's booked. Well, well, come on Fogg, come on,
it's all one. I suppose the story will be 'An attempt to escape owing to
too much indulgence;' and some hints consequent on that, and then
brought back to her own warm comfortable bed, where she went asleep so
comfortably that we all thought she was as happy as an Emperor, and
then--"

"She never woke again," put in Fogg. "But in this case you are wrong,
Watson. It is true that twice or thrice I have thought, for the look of
the thing, it would be desirable to have an inquest upon somebody, but
in this case I will not. The well is not full!"

"Full?"

"No, I say the well is not full, Watson; and it tells no tales."

"It would hold a hundred bodies one upon another yet," said Watson, "and
tell no tales. Ha! ha!"

"Good!"

"It is good. She is to go there, is she? well, so be it."

Watson carried the miserable female in his arms to the house.

"By-the-bye, it is a second thought," he said, "about No. 10."

"Yes, yes, there's no occasion. Watson, could you not at once--eh? It is
a good hour. Could you not go right through the house, my good Watson,
and at once--eh?"

"At once what?"

"Oh, you know. Ha! ha! You are not the dull fellow at comprehending a
meaning you would fain make out; but you, Watson--you understand me well
enough, you know you do. We understand each other, and always shall."

"I hope so, but if you want anything done I'll trouble you to speak out.
What do you mean by 'couldn't you go through the house at once--eh?'"

"Pho! pho! Put her down the well at once. Humanity calls upon us to do
it. Why should she awaken to a sense of her disappointment, Watson? Put
her down at once, and she will never awaken at all to a sense of
anything."

"Very well. Come on, business is business."

"You--you don't want me?"

"Don't I," said Watson, bending his shaggy brows upon him, and looking
extra hideous on account of a large black patch over one eye, which he
bore as a relict of his encounter with Tobias. "Don't I? Hark you, Fogg;
if you won't come and help me to do it, you shall have it to do by
yourself, without me at all."

"Why--why, Watson, Watson. This language--"

"Is nothing new, Fogg."

"Well, well, come on.--Come on--if it must be so, it must.--I--I will
hold a lantern for you, of course; and you know, Watson, I make things
easy to you, in the shape of salary, and all that sort of thing."

Watson made no reply to all this, but went through the house to the back
part of the grounds, carrying with him his insensible burthen, and Fogg
followed him, trembling in every limb. The fact was, that he, Fogg, had
not for some time had a refresher in the shape of some brandy. The old
deserted well to which they were bound was at a distance of about fifty
yards from the back of the house; towards it the athletic Watson
hastened with speed, closely followed by Fogg, who was truly one of
those who did not mind holding a candle to the devil. The walls of that
building were high, and it was not likely that any intruder from the
outside could see what was going on, so Watson took no precaution.--The
well was reached, and Fogg cried to him--

"Now--now--quick about it, lest she recovers."

Another moment and she would have been gone in her insensibility, but as
if Fogg's words were prophetic, she did recover, and clinging
convulsively to Watson, she shrieked--

"Mercy! mercy! Oh, have mercy upon me! Help! help!"

"Ah, she recovers!" cried Fogg, "I was afraid of that. Throw her in.
Throw her in, Watson."

"Confound her!"

"Why don't you throw her in?"

[Illustration: The Murder At The Well By Fogg And Watson.]

"She clings to me like a vice. I cannot--Give me a knife, Fogg. You will
find one in my coat pocket--a knife--a knife!"

"Mercy! mercy! Have mercy upon me! No--no--no,--Help! Oh God! God!"

"The knife! The knife, I say!"

"Here, here," cried Fogg, as he hastily took it from Watson's pocket and
opened it. "Here! Finish her, and quickly too, Watson!"

The scene that followed is too horrible for description. The hands of
the wretched victim were hacked from their hold by Watson, and in the
course of another minute, with one last appalling shriek, down she went
like a flash of lightning to the bottom of the well.

"Gone!" said Watson.

Another shriek and Fogg, even, stopped his ears, so appalling was that
cry, coming as it did so strangely from the bottom of the well.

"Throw something upon her," said Fogg. "Here's a brick--"

"Bah!" cried Watson, "bah! there's no occasion to throw anything on her.
She'll soon get sick of such squealing."

Another shriek, mingled with a strange frothy cry, as though some one
had managed to utter it under water, arose. The perspiration stood in
large drops upon the face of Fogg.--He seized the brick he had spoken
of, and cast it into the well. All was still as the grave before it
reached the bottom, and then he wiped his face and looked at Watson.

"This is the worst job," he said, "that ever we have had--"

"Not a whit.--Brandy--give me a tumbler of brandy, Fogg. Some of our own
particular, for I have something to say to you now, that a better
opportunity than this for saying is not likely to occur."

"Come into my room then," said Fogg, "and we can talk quietly.--Do you
think--that--that--"

"What?"

"That she is quite dead?"

"What do I care.--Let her crawl out of that, if she can."

With a jerk of his thumb, Watson intimated that the well was the "that"
he referred to, and then he followed Fogg into the house, whistling as
he went the same lively air with which he had frequently solaced his
feelings in the hearing of poor Tobias Ragg. Never had Fogg been in such
a state of agitation, except once, and that was long ago, upon the
occasion of his first crime. Then he had trembled as he now trembled,
but the

    "Dull custom of iniquity"

had effectually blunted soon the keen edge of his conscience, and he had
for years carried on a career of infamy without any other feeling than
exultation at his success.--Why then did he suffer now? Had the well in
the garden ever before received a victim? Was he getting alive to the
excellence of youth and beauty?--Oh no--no. Fogg was getting old. He
could not stand what he once stood in the way of conscience. When he
reached his room--that room in which he had held the conference with
Todd, he sank into a chair with a deep groan.

"What's the matter now?" cried Watson, who got insolent in proportion as
Fogg's physical powers appeared to be upon the wane.

"Nothing, nothing."

"Nothing?--Well, I never knew anybody look so white with nothing the
matter. Come, I want a drop of brandy; where is it?"

"In that cupboard; I want some myself likewise. Get it out, Watson. You
will find glasses there."

Watson was not slow in obeying this order. The brandy was duly produced,
and, after Fogg had drank as much as would have produced intoxication in
any one not so used to the ardent spirit as himself, he spoke more
calmly, for it only acted upon him as a gentle sedative.

"You wished to say something to me, Watson."

"Yes."

"What is it?"

"I am tired, completely tired, Fogg."

"Tired? Then why don't you retire to rest at once, Watson? There is, I
am sure, nothing to keep you up now; I am going myself in a minute."

"You don't understand me, or you won't, which is much the same thing. I
did not mean that I was tired of the day, but I am tired of doing all
the work, Fogg, while you--while you--"

"Well--while I--"

"Pocket all the profit. Do you understand that? Now hark you. We will go
partners, Fogg, not only in the present and the future, but in the past.
I will have half of your hoarded up gains, or--"

"Or what?"

Mr. Watson made a peculiar movement, supposed to indicate the last kick
of a culprit executed at the Old Bailey.

"You mean you will hang yourself," said Fogg. "My dear Watson, pray do
so as soon as you think proper. Don't let me hinder you."

"Hark you, Fogg. You may be a fox, but I am a badger. I mean that I will
hang you, and this is the way to do it. My wife--"

"Your what?"

"My wife," cried Watson, "has, in writing, the full particulars of all
your crimes. She don't live far off, but still far enough to make it a
puzzle for you to find her. If she don't see me once in every
forty-eight hours, she is to conclude something has happened to me, and
then she is to go at once to Bow Street with the statement, and lay it
before a magistrate. You understand. Now I have contrived, with what I
got from you by fair means as well as by foul, and by robbing the
patients besides, to save some money, and if you and I don't agree, Mrs.
Watson and I will start for New Zealand, or some such place, but--but,
Fogg--"

"Well?"

"We will denounce you before we go."

"And what is to be the end of all this? The law has a long as well as a
strong arm, Watson."

"I know it. You would say it might be long enough to strike me."

Fogg nodded.

"Leave me to take care of that. But as you want to know the result of
all this, it is just this. I want to have my share, and I will have it.
Give me a couple of thousand down, and half for the future."

Fogg was silent for a moment or two, and then he said--

"Too much, Watson, too much. I have not so much."

"Bah! At your banker's now you have exactly £11,267."

Fogg writhed.

"You have been prying. Well, you shall have the two thousand."

"On account."

Fogg writhed again. "I say you shall have so much, Watson, and you shall
keep the books, and have your clear half of all future proceeds. Is
there anything else you have set your mind upon, because if you have,
while we are talking about business, you may as well state it, you
know."

"No, there's nothing else--I am satisfied. All I have to add is, that
you had better put your head into the fire than attempt to play any
tricks with me. You understand?"

"Perfectly."

Watson was not altogether satisfied. He would have been better pleased
if Fogg had made more resistance. The easy compliance of such a man with
anything that touched his pocket looked suspicious, and filled the mind
of Watson with a thousand vague conjectures. Already--aye, even before
he left Fogg's room, Watson began to feel the uneasiness of his new
position, and to pay dearly for the money he was to have. Even money may
be given an exorbitant price for. When he was by himself, as he
traversed the passage leading to his own sleeping room, Watson could not
forbear looking cautiously around him at times, as though gaunt murder
stalked behind him, and he fastened his bed-room door with more than his
usual caution. The wish to sleep came not to him, and sitting down upon
his bed-side he rested his chin upon his hand and said to himself in a
low anxious shrinking kind of whisper--

"What does Fogg mean to do?"

Nor was the recent interview without its after effects upon the
mad-house keeper himself. When the door closed upon Watson he shook his
clenched hand in the direction he had taken, and muttered curses,

    "Not loud, but deep."

"The time will come," he said, "Master Watson, and that quickly too,
when I will let you see that I am still the master spirit. You shall be
satisfied for the present, but your death-warrant is preparing. You will
not live long to triumph over me by threats of what your low cunning can
accomplish."

He rose and drank more raw brandy, after which, still muttering
maledictions upon Watson, he returned to his bed-room, where, if he did
not sleep, and if during the still hours of the night his brain was not
too much vexed, he hoped to be able to concoct some scheme which should
present him with a prospect of exemplary vengeance upon Watson.




                             CHAPTER XXXV.
                        MRS. LOVETT'S NEW LOVER.


Mrs. Lovett was a woman of luxurious habits. Perhaps the constant
savoury hot pie atmosphere in which she dwelt contributed a something to
the development of her tastes, but certainly that lady, in dress,
jewellery, and men, had her fancies. Did the reader think that she saw
anything attractive in the satyr-like visage of Todd, with its
eccentricities of vision? Did the reader think that the lawyers' clerks
frequenting her shop suited her taste, varying, as all the world knows
that class of bipeds does, between the fat and flabby, and the white and
candle looking, if we may be allowed the expression? Ah, no,--Mrs.
Lovett's dreams of man had a loftier range, but we must not anticipate.
Facts will speak trumpet-tongued for themselves.

    It is the hour when lawyers' clerks
        From many a gloomy chamber stalk;
    It is the hour when lovers' vows
        Are heard in every Temple walk.

Mrs. Lovett was behind her counter all alone, but the loneliness
continued but for a very brief period, for from Carey-street, with a
nervousness of gait highly suggestive of a fear of bailiffs--bailiffs
were there in all their glory--comes a--a what shall we say? Truly there
are some varieties of the genus homo that defy minute classification,
but perhaps this individual who hastened down Bell Yard was the nearest
in approximation to what used to be called "a swaggering companion,"
that can be found. He was a gent upon town--that is to say, according to
his own phraseology, he lived upon his wits; and if the reader will
substitute dishonesty for wits, he will have a much clearer notion of
what the swaggering companion of modern days lived upon. He was tall,
burly, forty years of age, and his bloated countenance and sleepy eyes
betrayed the effects of a long course of intemperance. He wore mock
jewellery of an outrageous size; his attire was flashy and gaudy--his
linen ... the less we say about that the better--enormous black whiskers
(false) shaded his cheeks, and mangey-looking moustache (real) covered
his upper lip--add to all this, such a stock of ignorance and impudence
as may be supposed to thoroughly saturate one individual, and the reader
has the swaggering companion before him. At a rapid pace he neared Mrs.
Lovett's, muttering to himself as he went--

"I wonder if I can gammon her out of a couple of guineas."

Yes, reader, this compound of vulgarity, ignorance, impudence and
debauchery was Mrs. Lovett's gentle fancy--her taste--her--her, what
shall we say?--her personification of all that a man should be. Do not
start; Mrs. Lovett has many imitators, for, without libelling the
fairer, better, and more gentle of that sex, who can be such angels as
well as such--a-hem!--there are thousands who would be quite smitten
with the "swaggering companion." When he reached the shop-window, he
placed his nose against it for a moment to reconnoitre who was in the
shop, and seeing the fair one alone, he at once crossed the threshold.

"Ah, charmer, how do the fates get on with you?"

"Sir--"

A smile upon the face of Mrs. Lovett was a practical contradiction to
the rebuff which her reception of him by words of mouth seemed to carry.

"Oh, you bewitching--a--a--"

The remainder of the sentence was lost in the devouring a pie, which the
"swaggering companion" took from the shop counter.

"Really, sir," said Mrs. Lovett--"I wish you would not come here, I am
all alone, and--"

"Alone? You beautiful female.--Oh you nice creature.--Allow me."

The "swaggering companion" lifted up that portion of the counter which
enabled Mrs. Lovett to pass from one side of it to the other, and as
coolly as possible walked into the parlour. Mrs. Lovett followed him,
protesting at what she called his impudence. But for all that, a bottle
of spirits and some biscuits were procured. The "swaggering companion,"
however, pushed the biscuits aside, saying--

"Pies for me. Pies for me."

Mrs. Lovett looked at him scrutinisingly as she said--

"And do you really like the pies, or do you only eat them out of
compliment to me?"

"Really like them? I tell you what it is; out of compliment to you, of
course, I could eat anything, but the pies are delicacies.--Where do you
get your veal?"

"Well, if you will have pies you shall, Major Bounce."--That was the
name which the "swaggering companion" appended to his disgusting
corporealty.

"Certainly, my dear, certainly. As I was saying, I could freely, to
compliment you, eat old Tomkins, the tailor, of Fleet Street."

"Really. How do you think he would taste?"

"Tough!"

"Ha! Ha!"

It was an odd laugh that of Mrs. Lovett's. Had she borrowed it from
Todd?

"My dear Mrs. L.," said the major, "what made you laugh in that sort of
way? Ah, if I could only persuade you to go from L to B--"

"Sir?"

"Now, my charmer, seriously speaking:--Here am I, Major Bounce, a
gentleman with immense expectations, ready and willing to wed the most
charming woman under the sun, if she will only say 'yes.'"

"Have you any objection to America?"

"America? None in the least.--With you for a companion, America would be
a Paradise. A regular garden of, what do you call it, my dear? Only say
the word, my darling."

The major's arm was gently insinuated round the lady's waist, and after
a few moments she spoke.

"Major Bounce, I--I have made money."

"The devil!--so have I, but the police one day--a-hem!--a-hem!--what a
cough I have."

"What on earth do you mean?"

"Oh, nothing--nothing--only a joke. You said you had made money, and
that put me in mind of what I read in the 'Chronicle' to-day of some
coiners, that's all. Ha-ha!"

"When I spoke of making money, I meant in the way of trade, but having
made it, I should not like to spend it in London, and be pointed out as
the well-known pie-woman."

"Pie-woman! Oh, the wretches--only let--"

"Peace. Hold your tongue, and hear me out. If I marry and retire, it
will be far from here--very far indeed."

"Ah, any land, with you." The major absolutely saluted the lady.

"Be quiet. Pray, in what service are you a major?"

"The South American, my love. A much higher service than the British."

"Indeed."

"Lord bless you, yes. If I was now to go to my estates in South America,
there would be a jubilee of ten days at the very least, and the people
as well as the government would not know how to make enough of me, I can
assure you. In fact, I have as much right to take the rank of general as
of major, but the natural modesty of a military man, and of myself in
particular, steps in and says 'A major be it.'"

"Then you have property?"

"Property--property? I believe you, I have. Lots!"

The major dealt his forehead a slap as he spoke, which might be taken as
an indication that that was where his property was situated, and that it
consisted of his ignorance and impudence--very good trading capitals in
this world for, strange to say, the parties solely possessing such
qualifications get on much better than education, probity, and genius
can push forward their unhappy victims. Mrs. Lovett was silent for some
minutes, during which the major saluted her again. Then, suddenly
rising, she said--

"I will give you an answer to-morrow. Go away now. We shall be soon
interrupted. If I do consent to be yours, there will be something to do
before we leave England."

"By Jove, only mention it to me, and it is as good as done. By-the-bye,
there is something to do before I leave here, and that is, my charmer,
to pay you for the pies."

"Oh, no--no."

"Yes, yes--my honour. Touch my honour, even in regard of a pie, and
touch my life.--I put two guineas in one end of my purse, to pay my
glover in the Strand, and at the other end are some small coins--where
the deuce--can--I--have--put--it."

The major made an affectation of feeling in all his pockets for his lost
purse, and then, with a serio-comic look, he said--

"By Jove, some rascal has picked my pocket."

"Never mind me," said Mrs. Lovett, "I don't want payment for the pies."

"Well, but--the--the glover. Poor devil, and I promised him his money
this morning. For a soldier and a man of honour to break his word is
death. What shall I do?--Mrs. L., could you lend me a couple of guineas
until I have the happiness of seeing you again?"

"Certainly, major, certainly I can."

The gallant son of Mars pocketed the coins, and after saluting Mrs.
Lovett some half score of times--and she, the beast, liked it--he left
the shop and went chuckling into the Strand, where in a few minutes he
was in a pot-house, from whence he emerged not until he had liquidated
one of the guineas. Was Mrs. Lovett taken in by the major? Did she
believe his title, or his wealth, and his common honesty? Did she
believe in the story of the purse and of the two guineas that were to be
paid to the poor glover because he wanted them? No--no--certainly not.
But for all that, she admired the major.--He was her _beau ideal_ of a
fine man! That was sufficient. Moreover, being what he was--a rogue,
cheat, and common swindler--she could exercise, so she thought, a
species of control over him which no decent man would put up with, and
so in her own mind she had determined to marry the major and fly; but as
she said--"There was a little something to be done first." Did that
relate to the disposal of Todd? We shall see. If she calculated upon the
major putting Sweeney Todd out of the way, she sadly miscalculated; but
the wisest heads will blunder. Compared to Todd, the major was indeed a
poor creature; but Mrs. Lovett, in the stern courage of her own
intellect, could not conceive the possibility of the great, puffy,
bloated, fierce Major Bounce being as arrant a coward as ever was
kicked. He was so, though, for all that. After he had left her, Mrs.
Lovett sat for a long time in a profound reverie, and as it happened
that no one came into the shop; the current of her evil thoughts was
uninterrupted.

"I have sufficient," she said; "and before it gets too late, I will
leave this mode of life. Why did I--tempted by the fiend Todd--undertake
it, but that I might make wealth by it, and so assume a position that my
heart panted for. I will not delay until it is too late, or I may lose
the enjoyment that I have sacrificed so much to find the means of
getting. I live in this world but for the gratification of the senses,
and finding that I could not gratify them without abundant means, I fell
upon this plan. I--ah--that is he--"

Suddenly the swaggering companion, the redoubtable Major Bounce, rushed
past the shop-window, without so much as looking in for a single moment,
and made his way towards Carey Street. Mrs. Lovett started up and made
her way into the front shop. Major Bounce was out of sight, but from
Fleet Street came a poor, draggled, miserable looking woman, making vain
efforts at a speed which her weakness prevented her from keeping
up.--She called aloud--

"Stop! stop!--only a moment, Flukes! Only a moment, John. Stop!--stop!"

Her strength failed her, and she fell exhausted upon Mrs. Lovett's
door-step.

"Heartless!--heartless ever!" she cried. "May the judgment of the
Almighty reach him--may he suffer--yes--may he suffer only what I have
suffered."

"Who and what are you?" said Mrs. Lovett.

"Poor, and therefore everything that is abject and despicable in
London."

"What a truth," said Mrs. Lovett. "What a truth that is. Who would not
do even as I do to avoid poverty in a widowed life!--It is too horrible.
Amid savages it is nothing, but here it is indeed criminality of the
deepest dye. Whom did you call after, woman?"

"My husband."

"Husband. Describe him."

"A sottish-looking man, with moustache. Once seen, he is not easily
mistaken--ruffian and villain are stamped by nature upon his face."

Mrs. Lovett winced a little.

"Come in," she said, "I will relieve you for the present. Come in."

The woman by a great effort succeeded in rising and crossing the
threshold. Mrs. Lovett gave her a seat, and having presented her with a
glass of cordial and a pie, she waited until the poor creature should be
sufficiently recovered to speak composedly, and then she said to her
with perfect calmness, as though she was by no manner of means
personally interested in the matter--

"Now tell me--Is the man with moustache and the braided coat, who passed
hastily up Bell Yard a few moments only before you, really your
husband?"

"Yes, madam, that is Flukes--"

"Who?"

"Flukes, madam."

"And pray who and what is Flukes?"

"He was a tailor, and he might have been as respectable a man, and
earned as honest and good a living as any one in the trade, but a love
of idleness and dissipation undid him."

"Flukes--a tailor?"

"Yes, madam; and now that I am utterly destitute, and in want of the
common necessaries of life, if I chance to meet him in the streets and
ask him for the merest trifle to relieve my necessities, he flies from
me in the manner he has done to-day."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, madam. If we were in a lonely place he would strike me, so that I
should, from the injury he would do me, be unable to follow him, but
that in the public streets he dare-not do, for he fears some man would
interfere and put a stop to his cruelty."

"There, my good woman," said Mrs. Lovett, "there are five shillings for
you. Go now, for I expect to be busy very shortly."

With a profusion of thanks, that while they lasted were quite stunning,
poor Mrs. Flukes left the pie-shop and hobbled homewards. When she was
gone the colour went and came several times upon the face of Mrs.
Lovett, and then she repeated to herself--"Flukes--a tailor!"

"Pies ready?" said a voice at the door.

"Not quite."

"How long, mum; we want half a dozen of the muttons to-day."

"In about ten minutes."

"Thank you, I'll look in again."

"Flukes--a tailor? Indeed!--Flukes--a tailor? Well I ought to have
expected something like this. What a glorious thing it is really to care
for no one but oneself after all. I shall lose my faith in--in--fine
men."




                             CHAPTER XXXVI.
               TOBIAS'S MOTHER AWAKENS OLD RECOLLECTIONS.


Poor Tobias still remains upon his bed of sickness. The number of hours
at the expiration of which the medical man had expected him to recover
were nearly gone. In Colonel Jeffery's parlour three persons, besides
himself, were assembled. These three were his friend the captain, Sir
Richard Blunt, and Mrs. Ragg. The lady was sitting with a not over clean
handkerchief at her eyes, and keeping up a perpetual motion with her
knee, as though she were nursing some fractious baby, and Mrs. Ragg had
been used of late to go out as a monthly nurse occasionally, which,
perhaps, accounted for this little peculiarity.

"Now, madam," said the colonel, "you quite understand, I hope, that you
are not to mention to any living soul the fact of your son Tobias being
with me."

"Oh, dear me, no, sir. Who should I mention it to?"

"That we can't tell," interrupted the captain, "you are simply desired
not to tell it."

"I'm sure I don't see anybody once in a week, sir."

"Good God! woman," cried the colonel, "does that mean that when you do
see any one you will tell it?"

"Lord love you, sir, it's few people as comes to see you when you are
down in the world. I'm sure it's seldom enough a soul taps at my door
with a 'Mrs. Ragg, how are you?'"

"Now was there ever such an incorrigible woman as this?"

"If you were to talk to her for a month," said Sir Robert Blunt, "you
would not get a direct answer from her. Allow me to try something
else--Mrs. Ragg."

"Yes, sir--humbly at your service, sir."

"If you tell any one that Tobias is here, or indeed anywhere within your
knowledge, I will apprehend you about a certain candlestick."

"Goodness gracious, deliver us."

"Do you understand that, Mrs. Ragg? You keep silence about Tobias, and I
keep silence about the candlestick. You speak about Tobias, and I speak
about the candlestick."

Mrs. Ragg shook her head and let fall a torrent of tears, which the
magistrate took as sufficient evidence that she did understand him and
would act accordingly, so he added--

"Shall we all proceed up stairs? for a great deal will depend upon the
boy's first impression when he awakens--and in this case we should not
lose a chance."

In pursuance of this sound advice they all proceeded to poor Tobias's
bed-room, and there he lay in that profound repose which the powerful
opiate administered to him had had the effect of producing. It did not
seem as though he had moved head or foot since they had left him. His
face was very pale, and when Mrs. Ragg saw him she burst into tears,
exclaiming--

"He is dead--he is dead!"

"No such thing, madam," said Colonel Jeffery. "He only sleeps."

"But, oh deary me, what makes him look so old and so strange now? He was
bad enough when I saw him last, poor fellow, but not like this."

"He has received ill-usage from someone, and that is precisely what we
want to find out. If you can get from him the particulars of what he has
suffered, we will take care those who have made him suffer shall not
escape."

"Bless you, gentlemen, what's the use of that if my poor boy is killed?"

There was a good home truth in these words from Mrs. Ragg, although,
upon the score of general social policy, they might well be answered. An
argument with Mrs. Ragg, however, upon such a subject was not very
a-propos. The colonel made her sit down by Tobias's bed-side, and he was
then upon the point of remarking to his friend, the captain, that it
would be as well, since so many hours had passed, to send for the
medical man, when that personage made his appearance.

"Has he awakened?" he asked.

"No--not yet."

"Oh, I see you have a nurse."

"It is his mother. We hope that she, by talking to him familiarly, may
produce a good effect, and possibly rid him of that bewilderment of
intellect under which he now labours. What think you, sir?"

"That it is a good thought. Let us darken the room as much as possible,
as twilight will be most grateful to him upon awakening, which he must
do shortly."

The curtains of the window were so arranged that the room was in a state
of semi-darkness, and then they all waited with no small anxiety for
Tobias to recover from the deep and death-like sleep that had come over
him. After about five minutes he moved uneasily and uttered a low moan.

"Speak to him, Mrs. a--a--what's your name?"

"Ragg, sir."

"Aye, Ragg, just speak to him; of course he is well acquainted with your
voice, and it may have the effect of greatly rousing him from his
lethargic condition."

Poor Mrs. Ragg considered that she had some very extraordinary post to
perform, and accordingly she collected to her aid all her learning,
which, interrupted by her tears, and now and then by a sob, which she
had to gulp down like a large globule of castor oil, had certainly
rather a droll effect.

"My dear Tobias--my dear--lie a bed, sluggard, you know--well, I
never--Put the kettle on, Polly, and let's all have tea. Tobias, my
dear--bless us and save us, are you going to stay in bed all day?"

Another groan from Tobias.

"Well, my dear, perhaps you won't mind getting up and just running
towards the corner for a bunch of water cresses? Dear heart alive, there
goes the muffin-man like a lamplighter!"

It was by such domestic themes that Mrs. Ragg sought to recall the
wandering senses of poor Tobias to a cognizance of the present. But
alas! his thoughts were still in the dim and misty land of visions.
Suddenly he spoke--

[Illustration: Tobias's Delirium.]

"Hush--hush! There they come!--elephants!--elephants!--on--on--on. Now
for the soldiers, and all mad--mad--mad! Hide me in the straw--deep in a
world of straw. Hush! He comes. Sing, oh sing again!--and he--he will
not suspect."

The surgeon made a sign to Mrs. Ragg to speak again.

"Why, Tobias, my dear, what are you talking about? Do you mean the
Elephant and Castle?"

"Call to his remembrance," said the surgeon, "some old scenes."

"Yes, sir, but when one's heart and all that sort of thing is in one's
mouth it's very difficult to recollect things oneself. Tobias!"

"Yes--yes. Ha-ha!"

It was a low, plaintive, strange laugh that, that came from the poor boy
whose mind had been so overthrown, and it jarred upon the feelings of
all who heard it.

"Tobias, do you recollect the little cottage down the lane at Holloway,
where we lived, and the cock roaches, and the strange cat, you know,
Tobias, that would not go away? Don't you recollect, Tobias, how the
coals there were all slates, and how your poor father, as is dead and
gone--"

"Yes, I see him now."

Mrs. Ragg gave a faint scream.

"Father!--father!" said Tobias, as he held out his arms, and the big
tears rolled down his cheeks. "Father--father, Todd has not got me now.
Don't cry so, father. Stand out of the way of the elephants."

"My dear! my dear!" cried Mrs. Ragg, "do you want to break my heart?"

Tobias rose to a sitting position in the bed, and looked his mother in
the face--

"Are you, too, mad?" he said. "Are you, too, mad? Did you tell of Todd?"

"Yes, the only way," said Colonel Jeffery, "for people not to be mad, is
to tell of Todd."

"Yes--yes."

"And so you, Tobias, will tell us all you know. That is what we want you
to do, and then you will be quite happy and comfortable for the
remainder of your days, and live with your mother again far from any
apprehension from Todd. Do you understand me?"

Tobias opened his mouth several times in an eager, gasping sort of
manner, as though he would have said something rapidly, but he could
not. He placed his hands upon his brain, and rocked to and fro for a few
moments, and then he broke out into the same low, peculiar laugh that
had before so strangely affected Colonel Jeffery and the others who were
there present in that room. The surgeon shook his head as he said,
mournfully--

"It is of no use!"

"Do you really think so?" said the colonel.

"For the present, I am convinced that it is of no use to attempt to
recall his wandering senses. Time will do wonders, and he has the one
grand element of youth in his favour. That, as well as time, will do
wonders. The case is a bad one, and the shock the brain of this lad has
received must be a most fearful one."

"Do not," said Sir Richard Blunt, "give up so readily, Mrs. Ragg; I
would have you try him again. Speak to him again of his father--that
seemed to be the topic that most moved him."

Mrs. Ragg could hardly do so for her tears, but she managed to stammer
out--

"Tobias, do you recollect when your father bought you the rabbit, and
out of vexation, the creature eat its way out of a willow-work cage in
the night? Do you remember your poor father's funeral, Tobias, and how
we went, you and I, my poor boy, to take the last look at the only one
who--who--who--"

Mrs. Ragg could get no further.

"Ha--ha--ha!" laughed Tobias, "who told of Todd?"

"Who is this Todd," said the surgeon, "that he continually speaks of,
and shudders at the very name of?"

Colonel Jeffery glanced at Sir Richard Blunt, and the latter, who wished
the affair by no means to transpire, merely said--

"We are quite as much in the dark as you, sir. It is just what we should
like to know, who this Todd is, whose very name seems to hold the
imagination of this poor boy in a grasp of iron. I begin to think that
nothing more can be done now."

"Nothing, gentlemen, you may depend," said the surgeon. "How old is the
lad?"

"Sixteen as never was," replied Mrs. Ragg, "and a hard time I had of it,
sir, as you may suppose."

The surgeon did not exactly see how he was called upon to suppose
anything of the sort; however he made no further remark to Mrs. Ragg,
but continued in conversation for some time with Colonel Jeffery, who
informed him that Tobias should remain for a time where he was, so that
there should be every possible chance given for his recovery.

"I wish you to continue attending upon him, sir," he added, "for I would
spare nothing that medical advice can suggest to restore him. He has, I
am convinced, been a great sufferer."

"That is sufficiently clear, sir. You may rely upon my utmost
attention."

"Mrs. Ragg," said the colonel, "can you cook?"

"Cook, sir? Lord bless you, sir. I can cook as well as here and there a
one, though I say it that oughtn't, and if poor Tobias was but all
right, I should not go to be after making myself miserable now about
bygones. What's to be cured must be endured--it's a long lane as hasn't
a turning. As poor Mr. Ragg often used to say when he was
alive--'Grizzling ain't fattening.'"

"I should think it was not. It so happens, Mrs. Ragg, that there is a
vacancy in my house for a cook, and if you like to come and take the
place, you can look after Tobias as well, you know, for I intend him to
remain here for the present. Only remember, you tell this to no one."

"Me, sir! Lord bless you, sir, who do I see?"

The colonel was by no means anxious to convince himself a second time of
the impossibility of bringing Mrs. Ragg to a precise answer, so he
changed the subject, and it was finally arranged that without a word to
any one upon the subject, that very night Mrs. Ragg was to take up her
abode with Tobias. After this had been all arranged, the three gentlemen
proceeded to the dining room, and held a consultation.

"Of the guilt of Todd," said the magistrate, "I entertain no doubt, but
I own that I am extremely anxious to bring the crime legally home to
him."

"Exactly," said the colonel, "and I can only say that every plan you can
suggest will be cheerfully acquiesced in by me and my friend here."

The captain signified his assent.

"Be assured, gentlemen," added Sir Richard Blunt, "that something shall
be done of a decisive character before many days are past. I have seen
the higher powers upon the subject, and have full authority, and you may
rest satisfied that I shall not mind running a little personal risk to
unravel the mysteries that surround the career of Sweeney Todd. I think
one thing may be done conveniently."

"What is that, sir?"

"Why, It seems to be pretty well understood that no one resides in
Todd's house but himself, and as now he has no boy--unless he has
provided himself with one already--he must go out sometimes and leave
the place to itself, and upon one of those occasions an opportunity
might be found of thoroughly searching the upper part, at all events, of
his house."

"Could that be done with safety?"

"I think so. At all events, I feel inclined to try it. If I do so, and
make any discovery, you may depend upon my letting you know without an
hour's delay, and I sincerely hope that all that will take place may
have the effect of setting your mind at rest regarding your friend, Mr.
Ingestrie."

"But not of restoring him to us?"

The magistrate shook his head.

"I think, sir," he said, "that you ought to consider that he has, if any
one has, fallen a victim to Sweeney Todd."

"Alas! I fear so."

"All the evidence points that way, and we can only take measures in the
best way possible to bring his murderer to justice--that that murderer
is Sweeney Todd, I cannot for one moment of time bring myself to doubt."

Sir Richard Blunt shortly afterwards left Colonel Jeffery's house and
proceeded to the execution of a plan of proceeding, with the particulars
of which he had not thought proper to entrust to the colonel, and his
friend the captain. Long habits of caution had led the magistrate--who
was not one of the fancy magistrates of the present day, but a real
police officer--active, cool, and determined--to trust no one but
himself with his secrets, and so he kept to himself what he meant to do
that night. When he was gone, Colonel Jeffery had a long talk with his
friend, and the subject gradually turned to Johanna, whom the colonel
yet hoped, he said, to be able one day to call his own.

"No one," he remarked, "would be more truly rejoiced than I to restore
Mark Ingestrie to her whom he loves, and whose affection for him is of
so enduring and remarkable a character, but if, as Sir Richard Blunt
supposes, he is really no more, I think Johanna, by being mine, would
stand a better chance of recovering her serenity, if not of enjoying all
the happiness in this world that she deserves."

"Hope for the best," said the captain, "and recollect what the surgeon
said as regarded Tobias, that time works wonders."




                            CHAPTER XXXVII.
                         THE SEARCH AT TODD'S.


The house in Fleet Street, next door to Todd's, was kept by a shoemaker,
named Whittle, and in this shoemaker's window was a bill, only put up on
the very day of poor Tobias's escape from Peckham, announcing--"An Attic
to Let." This was rather an alluring announcement to Sir Richard Blunt.
At about half an hour after sunset on the same evening that had
witnessed the utter discomfiture of the attempt to restore poor Tobias
Ragg to his senses, two men stood in the deep recess of a doorway
immediately opposite to the house of Sweeney Todd. These two men were
none other than Sir Richard and his esteemed but rather eccentric
officer, Mr. Crotchet. After some few moments' silence, Sir Richard
spoke, saying--

"Well, Crotchet--what do you think of the affair now?"

"Nothink."

"Nothing? You do not mean that, Crotchet?"

"Says what I means--means what I says, and then leaves it alone."

"But you have some opinion, Crotchet?"

"Had, master--had--"

"Well, Crotchet; I think we can now cross over the way, and endeavour to
get possession of the shoemaker's attic, from which we can get into
Todd's house."

"And find nothink criminatory."

"You think not; but do you know, Crotchet, I am of opinion that the
greatest and cleverest rogues not unfrequently leave themselves open to
detection, in some little particular, which they have most strangely and
unaccountably neglected. I am not without a hope that we shall find the
man, Sweeney Todd, to be one of that class, and if so, we shall not fail
to do some good by our visit to the house.--You remain here and watch
for his going out, and when he is gone, come over the way and ask for
Mr. Smith. Have you seen Fletcher?"

"No, but he will be here presently, and will wait till that 'ere fellow
goes away, if so be as he goes out, and then when you and me hears two
notes on the key-bugle, it will be time all for us to go for to come to
mizzle."

"Very good," said Sir Richard Blunt, and he crossed over to the
shoemaker's shop, leaving Crotchet on the watch in the deep doorway.

The fact is, they had been waiting there for some time, in the hope that
Todd would go out, but he had not stirred, so that the magistrate
thought it would be as well to let Crotchet remain while he secured the
shoemaker's attic, with a view to ulterior proceedings. The magistrate
was dressed as a respectable, staid clerk, and he walked into the
shoemaker's shop with a gravity of gait that was quite imposing.

"You have an attic to let," he said. "Is it furnished?"

"Oh yes, sir, and comfortably too. My missus looks after all that, I can
tell you."

"Very well, I want just such a place; for, do you know, since I have
left a widower, I like to live in some lively situation, and as all my
friends are at Cambridge, and not a soul that I know in London, I don't
half fancy going into an out-of-the-way place to live; though, I dare
say, for all that, London is safe enough."

"Why, I don't know that," said the shoemaker. "However, you'll be safe
enough here, sir, never doubt. The rent is four shillings a week."

"Very good. I think, if you will show it to me, we shall suit each
other. The great object with me is to find myself in the house of a
respectable man, and one look at you, sir, is quite sufficient to show
me that you are one."

This was all highly flattering to the shoemaker, and he was so well
pleased to get such a respectable, civil-spoken, middle aged gentleman
into his house, that he was prepared, upon half a word to that effect,
to come down a whole sixpence a week in the rent, if needs were. Of
course, the would-be-lodger was well enough pleased with the attic, and
turning to the shoemaker, he handed him four shillings, saying--

"As my friends are all so far off, I ought to give you a week's rent in
advance, instead of a reference, and there it is."

After this, who could ask any further questions? The magistrate, just,
of his own accord, added that his name was Smith, and that he would stay
a short time in his room if the shoemaker could oblige him with a light,
which was done accordingly, and when the shoemaker's wife came
home--that lady having been out to gossip with no less a personage than
Mrs. Lovett--he was quite elated to tell her what a lodger they had, and
as he handed her the four shillings, saying "My dear, that will buy you
the ribbon at Mrs. Keating's, the mercer, that you had set your mind
upon," how could she be other than quite amiable?

"Well, John," she said, "for once in a way, I must say that you have
shown great judgment, and if I had been at home myself, I could not have
managed better."

This, we are quite sure, our lady readers will agree with us was as much
as any married female ought to say. Sir Richard Blunt ascended to the
attic, of which he was now, by virtue of a weekly tenancy, lord and
master, with a light, and closing the door, he cast his eyes around the
apartment. Its appointments were decidedly not luxurious. In one corner
a stump-bedstead awakened anything but lively associations, while the
miserable little grate, the front of which was decidedly composed of
some portions of an old iron hoop from a barrel, did not look redolent
of comforts. The rest of the apartments were what the auctioneers call
_en suite_, the said auctioneers having but a dreamy notion of what _en
suite_ means. But the appointments or disappointments of his attic were
of little consequence to Sir Richard Blunt. It was the window that
offered attractions to him. Softly opening it, he looked out, and found
that there was a leaden gutter, with only the average amount of filth in
it, the drain being, of course, stopped up by a dishclout and a cracked
flower-pot, which is perfectly according to custom in London. He saw
enough at a glance, however, to convince him that there would be no
difficulty whatever in getting to the attic of Todd's house, and that
fact once ascertained, he waited with exemplary and placid patience the
return of Crotchet. Now, Sweeney Todd was, during much of that day, in
what is denominated a brown study. He could not make up his mind in what
way he was to make up for the loss of the senses of Tobias. It was with
him an equal choice of disagreeables. To have a boy, or not to have a
boy, which to do became an anxious question.

"A boy is a spy," muttered Todd to himself--"a spy upon all my
actions--a perpetual police-officer in a small way, constantly at my
elbow--an alarum continually crying to me 'Todd! Todd! beware!' Curses
on them all, and yet what a slave am I to this place without a lad; and,
after all, when they do become too troublesome and inquisitive, I can
but dispose of them as I have disposed of him."

Todd patrolled his shop for some time, thus communing with himself; but
as yet he could not make up his mind which to do.--A boy or not a
boy?--that was the question. He remained in this unsatisfactory state of
mind until sunset had passed away and the dim twilight was wrapping all
things in obscurity. Then, without deciding upon either course, he
suddenly, in a very hurried manner, shut up his shop, and closing the
outer door carefully, he walked rapidly towards Bell Yard. He was going
to Mrs. Lovett's, whither we shall follow him at a more convenient
opportunity, but just now we have Sir Richard Blunt's enterprise to
treat of. Todd had no sooner got fairly out of sight, than Mr. Crotchet
emerged from the doorway in which he was concealed, and went a few paces
down Fleet Street, towards the Temple.--He soon met a man genteelly
dressed, who seemed to be sauntering along in an idle fashion.

"All's right, Fletcher," said Crotchet.

"Oh, is it?"

"Yes. Have you got that ere little article with you?"

"The bugle? Oh, yes."

"Mind you blows it then, if you sees Todd come home, and no gammon."

"Trust to me old fellow."

Without another word, Mr. Crotchet crossed over the road, and opened the
shop-door of the shoemaker. Now the face of Mr. Crotchet was not the
most engaging in the world, and when he looked in upon the shoemaker,
that industrious workman felt a momentary pang of alarm, and
particularly when Mr. Crotchet, imparting a horrible obliquity to his
vision, said--

"How is yer, old un?"

"Sir?" said the shoemaker.

"You couldn't show a fellow the way up to Smith's _hattic_, I supposes?"

"Smith--Smith?--Oh, dear me, that's the new lodger. I'll call him down
if you wait here."

"No occasion. I'll toddle up, my tulip. He's a relation o' mine, don't
you see the likeness atween us?--We was considered the handsomest pair
'o men as was in London at one time, and it sticks to us now, I can tell
you."

"If you wish, sir, to go up, instead of having Mr. Smith called down, of
course, sir, you can, as you are an old friend. Allow me to light you,
sir."

"Not the least occasion. Only tell me where it isn't, and I'll find out
where it is, old chap."

"It's the front attic."

"All's right. Don't be sich a hass as to be flaring away arter me, with
that ere double dip, I can find my way in _worserer_ places than this
here. All's right--easy does it."

To the surprise of the shoemaker, his mysterious visitor opened the
little door at the back of the shop, which led to the staircase, and in
a moment disappeared up them.

"Upon my life, this Mr. Smith," thought the shoemaker, "seems to have
some very strange connexions. He told me he knew nobody in London, and
then here comes one of the ugliest fellows, I think, I ever saw in all
my life, and claims acquaintance with him. What ought I to do?--Ought I
to tell Mrs. W. of it?"

At this moment Mrs. W. made her appearance from the mercer's, with the
ribbon that had tickled her feminine fancy--all smiles and sweetness.
The heart of the shoemaker died within him, for well he knew what
visitation he was likely to come in for, if anything connected with the
lodger turned out wrong.

"A-hem! a-hem! Well, my dear, have you got the ribbon?"

"Oh yes, to be sure, and a love it is--"

"Ah!--ah!"

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing, my dove. I was only thinking that it wasn't the ribbon that
makes folks look lovely, but the person who wears it. You would look
beautiful in any ribbon."

"Why, my dear, that may be very true, but still one ought to look as
well as one can, you know, for the credit of one's maker."

"Oh, yes, yes, but I was only thinking--"

"Thinking of what? Bless me, Mr. Wheeler, how mystifying you are
to-night, to be sure. What do you mean by this conduct? Was ever a woman
so pestered and tormented with a fool of a man, who looks like an owl in
an ivy bush for all the world, or a crow peeping into a marrowbone."

"My duck, how can you say so?"

"Duck indeed? Keep your ducks to yourself. Hoity toity. Duck, indeed.
You low good-for-nothing--"

"My dear, my dear. I was only thinking, and not in the least wishing to
offend."

"But you do offend me, you nasty insinuating, sneering wretch.--What
were you thinking about? Tell me this moment."

"Why, that a pretty silver-grey satin mantle would set off your figure
so well, that--"

"Oh, John!"

"That, though quarter-day is near at hand, I think you ought to have
one."

"Really, Jackey."

"Yes, my dear."

"What a man you are. Ah, Jackey, after all, though we have, like all
people, our little tiffs and wiffs and sniffs--after all, I say it,
perhaps, that should not say it, you are a dear, good, obliging--"

"Don't mention it."

"Yes, but--"

"No, don't. By-the-bye, do you know, Susey, that I begin to have my
suspicions--mind, I may be wrong, but I begin to have my suspicions, do
you know, that our attic lodger is, after all, no better than he should
be."

"Gracious!"

"Hush! hush! There has been a man here; so ugly--so--so--squintified, if
I may say so, that between you and me and the post, my dear, it's enough
to frighten any one to look at him, it is indeed.--But as for the
silver-grey satin, don't stint the quality for a sixpence or so."

"The wretch!"

"And take care to have plenty of rich trimming to it."

"The monster!"

"And have something pretty to match it, so that when you go to St.
Dunstan's next Sunday, all the folks will ask what fine lady from court
has come into the city out of curiosity to see the old church."

"Oh, Jackey."

"That's what I call," muttered Mr. Wheeler, "pouring oil upon the
troubled waters." He then spoke aloud, saying--"Now, my dear, it is your
judgment and advice I want. What shall we do in this case? for you
see--first of all, the new lodger denies knowing a soul, and then, in
half an hour, an old acquaintance calls upon him here."

The silver-grey satin--the flattering allusion to the probable opinion
of the people in St. Dunstan's Church on the next Sunday--the obscure
allusion to a something else to match it, and the appeal to her
judgment, all had the effect desired upon Mrs. Wheeler, who, dropping
entirely the hectoring tone, fell into her husband's views, and began
calmly and dispassionately, without abuse or crimination, to discuss the
merits, or rather the probable demerits, of the new lodger.

"I tell you, my dear, my opinion," said the lady. "As for stopping in
the house and not knowing who and what he is, I won't."

"Certainly not, my love."

"Then, Mr. W., the only thing to do, is for you and I to go up stairs,
and say that as I was out you did not know a Mr. Jones had spoken about
the lodging, but that, if he could give a reference in London, we would
still have him for a lodger."

"Very well. That will be only civil, and if he says he can't, but must
send to Cambridge--"

"Why then, my dear, you must say that he may stay till he writes, and
I'll be guided by his looks. If I give you a nudge, so, with my elbow,
you may consider that it's pretty right."

"Very well, my dove."




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.
                 SIR RICHARD PRIES INTO TODD'S SECRETS.


Crotchet soon reached the attic floor of the shoemaker's house, and
although in profound darkness, he managed, as he thought, to touch the
right door. Tap! tap! went Crotchet's knuckles, and as he did so he
followed a habit very general, when the knock is only a matter of
ceremony, and opened the door at the same moment. He popped his head
into a room where there was a light, and said--

"Here yer is."

A scream was the reply to him, and then Crotchet saw, by the state of
affairs there, that he had made a little mistake in the topography of
the attic landing. The attic in which he found himself, for he had
crossed the threshold, was in the occupation of an elderly gaunt-looking
female, who was comforting her toes by keeping them immersed in a pan of
water by the side of a little miserable fire, which was feebly
pretending to look cheerful in the little grate.

"Lor, mum!" said Crotchet. "Who'd a thought o' seeing of you?"

"Oh, you monster. You base man, what do you want here?"

"Nothink!"

"Be off with you, or else I'll call the _perlice_."

"Oh, I'm a going, mum. How do you bring it in, mum, in a general way?"

"Help! Murder!"

"Lord bless us, what a racket. Don't you go for to fancy, mum, that I
comed up these here attic stairs for to see you. Quite the rewerse,
mum."

"Then, pray who did you come to see, you big ugly monster you? The other
attic is empty. Oh, you base infidel. I believe I knows what men are by
this time."

"No doubt on it, mum. Howsomedever this here's the wrong door, I take
it. No harm done, mum. I wish you and your toes, mum, a remarkably good
evening."

"Crotchet," said a voice.

"Here yer is."

Sir Richard Blunt had been attentively listening for Crotchet, and when
he heard the screams of the old lady in the next attic, he opened the
door of his apartment, and looked out. He soon discovered what was
amiss, and called out accordingly.

"Bless us, who's that?"

"The Emperor o' Russia, mum," said Crotchet. "He's took that 'ere attic
next to you, cos he's heard so much o' the London chumbley pots, and he
wants to have a good look at them at his leisure."

With these words Mr. Crotchet left the old lady's attic, and closed the
door carefully, leaving her, no doubt, in a considerable state of
bewilderment. In another moment he was with the magistrate.

"Crotchet," said Sir Richard, "I thought I told you to do this thing as
quietly as you possibly could."

"Down as a hammer, sir."

"I think it is anything but down."

"Right as a trivet, sir, with a hextra leg. Lots o' fear, but no danger.
Now for it, Sir Richard. What lay is we to go on?"

It certainly never occurred to Sir Richard Blunt to hold any argument
with Mr. Crotchet. He had long since found out that he must, if he would
avail himself of his services--and for courage and fidelity he was
unequalled--put up with his eccentricities; so upon this occasion he
said no more about Crotchet's mistake, but, after a few moments' pause,
pointing to the attic door, he said--

"Secure it."

"All's right."

Crotchet took a curious little iron instrument from his pocket, and
secured it into the wall by the side of the door. It did not take him
more than a moment to do so, and then, fully satisfied of the efficacy
of his work, he said--

"Let 'em get over that if they can."

While he was so occupied. Sir Richard Blunt himself had opened the
window, and fastened it open securely.

"Now, Crotchet," he said, "look to your pistols."

"All's right, sir."

The magistrate carefully examined the priming of his own arms, and
seeing that all was right, he at once emerged from the attic through the
window on to the parapet of the house. He might have crept along the
gutter just within the parapet, but the gutter aforesaid was not exactly
in the most salubrious condition. Indeed, from its filthy state, one
might have fancied it to be peculiarly under the direction of the city
commissioners of sewers. Crotchet followed Sir Richard closely, and in a
moment or two they had traversed a sufficient portion of the parapet to
find themselves at the attic window of Todd's house. It would have been
next thing to a miracle if they had been seen in their progress, for the
roof was very dark coloured, and the night had fairly enough set in, so
that if any one had by chance looked up from the street below, they
would scarcely have discovered that there was anybody creeping along the
parapet. Now there was a slight creaking noise for about half a minute,
and then the window of Sweeney Todd's attic swung open.

"Come on," said Sir Richard, and he softly alighted in the apartment.
Crotchet followed him, and then the magistrate carefully closed the
window again, and left it in such a way, that a touch from within would
open it. Then they were in profound darkness, and as it was no part of
the policy of Sir Richard Blunt to run any unnecessary risks, he did not
move one inch from the place upon which he stood until he had lighted a
small hand lantern, which had a powerful reflector and a tin shade,
which in a moment could be passed over the glass, so as to hide the
light upon an emergency.

"Now, Crotchet," he said, "we shall see where we are."

"_Reether_," said Crotchet.

By holding the light some height up, they were able to command a good
view of the attic. It was a miserable looking room: the walls were in a
state of premature decay, and in several places lumps of mortar had
fallen from the ceiling, making a litter of broken plaster upon the
floor. It was entirely destitute of furniture, with the exception of an
old stump bedstead, upon which there lay what looked like a quantity of
old clothes.

"Safe enough," said Sir Richard.

"Stop!" said Crotchet.

"What's the matter?"

"There's something odd on the floor here. Don't you see as the dust has
got into a crevice as is bigger nor all the other crevices, and goes
right along this ways and then along that ways? Don't you move, sir.
I'll be down upon it in a minute."

Mr. Crotchet laid himself down flat upon the floor, and then crept on
until he came to that part of the flooring which had excited his
suspicions. As soon as he pressed upon it with both his hands it gave
way under them plainly, by the elevation of the other end of the three
boards of which this trap was composed, proclaiming that it was a
moveable portion of the floor, revolving or turning upon one of the
joists as a centre.

"Oh dear, how clever!" said Crotchet. "If Mr. Todd goes on a cutting
away his joists in this here way he'll bring his blessed old house down
with a run some day. How nice and handy, now, if any one was to step
upon here--they'd go down into the room below, and perhaps break their
blessed legs as they went."

[Illustration: The Secret Trap Discovered In Todd's House.]

"Escape the first for us!" said Sir Richard.

"Oh, lor, yes. Now this here Todd thinks, by putting this here man-trap
here, as he has _perwided_ again any accidents; but we ain't them 'ere
sort o' birds as is catched by chaff, not we. Why he must have spilted
his blessed ceiling down below to make this here sort of a jigamaree
concern."

"It's not a bad contrivance though, Crotchet. Its own weight, you see,
restores it to its place again, and so there's no trouble with it."

"Oh dear, no. It's a what I calls a self-acting catch-'em-who-can sort
o' machine. Yes, Sir Richard, I never did think that 'ere Todd was wery
green. He don't know quite so much as we know; but yet he's a rum 'un."

"No doubt of it. Do you think, Crotchet, there is anything else in this
attic to beware of?"

"Not likely; when he'd finished this here nice little piece of
handywork, I dare say he said to himself--'This will catch 'em,' and so
down stairs he toddled, and grinned like a monkey as has swallowed a
whole nut by haccident, and gived himself a pain in the side in
consekence. 'That'll catch 'em,' says he."

Mr. Crotchet seemed so much amused at the picture he drew to himself of
the supposed exultation of Todd, that for some moments he did nothing
but laugh. The reader must not suppose, however, that in the
circumstances of peril in which they were, he indulged in a regular "Ha!
ha!"--quite the contrary. He had a mode of laughing under such
circumstances that was entirely his own, and which, while it made no
noise, shook his huge frame as though some commotion had taken sudden
possession of it, and the most ridiculous part of the process was the
alarming suddenness with which he would become preternaturally serious
again. But Sir Richard Blunt knew his peculiarities, and paid no
attention to them, unless they very much interfered with business.

"We must not waste time. Come on, Crotchet."

Sir Richard walked to the door of the attic and tried it. It was as fast
as though it had been part of the wall itself.

"So--so," he said. "Master Todd has taken some precautions against being
surprised from the top of his house. He has nailed up this door as
surely as any door was ever nailed up."

"Has he really, though?"

"Yes. Quick, Crotchet. You have your tools about you, I suppose."

"Never fear," said Crotchet. "I'm the _indiwedal_ as never forgets
nothink, and if I don't have the middle panel out o' this door a'most as
soon as look at it, it's only cos it takes more time."

With this philosophical and indisputable remark, Mr. Crotchet stooped
down before the door, and taking various exquisitely made tools from his
pocket, he began to work at the door. He knocked nearly noiselessly, and
it looked like something little short of magic to see how the panel was
forced out of the door without any of the hammering and flustering which
a carpenter would have made of it.

"All's right," he said. "If we can't creep through here, we are bigger
than I think we is."

"That will do. Hush!"

They both listened attentively, for Sir Richard thought he heard a faint
noise from the lower part of the house. As, however, five minutes of
attentive listening passed away, and no repetition of it occurred, they
thought it was only some one of those accidental sounds which will at
times be heard in all houses whether occupied or not. Crotchet took the
lead by creeping clearly enough through the opening that he had made in
the door of the attic, and Sir Richard followed him. They were both,
now, at the head of the staircase, and Sir Richard held up the lantern
so as to have a good look around him. The walls looked damp and
neglected. There were two other doors opening from that landing, but
neither of them was fastened, so that they entered the rooms easily.
They took care, though, not to go beyond the threshold for fear of
accidents, although it was very unlikely that Todd would take the
trouble to construct a trap-door in any other attic than the one which
was so easily accessible from the parapet.

"Old clothes--old clothes!" said Crotchet. "There seems to be nothing
else in these rooms."

"So it would appear," said Sir Richard.

He lifted up some of the topmost of a heap of garments upon the floor,
and a cloud of moths flew upwards in confusion.

"There's the toggery," said Mr. Crotchet, "of the _smugged 'uns_!"

"You really think so."

"Knows it."

"Well, Crotchet, I don't think from what I know myself that we shall
disagree about Todd's guilt. The grand thing is to discover how, and in
what way he is guilty."

"Just so. I'm quite sure we have seed all as there is to see up here, so
suppose we toddle down stairs now, sir. There's, perhaps, quite a lot o'
wonders and natur', and art, down below."

"Stop a bit. Hold the lamp."

Crotchet did so, while Sir Richard took from his pocket a pair of thick
linsey-woolsey stockings, and carefully drew them on over his boots, for
the purpose of deadening the sound of his footsteps; and then he held
the light, while Mr. Crotchet, who was similarly provided with
linsey-woolseys, went through the same process. After this, they moved
like spectres, so perfectly noiseless were their footsteps upon the
stairs. Sir Richard went first, while Crotchet now carried the light,
holding it sufficiently high that the magistrate could see the stairs
before him very well, as he proceeded. It was quite evident, from the
state of those stairs, as regarded undisturbed dust, that they had not
been ascended for a considerable time; and indeed, Todd, considering the
top of his house as perfectly safe after the precautions he had taken,
did not trouble himself to visit it. Our adventurers reached the landing
upon the second floor in perfect safety; and after giving a few minutes
more to the precautionary measure of listening, they opened the first
door that presented itself to the observation, and entered the room.
They both paused in astonishment, for such a miscellaneous collection of
matters as was in this room, could only have been expected to be met
with in the shop of a general dealer. Several chairs and tables were
loaded with wearing apparel of all kinds and conditions. The corners of
the room were literally crowded with mobs of swords, walking sticks, and
umbrellas; while a countless heap of hats lay upon the floor in
disorder. You could not have stepped into that room for miscellaneous
personal appointments of one sort or another; and Mr. Crotchet and Sir
Richard Blunt trod upon the hats as they walked across the floor, from
sheer inability to get out of the way.

"Well," said Crotchet, "if so be as shaving should go out of fashion,
Todd could set up a clothier's shop, and not want for stock to begin
with."

"I can imagine," muttered the magistrate to himself, "what a trouble and
anxiety all these things must be to Todd, and woollen goods are so
difficult to burn. Crotchet, select some of the swords, and look if
there are maker's names upon the blades."

While Crotchet was preparing this order. Sir Richard was making a hasty
but sufficiently precise examination of the room.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX.
                        THE MYSTERIOUS CUPBOARD.


"Here they are," said Crotchet. "Some of these are worth something."

"Get a cane or two, likewise."

"All's right, sir. I tell you what it is, sir. If there's such things as
ghosts in the world, I wonder how this Todd can sleep o' nights, for he
must have a plaguy lot of 'em about his bed of a night."

"Perhaps he satisfied himself upon that head, Crotchet, before he began
his evil practices, for all we know; but let us make our way into
another room, for I think we have seen all there is to see in this one."

"Not a doubt of it. It's only a kind of store-room, this, and from the
size of it, I should say it ain't the largest on this floor."

Sir Richard walked out of the room on to the landing place. All was
perfectly still in the barber's house, and as he had heard nothing of
the bugle sound in Fleet-street, he felt quite satisfied that Todd had
not returned. It was a great thing, in all his daring exploits in
discovering criminals, and successfully ferreting out their haunts, that
he (Sir Richard) could thoroughly depend upon his subordinates. He knew
they were not only faithful but brave. He knew that, let what might
happen, they would never leave him in the lurch. Hence, in the present
instance, he felt quite at his ease in the house of Todd, so long as he
did not hear the sound of the bugle. Of course, personal danger he did
not consider, for he knew he was, if even he had been alone, more than a
match for Todd; but what he wanted was, not to overcome Sweeney Todd,
but to find out exactly what were his practices. He could, upon the
information he already had, have walked into Todd's shop at any time,
and have apprehended him, but that would not have answered. What he
wanted to do was to

    "Pluck out the heart of his mystery,"

and, in order to do that, it was not only necessary that Todd should be
at large, but that he should have no hint that such a person as he, Sir
Richard Blunt, had his eyes wide open to his actions and manoeuvres.
Hence was it that, in this examination of the house, he wished to keep
himself so secret, and free from any observation. There were three rooms
upon the second floor of Todd's house, and the very next one they met
with, was the one immediately beneath the trap in the floor of the
attic. A glance at the ceiling enabled them easily to perceive it. This
room was larger than the other considerably, and in it were many boxes
and chests, as well as in the centre an immense old-fashioned
counting-house desk, with six immense flaps to it, three upon each side,
while a brass railing went along the middle.

"Ah!" said Sir Richard, "here will be something worth the examining, I
hope."

"Let's take the cupboards first," said Crotchet. "There are two here,
and as they are the first we have seen, let's look at 'em, Sir Richard.
I never likes to be in a strange room long, without a peep in the
cupboard."

"Very well, Crotchet. Look in that one to the left, while I look in this
one to the right."

Sir Richard opened a cupboard door to the right of the fire-place in
this room, while Crotchet opened one to the left.

"More clothes," said Sir Richard. "What's in yours, Crotchet?"

"Nothing at all. Yet stay. There's a something high up here. I don't
know what it is, but I'll try and reach it if I can."

Crotchet went completely into the cupboard, but he had no sooner done
so, than Sir Richard Blunt heard a strange crushing sound, and then all
was still.

"Hilloa! What's that, Crotchet?"

He hastily stepped to the cupboard. The door had swung close. It was
evidently hung upon its hinges in a manner to do so. With his disengaged
hand, the magistrate at once pulled it open. Crotchet was gone. The
astonishment of Sir Richard Blunt for a moment was excessive. There was
the flooring of the cupboard perfectly safe, but no Crotchet. Nothing to
his eyes had looked so like a magical disappearance as this, and with
the trap in his hand, he stood while any one might have counted twenty,
completely motionless and transfixed by astonishment. Starting then from
this lethargic condition, he drew a pistol from his pocket, and rushed
to the door of the room. At this instant, he heard the bugle sound
clearly and distinctly in the street. Before the echo of the sound had
died away, the magistrate was upon the landing-place outside the door of
the second floor. He listened intently, and heard some one below
coughing. It was not the cough of Crotchet. What was he to do? If he did
not make a signal to the officers in the street that all was safe, the
house would soon be stormed, and, for all he knew, that might ensure the
destruction of Crotchet, instead of saving him. For a moment, the
resolution to go down the staircase at all hazards and face Todd--for he
had no doubt but that he had come home--possessed him, but a moment's
reflection turned the scale of thought in another direction. If the
officers, not finding him make a signal that he was safe, did attack the
house, they would not do so for some minutes. It was their duty not to
be precipitate. He leant on the balustrade, and listened with an
intentness that was perfectly painful. He heard the cough again from
quite the lower part of the house, and then he became aware that some
one was slowly creeping up the stairs. He had placed the slide over the
bull's eye of his little lamp, so that all was darkness, but he heard
the breathing of the person who was coming up towards him. He shrunk
back close to the wall, determined to seize, and with an iron hand, any
one who should reach the landing. Suddenly, from quite the lower part of
the building, he heard the cough again. The thought, then, that it must
be Crotchet who was coming up, impressed itself upon him, but he would
not speak. In a few moments some one reached the landing, and stretching
out his right arm, Sir Richard caught whoever it was, and said in a
whisper--

"Any resistance will cost you your life."

"Crotchet it is," said the new comer.

"Ah, how glad I am it is you!"

"Reether. Hush. The old 'un is below. Ain't I shook a bit. It's a
precious good thing as my bones is in the blessed habit o' holding on,
one of 'em to the rest and all the rest to one, or else I should have
tumbled to bits."

"Hush! hush!"

"Oh, he's a good way off. That 'ere cupboard has got a descending floor
with ropes and pullies, so down I went and was rolled out into a room
below and up went the bit of flooring again. I was very nearly startled
a little."

"Nearly?"

"Reether, but here I is. I got out and crept up stairs as soon as I
could, cos, says I, the governor will wonder what the deuce has become
of me."

"I did, indeed."

"Just as I thought. Sir Richard, just listen to me! I've got a fancy for
Todd."

"A fancy for Todd?"

"Yes, and I want to stay here a few hours--yes, go and let them as is
outside know all's right, and leave me here, I think somehow I shall
like to be in this crib alone with Todd for an hour or two. You have got
other business to see to, you know, so just leave me here; and mind yer,
if I don't get here by six in the morning, just consider as he's got the
better of me."

"No, Crotchet, I cannot."

"Can't what?"

"Consent to leave you here alone."

"Bother! what's the row, and where's the danger, I should like to know?
Who's Todd? Who am I? Gammon!"

Sir Richard shook his head, although Crotchet could not very well see
him shake it, and after a pause he added--

"I don't suppose exactly that there is much danger, Crotchet, but, at
all events, I don't like it said that I brought you into this place and
then left you here."

"Bother!"

"You go and leave me."

"A likely joke that. No, I tell yer what it is, Sir Richard. You knows
me and I knows you, so what does it matter what other folks say?
Business is business I hope, and don't you believe that I'm going to be
such a flat as to throw away my life upon such a fellow as Todd. I think
I can do some good by staying here; if I can't I'll come away, but I
don't think, in either case, that Todd will see me. If he does I shall,
perhaps, be forced to nab him, and that, after all, is the worst that
can come of it."

"Well, Crotchet, you shall have your own way."

"Good."

"I will return to the attic as soon as I conveniently can, and, let what
will happen to you, remember that you are not deserted."

"I knows it."

"Good bye. Take care of yourself, old friend."

"I means it."

"I should be indeed afflicted if anything were to happen to you."

"Gammon."

Sir Richard left him his own pistols, in addition to the pair which he,
Crotchet, always had about him, so that he was certainly well-armed, let
what would happen to him in that house of Sweeney Todd's, which had now
become something more than a mere object of suspicion to the police.
Well, they knew Todd's guilt--it was the mode in which he was guilty
only that still remained a mystery. The moment Sir Richard Blunt reached
the attic again, he held his arm out at full length from the window, and
waved to and fro the little lantern as a signal to the officers in the
street that he was safe. This done, he would not return to the room he
had hired of the bootmaker, but he resolved to wait about ten minutes
longer in case anything should happen in the house below that might
sound alarming. After that period of time, he resolved upon leaving for
an hour or two, but he, of course, would not do so without apprising his
officers of Crotchet's situation. During the time that had been passed
by Crotchet and Sir Richard Blunt in Sweeney Todd's house, the shoemaker
and his wife had had an adventure which created in their minds abundance
of surprise. It will be recollected that the shoemaker's wife had
decided upon what was to be done regarding the new lodger--namely, that
under the pretence that a Mr. Jones was a more satisfactory lodger, he
was to be asked to be so good as to quit the attic he had so strangely
taken. The arrival of Mr. Crotchet with so different a story from that
told by Sir Richard Blunt certainly had the effect of engendering many
suspicions in the minds of Sir Richard's new landlord and landlady.

"Well, my dear," said the shoemaker, "if you are willing to come up
stairs, I will say what you wish to this man, particularly as his
pretended friend don't seem to be coming down stairs again."

"Very well, my dear; I'll take the kitchen poker and follow you, and
while I am behind you, if I think he is a pleasant man, you know, and we
had better let him stay, I will give you a slight poke."

"A-hem! Thank you--yes."

Armed with the poker, the lady of the mansion followed her husband up
the staircase, and perhaps we may fairly say that curiosity was as
strong a feeling with her as any other in the business. To tell the
truth, the shoemaker did not half like the job; but what will a man, who
is under proper control at home, not do to keep up the shallow treaty of
peace which his compliance produces between him and his better half? Is
there anything which a hen-pecked husband dares say he will not do, when
the autocrat of his domestic hearth bids him do it? Up--up the long dark
staircase they went! Our ancestors, as one of their pieces of wisdom,
had a knack of making steep dark staircases; and, to tell the truth,
there are many modern architects equally ingenious. At length the attic
landing was reached. The shoemaker knew the localities of his house
better than to make such a mistake as Crotchet had done; so the old
lady, with her feet in the pan of water, was saved such another
interruption as had already taken place into her peaceful domains.

"Now, my dear, knock boldly," said the lady of the mansion. "Knock like
a man."

"Yes, my love."

The shoemaker tapped at the door with about the energy of a fly. The
soft appeal produced no effect whatever, and the lady growing impatient,
then poised the poker, and dealt the door a blow which induced her
husband to start aside, lest the lodger should open it quickly, and rush
out in great wrath. All was profoundly still, however; and then they
tried the lock, and found it fast.

"He's gone to bed," said the shoemaker.

"He can't," said the lady, "for there are no sheets on the bed. Besides,
they have not both gone to bed. I tell you what it is. There's some
mystery in this that I should like to find out. Now, all the keys of all
the attics are alike. Just wait here, and I'll borrow Mrs.
Macconikie's."

The shoemaker waited in no small amount of trepidation, while this
process of key-borrowing from the old lady who enjoyed a pan of water,
took place upon the part of his wife.




                              CHAPTER XL.
                     CROTCHET ASTONISHES MR. TODD.


The key was soon procured, but it will be recollected that Crotchet had
fastened the door rather too securely for it to be opened by any such
ordinary implement as a key, and so disappointment was the portion of
the shoemaker's wife.

"Don't you think, my love," said the shoemaker, "that it will be just as
well to leave this affair until the morning, before taking any further
notice of it?"

"And pray, then, am I to sleep all night, if I don't know the rights of
it, I should like to know? Perhaps, if you can tell me that, you are a
little wiser than I think you. Marry, come up!"

"Oh, well, I only--"

"You only! Then only don't. That's the only favour I ask of you, sir, is
to only don't."

What extraordinary favour this was, the lady did not condescend to
explain any more particulars, but it was quite enough for the husband to
understand that a storm was brewing, and to become humble and submissive
accordingly.

"Well, my dear, I'm sure I only wish you to do just what you like;
that's all, my dear, I'm sure."

"Very good."

After this, she made the most vigorous efforts to get into the attic,
and if any one had been there--which at that juncture there was
not--they might truly have asked "Who's that knocking at the door?"
Finding that all her efforts were ineffectual, she took to peeping
through the key-hole, but nothing was to be seen; and then, for the
first time, the idea struck her that there was something supernatural
about the business, and in a few moments this notion gained sufficient
strength to engender some lively apprehensions.

"I tell you what," she said to her husband, "if you don't fetch a
constable at once, and have the door opened, and see all about, I'm
afraid--indeed I'm quite sure--I shall be very ill."

"Oh, dear--oh, dear."

"It's of no use your standing here and saying 'Oh, dear,' like a great
stupid as you are--always was and always will be. Go for a constable, at
once."

"A constable?"

"Yes, There's Mr. Otton, the beadle of St. Dunstan's, lives opposite, as
you well know, and he's a constable. Run over the way and fetch him,
this minute."

She began hastily to descend the stairs, and the shoemaker followed her,
remonstrating, for the idea of fetching a constable, and making him and
his house the talk of the whole neighbourhood, was by no means a
proposition that met with his approval. The lady was positive, however,
and Mr. Otton, the beadle of St. Dunstan's, was brought from over the
way, and the case stated to him at length.

"_Conwulsions!_" exclaimed Otton, "what can I do?"

"_Burst_ open the door," said the lady.

"_Burst_ a door open, mum! What is you a thinking on? Why, that's
contrary to _Habus Corpus_, mum, and all that sort of thing.
Conwulsions, mum! you mustn't do it. But I tell you what, now, will be
the thing."

Here Mr. Otton put his finger to the side of his nose, and looked so
cunning that you would hardly have believed it possible.

"What?--what?"

"Why, suppose, mum, we ask Mr. Todd, next door, to give us leave to go
up into his attic, and get out at the window and look in at yours, mum?"

"That'll do. Run in--"

"Me!" cried the shoemaker. "Oh, M--Mr. Todd is a strange man--a very
strange man--not at all a neighbourly sort of man, and I don't like to
go to him.--I won't go, that's flat--unless, my love, you particularly
wish it."

"Conwulsions!" cried the beadle. "Ain't I a-going with you? Ain't I a
constabulary force, I should like to know? Conwulsions! What is yer
afeard on? Come on. Lor, what's the meaning o' that, I wonders, now; I
should just like to take that ere fellow up. Whoever heard of a horn
being blowed at such a rate, in the middle o' Fleet-street, afore,
unless it was somethin' as consarned the parish? Conwulsions! it's
contrary to _Habus Corpus_, it is. Is me a constabulary force, or is me
not?"

This was the bugle sound which warned Sir Richard Blunt and his friend
Crotchet that Sweeney Todd had returned to his shop; and, in fact, while
this very conversation was going on at the shoemaker's, Todd had lit the
lamp in his shop, and actually opened it for business again, as the
evening was by no means very far advanced. Mr. Otton went to the door,
and looked about for the audacious bugle player, but he was not to be
seen; so he returned to the back parlour of the shoemaker, uttering his
favourite expletive of "Conwulsions" very frequently.

"Now, if you is ready," he said, "I is; so let's come at once, and speak
to Mr. Todd. He may be a strange man, but for all that, he knows, I
_dessay_, what's proper respect to a _beetle_."

With this strange transformation of his own title upon his lips, Mr.
Otton stalked on rather majestically, as he thought, to the street, and
thence to Todd's shop door, with the shoemaker following him. The gait
of the latter expressed reluctance, and there was a dubious expression
upon his face, which was quite amusing to behold.

"Really, Mr. Otton," he said, "don't you think, after all, it would be
better to leave this affair alone till the morning? We can easily tell
my wife, you know, that Mr. Todd won't let us into his attic. That must
satisfy her, for what can she say to it?"

"Sir," said the beadle, "when you call in the _constabullary_ force, you
must do just what they say, or lasteways you acts contrary to _Habus
Corpuses_. Come on. Conwulsions! is we to be brought over the street,
and then is we to do nothing to go down to prosperity?"

The beadle uttered these words with such an air of pomposity and
importance that the shoemaker, who had a vague idea that _Habus Corpus_
was some fearful engine of the law at the command of all its
administrators, no longer offered any opposition, but, as meekly as any
lamb, followed Mr. Otton into Sweeney Todd's shop. The door yielded to a
touch, and Mr. Otton presented his full rubicund countenance to the gaze
of Sweeney Todd, who was at the further end of the shop, as though he
had just come from the parlour at the back of it, or was just going
there. He did not at first see the shoemaker, who was rather obscured by
the portly person of the beadle, and Todd's first idea was, the most
natural one in the world, namely, that the beadle came upon an emergency
to be shaved. Giving him an hideous leer, Todd said--

"A fine night for a clean shave."

"Werry. In course, Mr. T., you is the best judge o' that 'ere, but I
does for myself."

As he spoke, Mr. Otton rubbed his chin, to intimate that it was to his
shaving himself that he alluded just then.

"Hair cut?" said Todd, giving a snap to the blades of a large pair of
scissors, that made Mr. Otton jump again, and nearly induced the
shoemaker to run out of the shop into the street.

"No," said the beadle; and taking off his hat, he felt his hair, as
though to satisfy himself that it was all there, just as usual. "No."

Todd looked as though he would have shaved him with extreme pleasure,
and advancing a few steps, he added--

"Then what is it that you bring your wieldy carcase here for, you gross
lump of stupidity? Ha! ha! ha!"

"What? Conwulsions!"

"Pho!--Pho! Can't you take a joke, Mr. Otton? I know you well enough.
It's my funny way to call people, whom I admire very much, all the hard
names I can think of."

"Is it?"

"Oh, dear, yes. I thought you and all my neighbours knew that well
enough. I'm one of the drollest dogs alive. That I am. Won't you sit
down?"

"Well, Mr. Todd, a joke may be a joke." The beadle looked very
sententious at this discovery. "But you have the oddest way of poking
your fun at any one that ever I heard of; but, I comes to you now as a
respectable parishioner, to--"

"Oh," said Todd, putting his hands, very deliberately into his pockets,
"how much?"

"It ain't anything to pay. It's a mere trifle. I just want to go up to
your front attic, and--"

"What?"

"Your front attic, and get out of the window to look into the front
attic next door. We won't trouble you if you will oblige us with a
candle. That's all."

Todd advanced two steps further towards the beadle and looked peeringly
in his face. All the suspicious qualities of his nature rose up in
alarm. Every feeling of terror regarding the instability of his
position, and the danger by which he was surrounded, rushed upon him. At
once he conjectured that danger was approaching him, and that in this
covert manner the beadle was intent upon getting into the house, for the
purpose of searching it to his detriment. As the footpad sees in each
bush an officer, so, in the most trivial circumstances, even the acute
intellect of Sweeney Todd saw dangers, and rumours of dangers, which no
one but himself could have had the remotest idea of. He glared upon the
beadle with positive ferocity, and so much affected was Otton by that
lynx-like observation of Sweeney Todd's, that he stepped aside and
disclosed that he was not alone. If anything could have confirmed Todd
in his suspicions that there was a dead-set at him, it was finding that
the beadle was not alone. And yet the shoemaker was well known to him.
But what will lull such suspicion as Sweeney Todd had in his mind? Once
engendered, it was like the jealousy that--

    "Makes the meat it feeds on!"

He advanced, step by step, glaring upon the beadle and upon the
shoemaker. Reaching up his hand, he suddenly turned the lamp that hung
from the ceiling clear round, so that, in lieu of its principal light
falling upon him, it fell upon the faces of those who had paid him so
unceremonious a visit.

"Lawks!" said the beadle.

"Excuse us, Mr. Todd," said the shoemaker, "I assure you we only
meant--"

"What?" thundered Todd. Then suddenly softening his voice, he
added--"You are very welcome here indeed. Pray what do you want?"

"Why, sir," said Otton, "you must know that this gentleman has a
lodger."

"A what?"

"A lodger, sir, and so you see that's just the case. You understand that
this lodger--lor, Mr. Todd, this is your neighbour the shoemaker, you
know. The front attic, you know, and all that sort of thing. After this
explanation, I hope you'll lend us a candle at once, Mr. Todd, and let
us up to the attic."

Todd shaded his eyes with his hands, and looked yet more earnestly at
the beadle.

"Why, Mr. Otton," he said, "indeed you do want a shave."

"A shave?"

"Yes, Mr. Otton, I have a good razor here that will go over your chin
like a piece of butter. Only take a seat, sir, and if you, neighbour,
will go home comfortably to your own fireside, I will send for you when
Mr. Otton is shaved."

"But really," said the beadle, rubbing his chin, "I was shaved this
morning, and as I do for myself always, you see, why I don't think I
require. Conwulsions! Mr. Todd, why do you look at a man so? Remember
the _Habus Corpus_. That's what we call the _paladermius_ of the British
Constitution, you know."

By this time the beadle had satisfied himself that he did not at all
require shaving, and turning to the shoemaker, he said--

"Why don't you be shaved?"

"Well, I don't care if I do, and perhaps, in the meantime you, Mr.
Otton, will go up to the attic, and take a peep into the next one, and
see if my lodger is up or in bed, or what the deuce has become of him.
It's a very odd thing, Mr. Todd, that a man should take one's attic, and
then disappear without coming down stairs."

"Disappear without coming down stairs?" said Todd.

"Yes, and my wife says--"

Todd made an impatient gesture.

"Gentlemen, I will look in my attic myself. The fact is, that the
flooring is rather out of order, and unless you know exactly where to
step you will be apt to fall through a hole into the second floor."

"The deuce you are!" said Otton.

"Yes; so I would not advise either of you to make the attempt. Just
remain there, and I'll go at once."

The proposition suited both parties, and Mr. Todd immediately passed
through a door at the back of his shop, which he immediately closed
behind him again. Instead of going up stairs, however, he slid aside a
small opening in the panel of this door, and placed his ear to it. "If
people say anything impudent, it is the moment they are free from the
company that has held them in check," was one of Sweeney Todd's maxims.
His first notion that the beadle and the shoemaker had come covertly to
search his house, had given way a little, and he wanted to convince
himself of the innocency or the reverse of their intentions, before he
put himself to any further trouble.

"I don't like it," said the shoemaker.

"Like what? Conwulsions! what don't you like?"

"Intruding upon Mr. Todd. What does he care about my lodgers? It ain't
as if he let any of his own house, and had a fellow feeling with us."

"Werry good," said the beadle, "but you send for me, and you ask me
what's best, and I tell yer that _Habus Corpus_, and one thing and
another, what I advised was the only thing, that was to get into Mr.
Todd's attic, and then get on the parapet and into yours. But if so be
as there's holes in Mr. Todd's attic, that will alter the affair, you
know."

"Fool--fool!" muttered Todd. "After all, they only come upon their own
twaddling affairs, and I was idiot enough to suspect such muddy pated
rascals."

In an instant he was in the shop again.

"Nobody there, gentlemen; I have looked into the attic, and there's
nobody there."

"Well, I'm very much obliged to you, Mr. Todd," said the shoemaker, "for
taking so much trouble. I'll go, and rather astonish my wife, I think."

"Conwulsions!" said the beadle. "It's an odd thing, but you know, Mr.
Todd, _Habus Corpus_ must have his way."




                              CHAPTER XLI.
                             TODD'S VISION.


When they had left, Todd remained for some minutes in an attitude of
thought.

"Is this an accident?" he said, "or is it but the elaboration of some
deep design to entrap me. What am I to think?"

Todd was an imaginative man quite. He was just the individual to think,
and think over the affair until he made something of it, very different
from what it really was, and yet there was some hope that the matter was
no more than what it appeared to be, by the character of the parties who
had come upon the mission. If anything serious had come to the ears of
the authorities, he thought, that surely two such people as the beadle
of St. Dunstan's, and his neighbour the shoemaker, would not be employed
to unravel such a mystery. He sat down in an arm chair and rested his
head upon his hand, and while he was in that attitude the door of his
shop opened, and a man in the dress of a carter made his appearance.

"Be this Mister Todd's?"

"Well," said Todd, "what then?"

"Why, then, this be for him like. It's a letter, but larning waren't
much i' the fashion in my young days, so I can't read what's on it."

Todd stretched out his hand. An instant examination showed him it bore
the Peckham post-mark.

"Ah!" he muttered, "from Fogg. Thank you, my man, that will do. That
will do. What do you wait for?"

"Please to remember the carter, your honour!"

Todd looked daggers at him, and slowly handed out twopence, which the
man took with a very ill grace.

"What," said Todd, "would you charge me more for carrying a letter than
King George the Third does, you extortionate rascal?"

The carter gave a nod.

"Get out with you, or by--"

Todd snatched up a razor, and the carter was off like a shot, for he
really believed, from the awful looks of Todd, that his life was not
worth a minute's purchase. Todd opened the letter with great
gravity.--It contained the following words:--

    "DEAR SIR,"

    "The lad, T. R., I grieve to say, is no more. Let us hope he is gone
    where the weary are at rest, and where there is neither sin nor
    sorrow.

    "I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,

    "JACOB B. FOGG."

"Humph!" said Todd.

He held the letter in the flame of the lamp until it fell a piece of
airy tinder at his feet.

"Humph!" he repeated, and that humph was all that he condescended to say
of poor Tobias Ragg, whom the madhouse-keeper had thought proper to say
was dead; hoping that Todd might never be undeceived, for the barber was
a good customer.

If, however, Tobias should turn up to the confusion of Fogg and of Todd,
what could the latter do for the deceit that had been practised upon
him?--literally nothing.

"No sooner," said Todd, "does one cloud disappear from my route than
another takes its place. What can that story mean about the attic next
door? It sounds to my ears strange and portentous. What am I to think of
it?"

He rose and paced his shop with rapid strides. At length he paused as
though he had come to a determination.

"The want of a boy is troublesome to me," he said. "I must get one, but
for the present this must suffice."

He wrote upon a small slip of paper the words--"Gone to the Temple--will
return shortly." He then, by the aid of a wafer, affixed this
announcement to the upper part of the half-glass door leading into his
shop. Locking this door securely on the inside, and starting a couple of
bolts into their sockets, he lit a candle and left his shop. With a
stealthy, cat-like movement, Todd passed through the room immediately
behind his business apartment, and opening another door he made his way
towards the staircase. Then he paused a moment. He thought some sound
from above had come upon his ears, but he was not quite sure. To
suspect, however, was with such a man as Todd to be prepared for the
worst, and accordingly he went back to the room behind his shop again,
and from a table-drawer he took a knife, such as is used by butchers in
their trade, and firmly clutching it in his right hand, while he carried
the candle in his left, he once more approached the staircase.

"I do not think," he said, "that for nine years now any mortal
footsteps, but my own, have trod upon these stairs or upon the flooring
of the rooms above. Woe be to those who may now attempt to do so. Woe, I
say, be to them, for their death is at hand."

These words were spoken in a deep hollow voice, that sounded like tones
from a sepulchre, as they came from the lips of that man of many crimes.
To give Todd his due, he did not seem to shrink from the unknown and
dimly appreciated danger that might be up stairs in his house. He was
courageous, but it was not the high-souled courage that nerves a man to
noble deeds. No, Sweeney Todd's courage was that of hate--hatred to the
whole human race, which he considered, with a strange inconsistency, had
conspired against him; whereas he had been the one to place an
impassable barrier between himself and the amenities of society. He
ascended the stairs with great deliberation. When he reached the landing
upon the first floor, he cast his eyes suspiciously about him, shading
the light as he did so with his hand--that same hand that held the
knife, the shadow of which fell upon the wall in frightful proportions.

"All is still," he said. "Is fancy, after all, only playing me such
tricks as she might have played me twenty years ago? I thought I was too
old for such freaks of the imagination."

Todd did not suspect that there was a second period in his life, when
the mental infirmities of his green youth might come back to him, with
many superadded horrors accumulated, with a consciousness of guilt. He
slowly approached a door and pushed it open, saying as he did so--

"No--no--no. Above all things, I must not be superstitious. If I were
so, into what a world of horrors might I not plunge. No--no, I will not
people the darkness with horrible phantasies, I will not think that it
is possible that men with

    "Twenty murders on their heads,"

can revisit this world to drive those who have done them to death with
shrieking madness--this world do I say? There is no other. Bah! Priests
may talk, and the weak-brained fools who gape at what they do not
understand, may believe them, but when man dies--when the electric
condition that has imputed to his humanity what is called life, flies,
he is indeed

    "Dust to dust!"

Ha! ha! I have lived as I will die, fearing nothing and believing
nothing."

As he uttered those words--words which found no real echo in his heart,
for at the bottom of it lay a trembling belief in, and a dread of the
great God that rules all things, and who is manifest in the meanest
seeming thing that crawls upon the earth--he entered one of the rooms
upon that floor, and glanced uneasily around him. All was still. There
were trunks--clothes upon chairs, and a vast amount of miscellaneous
property in this room, but nothing in the shape of a human being. Todd's
spirits rose, and he held the long knife more carelessly than he had
done.

"Pho! pho!" he said. "I do, indeed, at times make myself the slave of a
disturbed fancy. Pho! pho! I will no more listen to vague sounds,
meaning nothing; but wrapping myself up in my consciousness of having
nothing to fear, I will pursue my course, hideous though it may be."

He turned and took his way towards the landing place of the staircase
again. He was now carrying both the light and the knife rather
carelessly, and everybody knows that when a candle is held before a
person's face, that but little indeed can be seen in the hazy vapour
that surrounds it. So it was with Todd. He had got about two paces from
the door, when a strange consciousness of something being in his way
came over him. He immediately raised his hand--that hand that still
carried the knife, to shade the light, and then, horror! horror! He saw
standing upon the landing a figure attired in faded apparel, whose face
was dabbled in blood, and the stony eyes which were fixed upon the face
of Todd, with so awful an expression, that had the barber's heart been
made of much more flinty materials than it was, he could not have
resisted the terrors of that awful moment. With a shriek that echoed
through the house, Todd fell upon the landing. The light rolled from
stair to stair until it was finally extinguished, and all was darkness.

[Illustration: Sweeney Todd Astonished By Crotchet, The Bow-Street
Officer.]

"Good," said Crotchet, for it was he who had enacted the ghost. "Good!
I'm blessed if I didn't think that ere would nail him. These sort o'
chaps are always on the look-out for something or another to be
frightened at, and you have only to show yourself to put 'em almost out
of their seven senses. It was a capital idea that of me to cut my finger
a little, and get some blood to smear over my face. It's astonishing
what a long way a little drop will go, to be sure. I dare say it makes
me look precious rum."

Mr. Crotchet was quite right regarding the appearance which the blood,
smeared over his face, gave to him. It made him look perfectly hideous,
and any one whose conscience was not--

    "With injustice corrupted!"

might well have been excused for a cold chill, and, perchance, even a
swoon, like Sweeney Todd's, at his appearance.

"I rather think," added Crotchet, "that's a settler; so I'll just take
the liberty, old fellow, of lighting your candle again, and then
_mizzling_, for I don't somehow think much good is to be done in this
crib just now."

By the aid of his phosphorus match Crotchet soon succeeded in
re-illumining the candle, which he found on a mat in the passage; but
notwithstanding his opinion that he had seen about as much as there was
to see in Todd's house, he, when he had the candle alight, thought he
might just as well peep into the parlour immediately behind the shop,
before going up-stairs again. The door offered no opposition, for Todd
had certainly not expected any one down stairs, and Mr. Crotchet found
himself in the parlour about as soon as he had formed the wish to be
there. This parlour was perfectly crammed with furniture, and all of the
bureau kind, that is to say, large shapeless looking pieces of mahogany,
with no end of drawers. Crotchet made an attempt at several before he
found one that yielded to his efforts to open it, and that only did so
because the hasp into which the lock was shot had given way, and no
longer held it close. This drawer was full of watches.

"Humph!" said Crotchet, "Todd ought to know the time of day certainly,
and no mistake. Ah, these ere machines, if they had tongues now, I
rather think, could tell a tale or two. Howsomedever, I'll pocket some
of 'em."

Mr. Crotchet put about a dozen watches in his pocket forthwith, and then
he began to think that, as he did not wish to take Mr. Todd just then
into custody, it would be just as well if he left the house. Besides,
the barber had only fell into a swoon through fright, so that his
recovery was a matter that could be calculated upon with something like
certainty in a short time.

"It would be a world of pities if he was to find out as the ghost was
only me," said Crotchet, "so I'll be off before he comes to himself."

Extinguishing the light, Crotchet wound his way up the staircase again,
but when he got to the landing he stopped, and said--

"Bless us! I've not got them canes and swords as Sir Richard wanted me
to bring away with me. Well, the watches will answer better than them,
for all he wants is to compare 'em with the descriptions of some folks
as has been missed by their blessed relations in London, so that's all
right. Hilloa!"

This latter ejaculation arose from Crotchet having trodden upon Todd.

"The deuce!" he added, "I thought I had got clear of him."

He paused, and heard Todd utter a deep groan. Mr. Crotchet took this as
a signal that he had better be off; and accordingly he ascended the next
staircase quickly, and in a very few minutes reached the attic of Todd's
house. When there, he quickly made his appearance in the shoemaker's
attic, and found that Sir Richard Blunt had left the door of it just
upon the latch for him. He was upon the point of passing out of the
room, and going down stairs, when he heard a confused sound approaching
the attic, and he paused instantly. The sound came nearer and nearer,
until Crotchet found that some half dozen people were upon the landing,
and all talking together in anxious whispers.

"What the deuce is up now?" he thought.

He approached the door and listened.

"I tell you what it is, Mr. Otton," said a female voice. "It's now
getting on for ten o'clock, and I positively can't sleep in my bed
unless I know something more about this horrid attic."

"Well, but, mum--"

"Don't speak to me. Here's an attic, and two men go into it. Then all at
once there's no men in it; and then all at once, one man comes down and
walks out as cool as a cucumber, and says nothing at all; and then we
know well enough as there was two men, and only one--"

"But, mum--"

"Don't speak to me, and only one has come down."

"And here's the t'other!" cried Crotchet, suddenly bouncing out of the
attic.

The confusion that ensued baffles all description. A grand rush was made
into the apartments of the lady who was fond of putting her feet into
hot water; and in the midst of the confusion, Crotchet quickly enough
went down stairs, and made his escape from the shoemaker's house.




                             CHAPTER XLII.
                          THE GREAT SACRIFICE.


While all these things were going on at Sweeney Todd's, in Fleet-street,
Mrs. Lovett was not quite idle as regarded her own affairs and feelings.
That lady's--what shall we say--certainly not affections, for she had
none--passions is a better word--were inconceivably shocked by the
discovery she had made of the perfidy of her flaunting and moustachied
lover. It will be perceived, by this little affair of Mrs. Lovett's, how
strong-minded women have their little weaknesses. The hour of the
appointment, which she (Mrs. Lovett) had made with her military-looking
beau, came round; and there she sat, looking rather disconsolate.

"Am I never to succeed," she muttered to herself, "in finding one with
whom I can make my escape from this sea of horrors that surrounds me? Am
I, notwithstanding I have so fully accomplished all I wished to
accomplish, by--by"--she shuddered and paused.--"Well, well, the time
will come--I must go alone. Let Todd go alone, and let me go alone. Why
should he wish to trammel my actions? He cannot surely think, for a
moment, that with him I will consent to pass the remainder of my life!"

The scornful curl of the lip, and the indignant toss of the head, which
accompanied these words, would have been quite sufficient to convince
Todd, had he seen them, of the hopelessness of any such notion.

"No," she added, after a pause, "I shall be alone in the world, or, if I
make ties, they shall be made in another country. There it is possible I
may be--oh, no, no--not happy; but I may be powerful, and have cringing
slaves about me, who, finding that I am rich, will tell me that I am
beautiful, and I shall be able to drink deeply of the intoxicating cup
of pleasure, in some land where prudery, or what is called propriety,
has not set up its banner as it has in this land of outward virtue. As
for Todd--I--I will try to be assured that he is a corpse before I
breathe freely; and if I fail in that, I will hope that we shall be
thousands of leagues asunder."

A shadow passed the window. Mrs. Lovett started to her feet.

"Ah! who comes? 'Tis he--no--God! 'tis Todd."

For a moment she pressed her hands upon her face, as though she would
squeeze out the traces of passion from the muscles, and then her old set
smile came back again. Todd entered the shop. For a few moments they
looked at each other in silence, and then Todd said--

"Alone?"

"Quite," she replied.

He gave one of his peculiar laughs, and then glided into the parlour
behind the shop. Mrs. Lovett followed him.

"News?" he said.

"None."

"Hem! The time is coming."

"The time to leave off this--"

"Yes. The time to quit business, Mrs. Lovett. All goes well--swimmingly.
Ha! ha!"

She shuddered as she said--

"Do not laugh."

"Let those laugh who win," replied Todd. "How old are you, Sarah?"

"Old?"

"Yes, or to shape the question perhaps more to a woman's liking, how
young are you? Have you yet many years before you in which to enjoy the
fruits of our labours? Have you the iron frame which will enable you to
say--'I shall revel for years in the soft enjoyments of luxury stolen
from a world I hate?' Tell me."

Mrs. Lovett fell into a musing attitude, and Todd thought she was
reflecting upon her age; but at length she said--

"I sometimes think I would give half of what is mine if I could forget
how I became possessed of the whole."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, Todd. Has no such feeling ever crossed you?"

"Never! I am implacable. Fate made me a barber, but nature made me
something else. In the formation of man there is a something that gives
weakness to his resolves, and makes him pause upon the verge of
enterprise with a shrinking horror. That is what the world calls
conscience. It has no hold of me. I have but one feeling towards the
human race, and that is hatred. I saw that while they pretended to bow
down to God, they had in reality set up another idol in their heart of
hearts. Gold! gold! Tell me--how many men there are in this great city
who do not worship gold far more sincerely and heartily than they
worship Heaven?"

"Few--few."

"Few? None, I say, none. No. The future is a dream--an _ignis fatuus_--a
vapour. The present we can grasp--ha!"

"What is our wealth, Todd?"

"Hundreds of thousands."

He shaded his eyes with his hands, and peered from the parlour into the
shop.

"Who is that keeps dodging past the window each moment, and peeping in
at every convenient open space in the glass that he can find?"

Mrs. Lovett looked, and then, after an effort, she said--

"Todd, I was going to speak to you of that man."

"Ah!"

"Listen; I suspect him. For some days past he has haunted the shop, and
makes endeavours to become acquainted with me. I did not think it sound
policy wholly to shun him, but gave him such encouragement as might
supply me with opportunities of judging if he were a spy or not."

"Humph!"

"I think him dangerous."

Todd's eyes glistened like burning coals.

"Should he come into your shop to be shaved, Todd--"

"Ha! ha!"

The horrible laugh rang through the place, and Mrs. Lovett's lover, with
the moustache, sprung to the other side of Bell Yard, for the unearthly
sound even reached his ears as he was peeping through the window to
catch a glimpse of the charming widow.

"You understand me, Todd?"

"Perfectly--perfectly--I shall know him again. Ah, my dear Mrs. Lovett,
how dangerous it is to be safe in this world. Even our virtue cannot
escape detraction; but we will live in hopes of better times. You and I
will show the world, yet, what wealth is."

"Yes--yes."

Todd crept close to her, and was about to place his arm round her waist,
but she started from him, exclaiming--

"No--no, Todd--a thousand times no. Have we not before quarrelled upon
this point. Do not approach me, or our compact, infernal as it is, is at
an end. I have sold my soul to you, but I have not bartered myself."

The expression of Todd's countenance at this juncture was that of an
incarnate fiend. He glared at Mrs. Lovett as though with the horrible
fascination of his ugliness he would overcome her, and then slowly
rising, he said--

"Her soul--ha! She has sold her soul to me--ha! I will call to-morrow."

He left the shop, and as he passed the gent who, by force of his
moustache, hoped to win the affections of Mrs. Lovett, he gave him such
a look that he terrified him and the gent found himself in the shop
before he was aware.

"Bless me, what a horrid looking fellow! I swear by my courage and
honour I never saw such a face. Ah, my charmer! Who was that left your
charming presence just now?"

"Some one who came for a pie."

"'Pon honour, he's enough to poison all the pies! Oh, you beauty,
yo--ou--ou--ou--"

The gallant's mouth was so full of a veal pie that he had stuffed into
it that for some few moments he could not produce an intelligible sound.
When he had recovered, he walked into the parlour and sat down, saying--

"Now, Mrs. Lovett, here am I, 'pon honour, your humble servant, and stop
my breath if I'd say as much to the commander-in-chief. When's the happy
day to be?"

"Do you really love me?"

"Do I love you? Do I love fighting? Do I love honour--glory? Do I love
eating and drinking? Do I love myself?"

"Ah, Major Bounce, you military men are so gallant."

"'Pon honour we are. General Cavendish used to say to me--'Bounce,' says
he, 'if you don't make your fortune by war, which you ought to do,
Bounce, 'pon honour, you will make it by love.' 'General,' says I--now I
was always ready for a smart answer, Mrs. Lovett--so 'General,' says I,
'the same to you!'"

"Very smart."

"Yes, wasn't it. 'Pon honour it was, and 'pon soul you looks more and
more charming every day that I see you."

"Oh you flatterer!"

"No--no. Bar flattering--bar flattering. His Majesty has often said,
'Talk of flattery. Oh dear, Bounce is the man for me. He is right
down--straight up-off handed. And no sort of mistake, on--on--on.'"

Another pie converted the oratory of the major into something between a
grunt and a sigh.

"But major, I'm afraid that you will regret marrying me. If I convert
all I have into money"--the major pricked up his ears--"I could not make
of it more than fifty thousand pounds."

The major's eyes opened to the size of pint saucers, as he said--

"Fifty--fift--fif.--Say it again!"

"Fifty thousand pounds."

The major rose and embraced Mrs. Lovett. Tears actually came into his
eyes, and gulping down the pie, he cried--

"You have fifty thousand charms. Only let me be your slave, your dog,
damme--your dog, Mrs. Lovett, and I shall consider myself the luckiest
dog in the world, but not for the money--not for the money. No, as the
Marquis of Cleveland once said, 'If you want a thoroughly disinterested
man, go to Bounce.'"

"Well, major, since we understand each other so well, there are two
little things that I must name as my conditions."

"Name 'em--name 'em. Do you want me to bring you the king's eye-tooth,
or her majesty's wig and snuff-box--only say the word."

"One is, that I will leave England. I have a private reason for so
doing."

"Damme, so have I. That is a-hem! If you have a reason, that is a reason
to me, you know."

"Exactly. In some other capital of Europe we may spend our money and
enjoy all the delights of existence. Do you speak French?"

"Ah-hem! Oh, of course. I never tried particularly, but as Lord North
said to the Duke of Bridgewater, 'Bounce is the man if you want anything
done of an out of-the-way character.'"

"Very well, then. My next condition is, that you shave off your
moustache."

"What?"

"Shave off your moustache; I have the greatest possible aversion to
moustache, therefore I make that a positive condition without which I
shall say no more to you."

"My charmer, do you think I hesitate? If you were to say to me, 'Bounce,
off with your head,' in a moment it would roll at your feet."

"Go, then, to Mr. Todd's, the barber, in Fleet-street, and have them
taken off at once, and then come back to me, for I declare I won't speak
another word to you while you have them on."

"But, dear creature--"

Mrs. Lovett shook her head.

"'Pon honour!"

She shook her head again.

"I'll go at once then, 'pon soul, and have 'em taken off. I'll be back
in a jiffy, Mrs. Lovett. Oh, you duck, I adore you. Confound the cash!
It's you I knuckle under to. Man doats on Venus, and I love Lovett. Bye,
bye; I'll get it done and soon be back. Fifty thousand--fifty--fif.--Oh,
lor' why Flukes, your fortune is made at last."

These last words did not reach the ear of Mrs. Lovett. That lady threw
herself into a chair, where the gallant major had left her.

"Another!" she said. "Another! Why did he try to deceive me? The fool,
to pitch upon me, of all persons, to make his victim. I must have found
him out, and poisoned him, if I had married him. It is better that Todd
should take vengeance for me, and then the time shall come when he shall
fall. Yes, so soon as I can, by cajollery or scheming, get sufficient of
the plunder into my own hands, Todd's hours are numbered."

After this, Mrs. Lovett fell into a train of musing, and her face
assumed an expression so different from that with which she was wont to
welcome her customers in the shop, that not one of them would have known
her. But we must look at Todd. It was upon his return home from several
calls, the last of which had been this recent visit to Mrs. Lovett, that
he had heard the noise in his house, which had terminated in his going
up stairs, and being so terrified by Crotchet. It will be recollected
that he fell insensible upon the staircase, and that Crotchet took that
opportunity of making good his retreat. How long he lay there, he, Todd,
had no means of knowing, for all was profound darkness upon the
staircase, but his first sensation consisted of a tingling in his feet
and hands, similar to the sensation which is properly called "your limbs
going to sleep." Then a knocking noise came upon his sense of hearing.

"What's that? Where am I?" he cried. "No--no. Don't hang me. Where's
Mrs. Lovett? Hang her. She is guilty!"

Knock!--knock!--knock!

"Hush! hush! What is it? Who wants me? Good God--no--no. There is no
good God for me!"

Knock! knock! knock! came again with increased violence at the door of
the shop below.




                             CHAPTER XLIII.
                          AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.


Todd scrambled to his feet. He held his head in his hand.

"What does it all mean? What does it all mean?"

Knock! knock! knock!

Todd's senses were slowly returning to him. He began to recollect events
at first confusedly, and then the proper order of their occurrence--how
he had come home, and then heard a noise, and gone up stairs and
seen--what? There he paused in his catalogue of events. What had he
seen?"

Knock! knock! knock!

"Curses!" he muttered. "Who can that be hammering with such devilish
perseverance at my door? By all that's horrible they shall pay dearly
for thus disturbing me. Who can it be? Not any one to arrest me? No--no!
They would not knock so long. An enforced entrance long before this
would have brought them to me. What did I see? What did I see? What did
I see? Dare I give it a name?"

He slowly descended the stairs, and reaching the shop, he peeped through
a place in the door which he had made for such a purpose. There stood
the hero of the moustachios knocking away with all his might to get the
behests of Mrs. Lovett obeyed. Todd suddenly flung open the door, and in
fell Major Bounce, alias Flukes.

"The devil! What do you want?"

"'Pon honour. Damn it. Is this the way to treat a military man?"

Todd turned to the side of the shop, and hastily put on a wig--by an
adroit movement of his fingers, he pulled his cravat sufficiently out
from his neck to be able to bury his chin in it, and when he turned to
the mock major, the latter had no suspicion that he looked upon the same
person who had so alarmed him by a look, in Bell Yard.

"Shaved or dressed sir?" said Todd.

"Confound you. Why did you open the door so quick?"

"Thought you knocked, sir."

"I did, but stop my breath, if you haven't given me an ugly fall. But no
matter. None but the brave deserve the fair. You perceive I am a
military man?"

"Oh, yes, sir, anybody may see that by your martial air."

"A-hem! You are right. Well then, Mr. Barber, I want my moustache shaved
off. It's a fancy of a lady. One of the most charming of her sex. One
with a fifty thousand pound charm. 'Pon my valour, she has. Ah! I am a
lucky dog. Thirty-eight--handsome as Apollo, and beloved by the fairest
of the fair."

    "Life is a jolly thing,
    Life is a jolly thing,
    While I drink deep and go frolicking,
    Fair maids, wives, and widows,
    Fair maids, wives, and widows
    Doat on the youth that goes frolicking."

"Ha! ha! ha! Life's a bumper. Upon my valour, Mr. Barber, I feel like a
young colt, that I do."

"Really, sir. You don't say so?"

"Oh, yes, yes! Ha! ha! All's right. All's right. Now, Mr.
What's-your-name. Off with the moustache. It's only in the cause of the
fair that I would condescend to part with them, that's a fact, but when
a lady's in the case--upon my valour, you are an ugly fellow."

"You don't say so," replied Todd, as he made a most hideous contortion.
"Most people think me so fascinating that they stay with me."

"Ha! ha! A good joke."

Major Bounce--we may as well still call the poor wretch Major
Bounce--placed his hat upon a chair, and his sword upon the top of it.

"Pray, sir, be seated," said Todd.

"Ah! Damme, is this seat a fixture?"

"Yes, sir, it's in the proper light, you see, sir."

"Oh, very well--I--pluff, pluff--puff, puff! Confound you, what have you
filled my mouth with soap-suds for?"

"Quite an accident, sir. Quite an accident, for which I humbly beg your
pardon, I assure you, sir. If you keep your mouth shut, and your eyes
open, you will get on amazingly. Have you seen the paper to-day, sir?"

"No!"

"Sorry for that, sir. A very odd case, sir--a little on one side--a most
remarkable case, I may say. A gentleman, sir, went into a barber's shop,
and--"

"Eh!--puff! sleush! puff! Am I to be poisoned by your soap-suds? Upon my
valour, I shall have to make an example of you to all barbers."

"You opened your mouth at the wrong time, sir."

"The wrong devil. Don't keep me here all night."

"Certainly not, sir. But as I was saying about this curious case in the
paper. A military gentleman went into a barber's shop to be shaved."

"Well. The devil--pluff, pluff! Good God! Am I to endure all this?"

"Certainly not, sir. I'll show you the paper itself. You must know, sir,
that the paragraph is headed 'Mysterious disappearance of a gentleman.'"

"Damn it, what do I care about it? Get on with the shaving."

"Certainly, sir."

Todd gave a horrible scrape to Major Bounce's face with a blunt razor.

"Quite easy, sir?"

"Easy? Good gracious, do you want to skin me?"

"Oh, dear no, sir. What an idea. To skin a military gentleman. Certainly
not, sir. I see you require one of my best keen razors--one of the
Magnum Bonums. Ha! ha!"

"Eh? What was that?"

"Only me giving a slight smile, sir."

"The deuce it was. Don't do it again, then, that's all; and get your
keen razor at once, and make an end of the business."

"I will--make an end of the business. Sit still, sir. I'll be back in a
moment."

Todd went into the parlour.

"£50,000!" muttered Major Bounce. "I am a happy fellow. At last, after
so many ups and downs, I light upon my feet. A charming widow!--and she
wishes to leave England. How lucky. I wish the very same thing.
£50,000!--50,000 charms!"

                  *       *       *       *       *

"Good God! what's that?" said a man, who was passing Todd's window, in
Fleet-street. "What a horrid shriek. Did you hear it, mum?"

"Oh dear, yes," said a woman. "I'm all of a tremble."

"It came from the barber's shop, here. Let's go in, and ask if anything
is the matter?"

The man and woman crossed Todd's threshold, and opened the shop door. A
glance showed them that a man's face was at a small opening of the
parlour door. _The shaving chair was empty._

"What's the matter?" said the man.

"With whom?" said Todd.

"Well, I don't know, but I thought somebody cried out."

Todd crept along the floor until he came close to the man, and then he
said--

"My friend, have you anything to do?"

"Yes, thank God."

"Then, go and do it; and the next time you hear me cry out with the
stomach-ache, ask yourself if it is your business to come in and ask me
any questions about it. As for you, ma'am, unless you want to be shaved,
I don't know, for the life of me, what you do here."

"Well, we only thought--"

Todd gave a hideous howl, which so terrified both the intruders, that
they left the shop in a moment. His countenance then assumed that awful
satanic expression which it sometimes bore, and he stood for the space
of about five minutes in deep thought. Starting then suddenly, he took
up the sword and hat of Major Bounce, and was in the act of putting both
into a cupboard, when a smothered cry met his ears. Todd unsheathed the
sword, and after fastening his shop door, he went into the parlour. He
was absent about ten minutes, and when he returned he had not the sword,
but he hastily washed his hands.

"Done!" he said.

Scratch! scratch! scratch! came something at his door, and Todd bent
forward in an attitude of listening. Scratch!--scratch!--scratch!--His
face turned ghastly pale, and his knees knocked together as he whispered
to himself--

"What is that?--what is that?"

Todd was getting superstitious. Since his adventure with Mr. Crotchet,
his nerves had been out of order, notwithstanding the exertions he had
made to control himself, and to convince his judgment that it was all a
matter of imagination. Yet now, somehow or another, although there was
no visible connection between the two things, he could not help mentally
connecting this scratching at the door with the vision on the staircase.
It is strange how the fancy will play such tricks, but it is no less
strange than true that she does so, yoking together matters most
dissimilar, and leading the judgment into strange disorder.

Scratch!--scratch!--scratch!

"What--what is it?" gasped Todd.

But time works wonders, and after the first shock to his nerves, the
barber began to think that some one must be playing him a trick, and,
for all he knew, it might be the very man whom he had snubbed so for
interfering with him, or it might be some boy--the boys would at times
tease Sweeney Todd. This supposition gathered strength each moment.

"It is a trick--a trick," he said. "I will be revenged!"

He took a thick stick from a corner, and stealthily approached the door.
The odd scratching noise continued, and he again paused for a few
moments to listen to it.

"A boy--a boy," he growled. "It is one of the infernal boys."

Opening the door a little way with great quickness, Todd aimed a blow
through the opening. There was a short angry bark, and his old enemy,
the dog that had belonged to the mariner, thrust in his head, and glared
at Todd.

"Help!--help! Murder!" cried Todd. "The dog again!"

He made a vain effort to shut the door; but Hector was too strong for
him, and, as he had got his head in, he seemed to be determined to force
in his whole body, which he fully succeeded in doing. Todd dropped the
stick, and rushed into the back-parlour for safety, from whence, through
a small square of glass near the top of the door, he glared at the
proceedings of his four-footed foe. The dog went direct to the cupboard
from which he had taken his master's hat, and, opening the door, he
dragged out an assemblage of miscellaneous property, as though he hoped
to find among it some other vestige of the dear master he had lost.
When, however, after tossing the things about, he found that they were
all strange to him, he gave a melancholy howl. Hector then appeared to
be considering what he should do next, and, after a few moments'
consideration, he made a general survey of the shop, and finally ended
by leaping into the shaving-chair, where he sat and commenced such a
series of melancholy howls, that Todd was nearly driven out of his mind
at the conviction that the whole street must be soon in a state of
alarm. Oh! how glad he would have been to have shot Hector; but then,
although he had pistols in the parlour, he might miss him, and send the
bullet into Fleet-street through his own window, and, perchance, hit
somebody, and that would be a trouble. The report, too, would bring a
crowd round his shop, and the old story of him and the accusing dog--for
had not that dog accused him?--would be brought up again. But yet
something must be done.

"Am I to be a prisoner here," said Todd, "while that infernal dog sits
in the shaving chair, howling?"

Now and then, for the space of about half-a-minute, the dog would be
quiet, but then the prolonged howl that he would give plainly showed
that he had only been gathering breath to give it. Todd got desperate.

"I must and will shoot him," he said.

Going to a sideboard he opened a drawer, and took from it a large
double-barrelled pistol. He looked carefully at the priming, and
satisfying himself that all was right, he crept again to the parlour
door.

"I must and will shoot him at any risk," he said. "This infernal dog
will be else the bane and torment of my life. I thought I had been
successful in poisoning the brute as he suddenly disappeared from my
door, but he has been preserved by some sort of miracle on purpose to
torment me."

Howl went the dog again. Sweeney Todd took a capital aim with the
pistol. To be sure his nerves were not quite in such good order as they
sometimes were, but then the distance was so short that how could he
miss such an object as a Newfoundland dog?

"I have him--I have him," he muttered. "Ha! ha! I have him!"

He pulled the trigger of the pistol--snap went the lock, and the powder
in the pan flashed up in Todd's face, but that was all. Before he could
utter even an oath the shop door was opened, and a man's voice cried--

"Hasn't nobody seen nothing of never a great dog nowheres? Oh, there you
is, my tulip. Come to your father, you rogue you. So you guved me the
slip at last did you, you willain!"




                             CHAPTER XLIV.
                       TODD AND THE SILVERSMITH.


[Illustration: Sweeney Todd Re-Visited By The Dog Of One Of His
Victims.]

Hector whined a kind of recognition of this man, but he did not move
from the chair in Todd's shop upon which he had seated himself.

"Come, old fellow," said the man, "you don't want to be shaved, do you?"

Hector gave a short bark, but he wagged his tail as much as to
intimate--"Mind, I am not at all angry with you." And indeed it was
quite evident, from the manner of the dog to this man, that there was a
good understanding between them.

"Come now, Pison," said the man, "don't be making a fool of yourself
here any more. You ain't on friendly terms here, my tulip."

"Hilloa!" cried Todd.

The man gave a start, and Hector uttered an angry growl.

"Hilloa! Who are you?"

"Why, I'm the ostler at the 'Bullfinch!' _oppesite_."

"Is that your dog?"

"Why in a manner o' speaking, for want of a better master, he's got me."

The ostler, by dint of shading his eyes with his hands, and looking very
intently, at last saw Todd, and then he added--

"Oh, it's you, master, is it?"

"Take away that animal directly," cried Todd. "Take him away. I hate
dogs. Curses on both you and him; how came he here?"

"Ah, Pison, Pison, why did you come here, you good for nothink feller
you? You ought to have knowed better. Didn't I always say to
you--leastways, since I've had you--didn't I say to you--'Don't you go
over the way, for that ere barber is your natural enemy, Pison,' and yet
here yer is."

As he spoke, the ostler embraced Hector, who was not at all backward in
returning the caress, although in the midst of it he turned his head in
the direction of the back-parlour, and gave a furious bark at Todd.

"There is some mystery at the bottom of all this," muttered Todd; and
then raising his voice, he added--"How did you come by the dog?"

"Why, I'll tell you, master. For a matter of two days, you know, he
stuck at your door with a hat as belonged--"

"Well, well!"

"Yes, his master, folks said, was murdered."

"Ha! ha!"

"Eh? Oh, Lord, what was that?"

"Only me; I laughed at the idea of anybody being murdered in Fleet
Street, that was all."

"Oh, ah! It don't seem very likely. Well, as I was a saying, arter you
had finished off his master--"

"I?"

"Oh, I begs your pardon! Only, you see, the dog would have it that you
had, and so folks say so as natural as possible; but, howsomdever, I
comed by and seed this here dog in the agonies o' conwulsions all along
o' pison. Now where I come from, the old man--that's my father as
was--had lots o' dogs, and consekewently I knowed somethink about them
ere creturs; so I takes up this one and carries him on my back over the
way to the stables, and there I cures him and makes a pet of him, and I
called him Pison, cos, you see, as he had been pisoned. Lor, sir, you
should only have seed him, when he was a getting a little better, how he
used to look at me and try to say--'Bill, don't I love you neither!'
It's affection--that it is, blow me!"

Todd gave an angry snarl of derision.

"I tell you what it is, my man," he said; "if you will hang that dog, I
will give you a guinea."

"Hang Pison? No, old 'un, I'd much rather hang you for half that ere
money. Come along, my daffydowndilly. Don't you stay here any more. Why,
I do believe it was you as pisoned him, you old bloak."

The ostler seized Hector, or Pison, as he had fresh christened him,
round the neck, and fairly dragged him away out of the shop. To be sure,
if Hector had resisted, the ostler, with all the power of resistance he
possessed, it would indeed have been no easy matter to remove him; but
it was wonderful to see how nicely the grateful creature graduated his
struggles, so that they fell short of doing the smallest hurt to his
preserver, and yet showed how much he wished to remain as a terror and a
reproach to Sweeney Todd. When they were both fairly gone, Todd emerged
from his parlour again, and the horrible oaths and imprecations he
uttered will not bear transcription. With eager haste he again bundled
into the cupboard all the things that the dog had dragged out of it, and
then stamping his foot, he said--

"Am I, after defeating the vigilance of heaven only knows who, and for
so long preserving myself from almost suspicion, to live in dread of a
dog? Am I to be tormented with the thought that that fiend of an animal
is opposite to me, and ready at any moment to fly over here and chase me
out of my own shop. Confound it! I cannot and will not put up with such
a state of things. Oh, if I could but get one fair blow at him. Only one
fair blow!"

As he spoke he took up a hammer that was in a corner of the shop, and
made a swinging movement with it through the air. Some one at that
moment opened the shop door, and narrowly escaped a blow upon the head,
that would have finished their mortal career.

"Hilloa! Are you mad?"

"Mad!" said Todd.

"Yes: do you knock folks' brains out when they come to be shaved?"

"Mine's a sedentary employment," said Todd, "and when I am alone, I like
exercise to open my chest. That's all. Ain't it rather late to be
shaved? I was just about to shut up."

"Why it is rather late, Mr. Todd; but the fact is, I am going to York by
the early coach from the Bullfinch Inn, opposite, and I want a shave
before I get upon my journey, as I shan't have an opportunity you see,
again, for some time."

"Very well, sir."

"Come in, Charley."

Todd started.

"What's that?" he said. He felt afraid that it was the dog again, under
some new name. Truly, conscience was beginning to make a coward of
Sweeney Todd, although he denied to himself the possession of such an
article. Charley came in the shape of a little boy, of about eight years
of age.

"Now you sit down, and don't do any mischief," said the father, "while I
get Mr. Todd to shave me. I am a late customer indeed. You see the coach
goes in two hours, and as I have got to call the last thing upon
Alderman Stantons, I thought I would be shaved first, and my little lad
here would come with me."

"Oh, certainly, sir," said Todd; "I believe I have the pleasure of
speaking to Mr. Brown, the silversmith."

"Yes--yes. The alderman gave me some jewels, worth about three thousand
pounds, to re-set, and though they are not done, I really don't like to
have them at home while I take such a journey, so I want to lodge them
with him again until I come back."

Todd lathered away at Mr. Brown's chin, as he said with an air of
innocence--

"Can you carry so many jewels about with you, sir?"

"So many? Aye, ten times as many. Why they are all in a little narrow
case, that would not hold a pair of razors."

"Indeed!"

Todd began the shaving.

"And so this is your little boy? A sharp lad, no doubt."

"Tolerable."

"The whiskers as they are, sir?"

"Oh, yes--yes."

"I suppose you never trust him out alone in the streets?"

"Oh, yes; often."

"Is it possible. Well, now, I should hardly have thought it. What a
sweet child he looks, and such a nice complexion, too. It's quite a
pleasure to see him. I was considered myself a very fine child a good
while ago."

Todd took care to lift the razor judiciously, so as to give Mr. Brown
opportunities of replying; and the silversmith said--

"Oh, yes; he's a nice little fellow. He's got his mother's complexion."

"And he shan't lose it," said Todd, "if there's any virtue in
_pearlometrical savonia_."

"In what?"

"Oh, that's the name I give to a soap that preserves the complexion in
all its purity. I have only a small parcel of it, so I don't sell it,
but I give it away now and then, to my lady customers. Excuse me for one
moment."

"Oh, certainly."

Todd opened a glass case, and took out two pieces of soap, of a
yellowish tint.

"There, Charley," he said as he handed them to the little fellow.
"There's a piece for you, and a piece for mamma."

"Really you are very kind, Mr. Todd," said Brown.

"Oh, don't mention it. Run home at once, Charley, with them, and by the
time you get back your father will be--finished. Run along."

"I won't," said Charley.

"Ah, come--come," said his father.

"I won't go, and I don't like soap."

"And why don't you like soap, my little man?" said Todd, as he
recommenced operations upon the silversmith's face.

"Because I don't like to be washed at all, it scrubs so, and I don't
like you, either, you are so dreadfully ugly--that I don't."

Todd smiled blandly.

"Now, Charley," said his father, "I am very angry with you. You are a
very bad boy indeed. Why don't you do as Mr. Todd tells you?"

"Because I won't."

"Bless him," said Todd, "bless his heart. But don't you think, Mr.
B."--here Todd's voice sank to a whisper--"don't you think that it's
rather injudicious to encourage this obstinacy--if one may call it
such--thus early in life? It may, you know, grow upon the dear little
fellow."

"You are right, Mr. Todd; and I know that he is spoiled; but I have a
more than ordinary affection for him, since, under most critical
circumstances, once I saved his life. From that time, I confess that I
have been weak enough to allow him too much of his own way. Thank you,
Mr. Todd. A very clean comfortable shave indeed."

Mr. Brown rose from his chair and approached the little boy.

"Charley, my dear," he said; "you will save papa's life some day, won't
you?"

"Yes," said Charley.

The father kissed him; as he added--

"How affected I feel to-night. I suppose it's the thought of the long
journey I am going."

"No doubt," said Todd.

"Good night, Mr. Todd. Come along, Charley."

"Won't you give me a kiss, you darling, before you go?" said Todd.

"No, ugly, I won't."

"Oh, Charley--Charley, your behaviour to Mr. Todd is really anything but
right. You are a very bad boy to-night. Come along."

Away they went, and Todd stood stropping the lately-used razor upon his
hand, as he glared upon them, and muttered--

"Jewels worth three thousand pounds! And so you saved the child's life,
did you? By all that's devilish he has returned the obligation."

He went to the door and looked after the retreating figures of the
silversmith and his child. He saw with what tender care the father
lifted the little one over the road-way, and again he muttered--

"Three thousand pounds gone!--gone, when it was almost within my grasp.
All this is new. I used not to be the sport of such accidents and
adverse circumstances. Time was, when by the seeming irresistible force
of my will, I could bend circumstances to my purposes, but now I am the
sport of dogs and children. What is the meaning of it all? Is my ancient
cunning deserting me? Is my brain no longer active and full of daring?"

He crept back into his shop again. The hour was now getting late, and
after sitting for some time in silent musing he rose, and without a
word, commenced closing his establishment for the night.

"I must have another boy," he said, as he put up the last shutter and
secured it in its place. "I must have another boy. This state of things
will not do. I must certainly have another boy. Tobias Ragg would have
suited me very well, if he had not been so--so--what shall I call it,
confoundedly imaginative. But he is dead--dead! that is a comfort. He is
dead, and I must have another boy."

Bang! went Sweeney Todd's shop door. The beautiful moon climbed over the
house-tops in old Fleet Street. The clock of St. Dunstan's struck the
hour of eleven. The streets began to be thin of pedestrians, and the din
of carriages had almost entirely ceased. London then, although it was so
not long ago, presented a very different aspect at the hour of eleven to
what it does now. The old hackney-coaches had not been ousted from the
streets by the cabs and the omnibuses, and the bustle of the city was
indeed but a faint echo then, of what it is now. Time changes all
things.




                              CHAPTER XLV.
                        JOHANNA'S NEW SITUATION.


"Johanna, attend to me," said Mrs. Oakley, upon the morning after these
events.

"Well, mother?"

"Your father is an idiot."

"Mother, mother! I dissent from the opinion, and if it were true, it
comes with the worst possible grace from you, but I am sick at heart. I
pray you to spare me reproaches or angry words, mother."

"Haity taity, one must not speak next, I suppose. Some people fancy that
other people know nothing, but there is such a thing as overhearing what
some people say to other people."

Johanna had not the most remote notion of what her mother meant, but
Mrs. Oakley's tongue was like many pieces of machinery, that when once
set in motion are not without considerable trouble brought to a
standstill again, so on she went.

"Of course. I now know quite well why the godly man who would have made
you a chosen vessel was refused. It was all owing to that scamp, Mark
Ingestrie."

"Mother!"

"Marry come up! you need not look at me in such a way. We don't all of
us see with the same eyes. A scamp he is, and a scamp he will be."

"Mother, he whom you so name is with his God. Mention him no more. The
wild ocean rolls over his body--his soul is in heaven. Speak not
irreverently of one whose sole crime was that he loved me. Oh, mother,
mother, you--"

Johanna could say no more, she burst into tears.

"Well," said Mrs. Oakley, "if he is dead, pray what hinders you from
listening to the chosen vessel, I should like to know?"

"Do not. Oh do not, mother, say any more to me--I cannot, dare not trust
myself to speak to you upon such a subject."

"What is this?" said Mr. Oakley, stepping into the room. "Johanna in
tears! What has happened?"

[Illustration: Mr. Oakley Defends Johanna From The Violence Of Her
Mother.]

"Father--dear father!"

"And Mr. O.," cried Mrs. Oakley, "what business is it of yours, I should
like to know? Be so good, sir, as to attend to your spectacles, and such
like rubbish, and not to interfere with my daughter."

"Dear me!--ain't she my daughter likewise?"

"Oh yes, Mr. O.! Go on with your base, vile, wretched, contemptible,
unmanly insinuations. Do go on, pray--I like it. Oh, you odious wretch!
You spectacle-making monster!"

"Do not," cried Johanna, who saw the heightened colour of her father's
cheek. "Oh, do not let me be the unhappy cause of any quarrelling.
Father! father!"

"Hush, my dear, don't you say another word. Cousin Ben is coming to take
a little bit of lunch with us to-day."

"I know it," cried Mrs. Oakley, clapping her hands together with a
vengeance that made Oakley jump again. "I know it. Oh, you wretch. You
couldn't have put on such airs if your bully had not been coming; I
thought the last time he came here was enough for him. Aye, and for you
too, Mr. O."

"It was nearly too much," said the spectacle-maker, shaking his head.

"Tow row, row, row, row!" cried Big Ben, popping his head into the
parlour, "what do you all bring it in now? Wilful murder with the chill
off or what? Ah, mother Oakley, what's the price of vinegar now,
wholesale--pluck does it. Here you is. Ha, ha! Aint we a united family.
Couldn't stay away from you, Mother Oakley, no more nor I could from
that ere laughing hyena we has in the Tower."

"Eugh!--wretch!"

"Sit down, Ben," said Mr. Oakley. "I am glad to see you, and I am quite
sure Johanna is."

"Oh, yes, yes."

"That's it," said Ben. "It's on Johanna's account I came. Now, little
one, just tell me--"

Johanna had just time to place her finger upon her lips, unobserved by
any one, and shake her head at Ben.

"Ah--hem! How are you, eh?" he said, turning the conversation. "Come,
Mother O., stir your old stumps and be alive, will you? I have come to
lunch with your lord and master, so bustle--bustle."

Mrs. Oakley rose, and placing her hands upon her hips, she looked at
Ben, as she said--

"You great, horrid, man-mountain of a wretch. I only wonder you ain't
afraid, after the proper punishment you had on the occasion of your last
visit, to show your horrid face here again?"

"You _deludes_ to the physicking, I suppose, mum. Lor bless you, it did
us no end of good; but, howsomedever, we provide agin wice in animals
when we knows on it aforehand, do you see. Oh, there you is."

A boy howled out from the shop--"Did a gentleman order two gallons of
half-and-half here, please?"

"All's right," said Ben. "Now, Mother O., the only thing I'll trouble
you for, is a knife and fork. As for the rest of the combustibles, here
they is."

Ben took from one capacious pocket a huge parcel, containing about six
pounds of boiled beef, and from the other he took as much ham.

"Hold hard!" he cried to the boy who brought the beer. "Take this
half-crown, my lad, and get three quartern loaves."

"But, Ben," said old Mr. Oakley, "I really had no intention, when I
asked you to come to lunch this morning, of making you provide it
yourself. We have, or we ought to have, plenty of everything in the
house."

"Old birds," said Ben, "isn't to be caught twice. A fellow, arter he has
burnt his fingers, is afeard o' playing with the fire. No, Mrs. O., you
gave us a benefit last time, and I ain't a-going to try my luck again.
All's right--pitch into the grub. How is the chosen vessel, Mother O.?
All right, eh?"

Mrs. Oakley waited until Ben had made an immense sandwich of ham and
beef; and then in an instant, before he was aware of what she was about,
she caught it up, and slapped it in his face with a vengeance that was
quite staggering.

"Easy does it," said Ben.

"Take that, you great, fat elephant."

"Go it--go it."

Mrs. Oakley bounced out of the room. Johanna looked her sorrow; and Mr.
Oakley rose from his chair, but Ben made him sit down again, saying--

"Easy does it--easy does it. Never mind her, cousin Oakley. She must
have her way sometimes. Let her kick and be off. There's no harm
done--not a bit. Lord bless you. I'm used to all sorts of cantankerous
animals."

Mr. Oakley shook his head.

"Forget it, father," said Johanna.

"I only wish, my dear, I could forget many things; and yet there are so
many others, that I want to remember, mixed up with them, that I don't
know how I should manage to separate them one from the other."

"You couldn't do it," said Ben. "Here's luck in a bag, and shake it out
as you want it."

This sentiment was uttered while Ben's head was deep in the recesses of
the two-gallon can of beer, so that it had a peculiar solemn and
sonorous effect with it. After drinking about a quart, Ben withdrew the
can, and drew a long breath.

"Has he brought yours?" he said.

"What?--who?"

"Why the other two gallons for you and Johanna."

"Good gracious, Ben, you don't mean that?"

"Don't I, though. Oh, here he is. All's right. Now, my lad, get the
little pint jug, with the silver top to it, and if we don't mull a drop,
I'm a sinner. Now, you'll see if Mrs. O. don't come round quite
handsome."

Ben, by the aid of some sugar, succeeded in making a very palatable
drink, and just as the steam began to salute the nostrils of old Oakley
and himself, the door of the parlour was opened, and who should
heedlessly step into the room but the pious Mr. Lupin himself. Mr. Lupin
was so transfixed by finding Ben there, that for a moment or two he
could not gather strength to retreat; and during that brief period, Ben
had shifted his chair, until he got quite behind the reverend gentleman,
who, when he did step back, in consequence fell into Ben's lap.

"What do yer mean?" cried Ben, in a voice of thunder.

"Oh, murder--murder! Have mercy upon me! I only looked in as I was
passing, to ask how all the family was."

"Yes," said Mr. Oakley, "and because you, no doubt, heard I was going to
Tottenham, to Judge Merivale's, to fit him with a pair of spectacles."

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Let me go, sir."

"I don't want you," said Ben; "but as you are here, let's make an end of
all differences, and have a pint together."

"A pint?"

"Yes, to be sure. By the look of your nose, I should say it knows pretty
well what a pint is."

"Oh, dear--man is sinful alway. I bear no malice, and if the truly
right-minded and pious Mrs. Oakley was only here, we might drink down
all differences, Mr. a--a--"

"Ben."

"Mr. Ben. Thank you, sir."

"Oh, Mr. Lupin," cried Mrs. Oakley, at this moment bursting into the
parlour. "Is it possible that you can give your mind in this way to the
Philistines? Is not this backsliding?"

"Let us hope for the best, sister," said Mr. Lupin, with an evangelical
twang. "Let us hope for the best. If people will drink, they had much
better drink with the saints, who may take some favourable opportunity
of converting them, than with sinners."

"Sit down, mum," said Ben, "and let's bury all animosities in the can.
Easy does it. Don't you go, Johanna."

"Yes, but, Ben, I--"

"Now don't."

Ben saw by the direction of Johanna's eyes, that the Rev. gentleman was
resting one of his red raw-looking hands upon her arm, and, situated as
she was, she could not get out of his way but by rising.

"Sit still," said Ben. "Easy does it."

Lifting up the can, then, he pretended to drink out of it, and then
brought it with such a thundering crack upon Mr. Lupin's head, that it
quite staggered him.

"Paws off," said Ben. "Just attend to that ere gentle hint, old friend."

Mr. Lupin sat down with a groan.

"Now, mum," said Ben, who all the while had held fast the stone mug of
mulled porter. "Now, mum, here's some hot, that don't suit me so well as
the cold, perhaps you and Mr. Lupin will take that, while I cuts a few
more sandwiches."

He placed the jug before Mr. Lupin, who thereupon left off rubbing his
head, and said--

"I'm sure it would be highly unchristian of me to bear any malice, so,
with the Lord's leave, I will even partake of some of this worldly
liquor, called mulled porter."

Now while Mr. Lupin drank the savoury stream from the jug, it assailed
the senses of Mrs. Oakley, and when the porter was placed before her,
she raised it to her lips, saying--

"If folks are civil to me, I'm civil to them, only I don't like my godly
friends to be ill-treated. I'm sure nobody knows what I have gone
through for my family, and nobody thinks what a mother and wife I have
been. What would have become of Oakley if it hadn't been for me, is a
question I often ask myself in the middle of the night?"

"She's a wonderful woman," sighed Lupin.

"Oh, uncommon," said Ben.

"Let me go," whispered Johanna to Ben.

"No, no! Wait for the fun."

"What fun?"

"Oh, you'll see. You don't know what a trouble it has cost me, to be
sure. Only wait a bit, there's a duck, do."

Johanna did not like to say she would not, so she shrunk back in her
chair in no small curiosity, to know what was about to happen. Mrs.
Oakley lifted the jug to her lips and drunk deep. The aroma of the
liquor must have been peculiarly grateful to the palate of Mrs. Oakley,
for she certainly kept the jug at her mouth for a length of time, that,
to judge by the look of impatience upon the countenance of Mr. Lupin,
was something outrageous.

"Sister!" he said. "Mind your breath."

Down came the jug, and Mrs. Oakley, when she could draw breath, gasped--

"Very good indeed. A dash of allspice would make it delicious."

"Oh, sister," cried Lupin as he grasped the jug, that was gently pushed
towards him by Ben after Mrs. Oakley had set it down. "Oh, sister, don't
give your mind to carnal things, I beg of you. Why, she's drank it all."

Mr. Lupin peered into the jug. He shut the right eye and looked in with
the left, and then he shut the left eye and looked in with the right,
and then he moved the jug about until the silver lid came down with a
clap, that nearly snapped his nose off.

"What's the matter?" said Ben.

"I--I--don't exactly--" Mr. Lupin raised the lid again and again, and
peered into the jug in something of the fashion which popular belief
supposes a crow to look into a marrow bone.

At length he turned the jug upside down, and struck the bottom of it
with his pious knuckles. A huge toad fell sprawling upon the table. Mrs.
Oakley gave a shriek, and rushed into the yard. Mr. Lupin gave a groan,
and flew into the street, and the party in the parlour could hear them
in a state of horrible sickness.

"Easy does it," said Ben, "it's only a piece of wood shaped like a toad
and painted, that's all. Now I'm easy. I owed 'em one."




                             CHAPTER XLVI.
                       TOBIAS'S HEART IS TOUCHED.


Tobias is no worse all this time. But is he better? Has the godlike
spirit of reason come back to the mind-benighted boy? Has that pure and
gentle spirit recovered from its fearful thraldom, and once again opened
its eyes to the world and the knowledge of the past? We shall see.
Accompany us, reader, once again to the house of Colonel Jeffery. You
will not regret looking upon the pale face of poor Tobias again. The
room is darkened, for the sun is shining brightly, and an almond tree in
the front garden is not sufficiently umbrageous in its uncongenial soil
to keep the bright rays from resting too strongly upon the face of the
boy. There he lies! His eyes are closed, and the long lashes--for
Tobias, poor fellow, was a pretty boy--hung upon his cheek, held down by
the moisture of a tear. The face is pale, oh, so pale and thin, and the
one arm and hand that lies outside the coverlet of the bed, show the
blue veins through the thin transparent skin. And all this is the work
of Sweeney Todd. Well, well! heaven is patient! In the room is
everything that can conduce to the comfort of the slumbering boy.
Colonel Jeffery has kept his word. And now that we have taken a look at
Tobias, tread gently on tip-toe, reader, and come with us down stairs to
the back drawing-room, where Colonel Jeffery, his friend Captain
Rathbone, the surgeon, and Mrs. Ragg are assembled. Mrs. Ragg is "crying
her eyes out," as the saying is.

"Sit down, Mrs. Ragg," said the colonel, "sit down and compose yourself.
Come, now, there is no good done by this immoderate grief."

"But I can't help it."

"You can control it. Sit down."

"But I oughtn't to sit down. I'm the cook, you know, sir."

"Well, well; never mind that, if you are my cook. If I ask you to be
seated, you may waive all ceremony. We want to ask you a few questions,
Mrs. Ragg."

Upon this Tobias's mother did sit down, but it was upon the extreme edge
of a chair, so that the slightest touch to it in the world would have
knocked it from under her, and down she would have gone on to the floor.

"I'm sure, gentlemen, I'll answer anything I know, and more too, with
all the pleasure in life, for, as I often said to poor Mr. Ragg, who is
dead and gone, and buried accordingly in St. Martin's, as he naturally
might, and a long illness he had, and what with one thing and--"

"Yes! yes! we know all that. Just attend to us for one moment, if you
please, and do not speak until you thoroughly understand the nature of
the question we are about to put to you."

"Certainly not, sir. Why should I speak, for as I often and often said,
when--"

"Hush, hush!"

Mrs. Ragg was silent at last, and then the surgeon spoke to her calmly
and deliberately, for he much wished her clearly to understand what he
was saying to her.

"Mrs. Ragg, we still think that the faculties of your son Tobias are not
permanently injured, and that they are only suffering from a frightful
shock."

"Yes, sir, they is frightfully shook."

"Hush! We think that if anything that greatly interested him could be
brought to bear upon the small amount of perception that remains to him
he would recover. Do you now know of anything that might exercise a
strong influence over him?"

"Lord bless you--no, sir."

"How old is he?"

"Fifteen, sir, and you would hardly believe what a time of it I had with
Tobias. All the neighbours said--'Well, if Mrs. Ragg gets over this,
she's a woman of ten thousand;' and Mrs. Whistlesides, as lived next
door, and had twins herself, owned she never--"

"Good God, will you be quiet, madam?"

"Quiet, sir? I'm sure I haven't said two words since I've been in the
blessed room. I appeal to the _kernel_."

"Well! well! it appears then, Mrs. Ragg, you can think of nothing that
is at all likely to aid us in this plan of awakening, by some strong
impression, the dormant faculties of Tobias?"

"No, gentlemen, no! I only wish I could, poor boy; and there's somebody
else wasting away for grief about him; poor little thing, when she heard
that Tobias was mad, I'm sure I thought she'd have broke her heart, for
if Tobias ever loved anybody in all the world, it was little Minna Gray.
Ah! it's affecting to think how such children love each other, ain't it,
sir? Lord bless you, the sound of her footstep was enough for him, and
his eyes would get like two stars, as he'd clap his hands together, and
cry--'Ah! that's dear Minna.' That was before he went to Mr. Todd's,
poor fellow."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, sir, oh, you haven't an idea."

"I think I have. Who is this Minna Gray, who so enthralled his boyish
fancy?"

"Why, she's widow Gray's only child, and they live in Milford Lane,
close to the Temple, you see, and even Tobias used to go with me to
drink tea with Mrs. Gray, as we was both _bequeathed_ women in a world
of trouble."

"You were what?"

"Bequeathed."

"Bereaved you mean, I suppose, Mrs. Ragg; but how could you tell me that
you knew of no means of moving Tobias's feelings. This Minna Gray, if he
really loves her, is the very thing."

"Lor, sir. What do you mean?"

"Why, I mean that if you can get this Minna Gray here, the possibility
is that it will be the recovery of Tobias. At all events, it is the only
chance of that kind that presents itself. If that fails, we must only
trust to time. How old is this girl?"

"About fourteen, sir, and though I say it--"

"Well, well. Do you now, as a woman of the world, Mrs. Ragg, think that
she has an affection for poor Tobias?"

"Do I think? Lor bless you, sir, she doats on the ground he walks on,
that she does--poor young thing. Hasn't she grizzled a bit. It puts me
in mind of--"

"Yes, yes. Of course it does. Now, Mrs. Ragg, you understand it is an
object with our friend the colonel here, that no one but yourself should
know that Tobias is here. Could you get this young girl to come to tea,
for instance, with you, without telling her what else she is wanted
for?"

"Dear me, yes, sir; for, as I used to say to Mr. Ragg, who is dead and
gone, and buried in St. Martin's--"

"Exactly. Now go and get her by all means, and when she comes here we
will speak to her, but above all things be careful what you say."

"I think Mrs. Ragg is already aware," said Colonel Jeffery, "that her
son's safety, as well as her own, depends upon her discretion in keeping
his whereabouts a profound secret. We will instruct this young girl when
she comes here."

Colonel Jeffery, when he heard that the medical man was of opinion that
the experiment of awakening the feelings of Tobias, by bringing Minna
Gray, was worth trying, at once acquiesced, and urged upon Mrs. Ragg to
go and see Minna. After many more speeches, about as much to the purpose
as those which we have already formed, Mrs. Ragg got herself dressed and
went upon her errand. She was instructed to say that she had found
herself unequal to being a laundress in the Temple, and so had thought
it was better to return to her own original occupation of cook in a
gentleman's family, and that, as she had the liberty to do so, she
wished Minna Gray to come and take tea with her. Thus forewarned of the
part she was to play, Mrs. Ragg started upon her mission, in which we
need not follow her, for the result of it is all that we particularly
care about, and that consisted in her bringing Minna in great triumph to
the colonel's house. Colonel Jeffery, and Captain Rathbone, who was
staying to dine with him, saw the young girl as she came up the garden
path. She was one of those small, delicately beautiful young creatures,
who seem specially made to love and be loved. Her light auburn hair hung
in dancing curls down her fair cheeks, and her beautifully shaped lips
and pearly teeth were of themselves features that imparted much
loveliness to her countenance. She had, too, about her face all the
charm of childish beauty, which bespoke her so young as to have lost
little of that springtide grace, which, alas! is so fleeting. Add to all
this a manner so timid, so gentle, and so retiring, that she seemed to
be an inhabitant of some quieter world than this, and you have Minna
Gray, who had crept into the boyish heart of poor Tobias, before your
eyes.

"What a gentle quiet looking little creature," said the captain.

"She is indeed; and what a contrast!"

"Between her and Mrs. Ragg, you mean? It does indeed look like an
elephant escorting a fawn. But Mrs. Ragg has her good qualities."

"She has, and they are numerous. She is honest and candid as the day,
and almost the only fault that can be laid to her charge is her
garrulity."

"How do you mean to proceed?"

"Why, Rathbone, I mean to condescend to do what, under any other
circumstances, would be most unjustifiable--that is, listen to the
conversation of Mrs. Ragg with Minna Gray; I do so with the concurrence
of the old lady, who is to lead her to speak of Tobias, and it is solely
for the purpose of judging if she really loves the boy, and making a
proper report to the surgeon, that I do so."

"You are right enough, Jeffery; the end in this case, at all events,
sanctifies the means, however defective such a system of philosophy may
be as a general thing. May I likewise be an auditor?"

"I was going to ask you to so far oblige me, for I shall then have the
advantage of your opinion; so you will do me a favour."

There was a small pantry called a butler's pantry close to the kitchen,
into which Mrs. Ragg had taken Minna Gray. A door opened from this
pantry into the kitchen, and another on to the landing at the foot of
the kitchen stairs. Now Mrs. Ragg was to take care that the door opening
to the kitchen should be just ajar, and the colonel and his friend could
get into the pantry by the other mode of entrance. Colonel Jeffery was a
gentleman in the fullest sense of the term, and he kept no useless
bloated menials about him, so the butler's pantry had no butler to
interfere with him, the colonel, in his own house. In the course of a
few minutes Jeffery and Rathbone were in the pantry, from whence they
could both see and hear what passed in the kitchen. To be sure there was
a certain air of restraint about Mrs. Ragg at the thought that her
master was listening to what passed, and that lady had a propensity to
use hard words, of the meaning of which she was in the most delightful
state of ignorance; but as it was to Minna Gray's conversation that the
colonel wanted to listen, these little peculiarities of Mrs. Ragg upon
the occasion did not much matter. Of course, Minna thought she had no
other auditors than her old friend. Mrs. Ragg was quite busy over the
tea.

"Well, my dear," she said to Minna, "this is a world we live in."

Mrs. Ragg, no doubt, intended this as a discursive sort of remark that
might open any conversation very well, and lead to anything, and she was
not disappointed, for it seemed to give to the young girl courage to
utter that which was struggling to her lips.

"Mrs.--Mrs. Ragg," she began, hesitatingly.

"Yes. My dear, let me fill your cup."

"Thank you; but I was going to say--"

"A little more sugar?"

"No, no. But I cannot place a morsel in my lips, Mrs. Ragg, or think or
speak to you of anything else, until you have told me if you have heard
any news of poor--poor--"

"Tobias?"

"Yes--yes--yes!"

Minna Gray placed her two little hands upon her face and burst into
tears. Mrs. Ragg made a snuffling sort of noise that, no doubt, was
highly sympathetic, and after a pause of a few moments' duration, Minna
gathered courage to speak again.

"You know, Mrs. Ragg, the last you told me of him was that--that Mr.
Todd had said he was mad, you know, and then you went to fetch somebody,
and when you came back he was gone; and Mr. Todd told you the next day
that poor Tobias ran off at great speed and disappeared. Has anything
been heard of him since?"

"Ah, my dear, alas! alas!"

"Why do you cry alas?--Have you any more sad news to tell me?"

"He was my only son--and all the world and his wife, as the saying is,
can't tell how much I loved him."

Minna Gray clasped her hands, and, while the tears coursed down her
young fair cheeks, she said--

"And I, too, loved him!"

"I always thought you did, my dear, and I'm sure, if you had been an
angel out of Heaven, my poor boy could not have thought more of you than
he did. There was nothing that you said or did that was not excellent.
He loved the ground you walked on; and a little old worsted mitten, that
you left at our place once, he used to wear round his neck, and kiss it
when he thought no one was nigh, and say--'This was my Minna's!'"

The young girl let her head rest upon her hands, and sobbed
convulsively.

"Lost--lost!" she said, "and poor, kind, good Tobias is lost!"

"No, my dear, it's a long lane that hasn't a turning. Pluck up your
courage, and your courage will pluck up you. Keep sixpence in one
pocket, and hope in another. When things are at the worst they mend. You
can't get further down in a well than the bottom."

Minna sobbed on.

"And so, my dear," added Mrs. Ragg, "I do know something more of
Tobias."

The young girl looked up.

"He lives!--he lives!"

"Lor a mussy, don't lay hold of a body so. Of course he lives, and,
what's more, the doctor says that you ought to see him--he's up stairs."

"Here?--here?"

"Yes, to be sure. That's why I brought you to tea."

Minna Gray took a fit of trembling, and then, making great efforts to
compose herself, she said--

"Tell me all--tell me all!"

"Well, my dear, it's an ill wind that blows nobody good, and so here I
am, cook in as good a place as mortal woman would wish to have. I can't
tell you all the rights of the story, because I don't know it. But
certainly Tobias is up stairs in bed like a gentleman, only they say as
his brains is--is something or another that makes him not understand
anything or anybody, and so you see the doctor says if you speak to him,
who knows but what he may come to himself?"

With an intuitive tact that belongs to some minds, and which Minna Gray,
despite the many disadvantages of her social position, possessed in an
eminent degree, she understood at once the whole affair. Tobias was
suffering from some aberration of intellect, which the voice and the
presence of one whom he loved fondly might dissipate. Would she shrink
from the trial?--would her delicacy take the alarm and overcome her
great desire to recover Tobias? Oh, no; she loved him with a love that
far outstripped all smaller feelings, and, if ever there was a time when
that love took complete possession of her heart, it was at this
affecting moment, when she was told that her voice might have the magic
power of calling back to him the wandering reason that harshness and
ill-usage had for a time toppled from its throne.

"Take me to him!" she cried--"take me to him! If all that is wanted to
recover him be the voice of affection, he will soon be as he was once to
us."

"Well, my dear, take your tea, and I'll go and speak to the _kernel_."

It was now time for Colonel Jeffery and his friend, the captain, to
retire from the pantry, where we need not say that they had been pleased
and affected listeners to what had passed between Mrs. Ragg and the fair
and intelligent Minna Gray, who, in beauty and intelligence, far
exceeded their utmost expectations.




                             CHAPTER XLVII.
                     TOBIAS RECOVERS HIS INTELLECT.


In the course of a quarter of an hour the surgeon was sent for, and then
Mrs. Ragg tapped at the drawing-room door, to give the colonel an
account of the success of her mission; but he at once said to her--

"We know all, Mrs. Ragg. We merely wish to see Tobias first, so that the
medical gentleman may see exactly his condition, and then if you will
bring Minna Gray here I will speak to her, and, I hope, put her quite at
her ease as regards what she has to do."

"Certainly, sir, certainly. Hold fast, and good comes at last."

The surgeon and the two gentlemen went to Tobias's chamber, and there
they found him in the same lethargic condition that, with only
occasional interruptions, he had continued in since he had been in the
colonel's house. These interruptions consisted in moaning appeals for
mercy, and at times the name of Todd would pass his lips, in accents
which showed what a name of terror it was to him. The surgeon placed his
hand upon Tobias's head.

"Tobias!" he said, "Tobias!"

A deep sigh was his answer.

"Tobias! Tobias!"

"Oh, God! God!" cried Tobias, feebly. "Spare me--I will tell nothing.
Oh, spare me, Mr. Todd.--Repent now. There, there--the blood! What a
crowd of dead men. Dead--dead--dead--all dead!"

"No better?" said the colonel.

"Not a bit. On the contrary, the longer he remains in this condition,
the less chance there will be of his recovery. I shall lose hope, if
this last experiment produces no good results. Let us go and speak to
the young girl."

They all descended to the drawing-room, and Minna Gray was summoned.
Colonel Jeffery took her kindly by the hand and led her to a seat, and
then he said to her--

"Now, Miss Gray, remember that all here are friends to you and to
Tobias, and that we all feel deeply for him and for you. You are very
young, both of you, but that is no reason on earth why you should not
love each other."

Minna looked up at him through her tears, as she said--

"Is he very--very ill?"

"He is indeed. We suspect--indeed, I may say we know, that his mind has
received so severe a shock that, for a time, it is deranged; but we hope
that, as that derangement, you understand, has not arisen from any
disease, pleasant and agreeable impressions may restore him. What we
want you to do is to speak to him as you, no doubt, have been in the
habit of doing in happier times."

"Yes, yes, sir."

"I think you know exactly what we mean?"

"I do, sir--indeed I do."

"Oh, bless you, sir, she understands," said Mrs. Ragg. "A nod is as good
as a wink to a blind horse, you know, gentlemen. Handsome is as handsome
does--as I used to say to the late Mr. Ragg, who is naturally dead and
gone, and accordingly buried in St. Martin's--"

"You can tell us that another time, madam," said the surgeon. "At
present, you see we are rather busy. Now, Miss Gray, if you will have
the goodness to come with me, we will see what can be done for our young
friend above stairs."

Poor Minna Gray! How her colour went and came like the sunlight of an
April day, as she accompanied the three gentlemen and Mrs. Ragg up
stairs to Tobias's chamber. How she trembled when they reached the
landing; and what a faintness came over her when the door was opened,
and she saw that dimly-lighted room.

"Courage," whispered Colonel Jeffery to her. "This is a holy errand you
are upon."

"Yes, yes."

"Cut your coat according to your cloth," said Mrs. Ragg, who, provided
she thought of a proverb, was not very particular with regard to its
applicability to the circumstances under which she uttered it. "Keep
your feet to the length of your sheet."

"Pray, madam," said the surgeon, who seemed to have quite a horror of
Mrs. Ragg. "Pray, madam, oblige me by being silent."

"A still tongue makes a wise head."

"Good God, colonel! will you speak to her?"

"Hush, Mrs. Ragg!" said Colonel Jeffery. "Hush! You will perhaps be the
means of spoiling this important effort for the recovery of your son if
you are not perfectly quiet."

Thus admonished, Mrs. Ragg shrank into the background a little, and the
colonel went to the window and let in a little more light. The surgeon
conducted Minna Gray to the bed-side, and she looked upon the boy who
had won her childish heart through a world of tears.

"It is--it is--Tobias!"

"Is he much altered?"

"Oh, yes; much--much. He--he used to look so happy. His--his face was
like a piece of sunshine!"

She sank upon a chair that was by the bed-side, and sobbed.

"This will never do," said the surgeon.

"Wait--oh, wait a little," she whispered. "Only wait a little.--I shall
be better soon."

The surgeon nodded; and then stepping back to the colonel and the
captain, he said--

"This burst of grief must have its way, or it will mar all. We must have
patience."

They all hid themselves behind the folds of the bed furniture, and Mrs.
Ragg sat down in an obscure corner of the room, working her knee up and
down, as though she were nursing an imaginary baby. Gradually the sobs
of Minna Gray subsided, until all was still. She then gently took one of
the thin wasted hands of poor Tobias in her own, and looked at it. Oh,
how changed it was. She then bent over him, and looked in his face. What
permeative lines of care were there, battling with rounded muscles of
early youth! Then she summoned all her courage to speak. She placed her
lips close to his ear, and in the soft sweet accents that had long
before sank deep into his heart, she said--

"Tobias!--my Tobias!"

The boy started.

"Dear Tobias, it is I. Minna!"

He opened his eyes, which had been closed and seemingly cemented by
tears.

"Tobias! Tobias, dear!"

A smile--a heavenly smile. It was the first that had played upon his
lips since he set foot in the shop of Sweeney Todd, now broke like a
sunbeam over his face.

"I am mad--mad!" he said, gently, "or that is the voice of my Minna."

"It is your Minna. It is--it is, Tobias; look at me."

He rose up in the bed--he cast one glance at the well-known and dearly
remembered face, and then, with a gasping sob of joy, he clasped her in
his arms.

"It's done," said the surgeon.

"Thank God!" said Colonel Jeffery.

Mrs. Ragg drew her breath so hard through her nose that she made a noise
like some wild animal in the agonies of suffocation.

"You really know me, Tobias?"

"Know you, dear? Oh, why should I not know you, Minna? God bless you!"

"May He bless you, Tobias."

They wept together; Minna forgot that there was anybody in the world but
herself and Tobias, and parting the long straggling masses of his hair
from before his face, she kissed him.

"For my sake, Tobias, now you will take care of yourself, and recover
quickly."

"Dear--dear Minna."

He seemed never tired of holding her hands and kissing them. Suddenly
the surgeon stepped forward with a small vial in his hand.

"Now, Tobias," he said, "you are much better, but you must take this."

The look of surprise and consternation with which Tobias regarded him
was beyond description. Then he glanced at the bedstead and the rich
hangings, and he said--

"Oh, Minna, what is all this? Where am I? Is it a dream?"

"Give it to him," said the surgeon, handing the vial to Minna. She
placed the neck of it to his lips.

"Drink, Tobias."

Had it been deadly poison she had offered him, Tobias would have taken
it. The vial was drained. He looked in her face again with a smile.

"If this is indeed a dream, my Minna, may I never
awaken--dear--dear--one--I--I--"

[Illustration: Tobias Restored To His Senses By Minna's Assistance.]

He fell back upon the pillow. The smile still lingered upon his face,
but the narcotic which the surgeon had had administered to him had
produced its effect, and the enfeebled Tobias fell into deep sleep.
Minna Gray looked rather alarmed at this sudden falling off of Tobias
from waking to sleeping, but the surgeon quieted her fears.

"All is right," he said. "He will awaken in some hours wonderfully
refreshed, and I have the pleasure of now predicting his perfect cure."

"You do not know," said Colonel Jeffery, "what pleasure that assurance
gives me."

"And me," said the captain.

Minna looked all that she thought, but she could not speak, and Mrs.
Ragg, still kept up the mysterious noise she produced by hard breathing
with her mouth close shut.

"Now, madam," said the surgeon to her, "our young friend must be left
alone for some hours. It is now six o'clock, and I do not expect he will
awaken until twelve. When he does so, I am very much mistaken if you do
not all of you find him perfectly restored and composed, although very
weak."

"I will take care to be at hand," said the colonel. "Miss Gray, perhaps
you will call and see how he is to-morrow, and all I can say is, that
you will be quite welcome to my house whenever you think proper, but let
me impress upon you one thing."

"What is it, sir?"

"The absolute necessity of your keeping Tobias's place of abode and
anything concerning him a most profound secret."

"I will do so."

"If you do not, you will not only endanger the cause of justice, but in
all probability his life, for he has an enemy with great resources, and
of the most unscrupulous disposition in the use of them: I say this much
to you, because the least indiscretion might be fatal."

"I will guard the secret, sir, as I would guard his life."

"That will do--now come down stairs, and let us have a glass of wine to
drink to the speedy restoration to perfect health of Tobias. Come,
Rathbone, what do you think? Shall we be one too many yet for Todd?"

"I begin to think we shall."

"I feel certain of it. So soon as we see that Tobias is sufficiently
well to make any statement, it will be necessary to send for Sir Richard
Blunt."

"Certainly."

"And then I hope and trust that we shall get at something that will
elucidate the mystery that is still attached to the fate of poor
Thornhill."

"Ah, I fear he is gone!"

"Dead?"

"Yes. That fatal string of pearls has heralded him to death, I fear;
but, perhaps we shall hear a something concerning that yet from Tobias."

They all sat down in the drawing-room, and with tearful pleasure Minna
Gray drank a glass of wine to the health of Tobias, after which Mrs.
Ragg saw her home again to Milford Lane, and no doubt all the road from
this colonel's house to there did not want for a prolific subject of
conversation. How happy Minna felt when she put up to Heaven her simple
prayer that night, previous to seeking repose.




                            CHAPTER XLVIII.
                     JOHANNA MAKES A NEW CONFIDANT.


We left the spectacle-maker and his family rather in a state of
confusion. Big Ben the Beef-eater had had his revenge upon both Mrs.
Oakley and the Saint, and it was a revenge that really did them no harm,
so that in that respect it had turned out well. The Rev. Josiah Lupin
did not return to the house, but Mrs. Oakley, in a terrible state of
prostration from the effects of the sickness that had come over her,
staggered again into the parlour. She looked at Mr. Oakley, as she
said--

"If you were half a man you would take the life of that villain for
treating me in the way he has; I have no doubt but he meant to take the
life of the pious Mr. Lupin, and so add him to the list of martyrs."

"My dear," said the spectacle-maker, "if Mr. Lupin intrudes himself into
my house, and any friend of mine turns him out, I am very much obliged
to him."

"Perhaps you would be equally obliged to this monster, whom you call
your friend, if he would turn me out?"

Mr. Oakley shook his head as he said--

"My dear, there are some burthens which can be got rid of, and some that
must be borne."

"Come--come, Mother Oakley," said Ben. "Don't bear malice. You played me
a trick the last time I came here, and now I have played you one. That's
all. It wasn't in human nature not to do it, so don't bear malice."

Mrs. Oakley, if she had been in a condition to do so, no doubt would
have carried on the war with Big Ben, but she decidedly was not, and
after a shudder or two, which looked as though she thought the toad was
beginning again to oppress her, she rose to leave the room.

"Mother," said Johanna, "it was not a real toad."

"But you are!" said Mrs. Oakley, sharply. "You have no more feeling for
your mother than as if she were a brickbat."

Feeling now that at all events she had had the last word at somebody,
Mrs. Oakley made a precipitate retreat, and sought the consolations and
solitude of her own chamber. Mr. Oakley was about to make some speech,
which he prefaced with a sigh, when some one coming into the shop called
his attention, and he left Johanna and Big Ben the Beef-eater together
in the parlour. The moment they were alone, Ben began shaking his head
and making some very mysterious signs, which completely mystified
Johanna. Indeed she began to be afraid that Ben's intellects were not
quite right, although an ordinary observer might have very well supposed
there was something the matter with his nether garments, for he pointed
to them repeatedly, and shook his head at Johanna.

"What is the matter, cousin?" she said.

"Oh, dear!--oh, dear!--oh--oh--oh!"

"Are you ill?"

"No, but I only wonder as you ain't. Didn't I see you in Fleet-street
with these here on?--oh!--oh!--not these here exactly, but another pair.
These would be a trifle too large for you. Oh, dear-a-me! my heart bled
all for to see such a young and delicate little puss as you a taking to
wear the thingamies so soon."

Johanna now began to understand what Ben meant, namely, that he had seen
her in Fleet-street disguised in male attire, with her young friend
Arabella Wilmot.

"Oh, Ben," she said, "you must not think ill of me on that account."

"But--but," said Ben, rather hesitatingly, as if he were only putting a
doubtful proposition, "wasn't it rather unusual?"

"Yes, Ben, but there were reasons why I put on such garments. Surely it
was better to do so than--than--to--"

"Than to go without any?" said Ben.

"No--no, I did not say that--I mean it was better for me to forget a
little of that maiden delicacy which--which--than to let him--"

She burst into tears.

"Holloa!" cried Ben, as he immediately folded her in an immense embrace,
that went very near to smothering her. "Don't you cry, and you may wear
what you like, and I'll come and help you to put 'em on. Come, come,
there's a nice little dear, don't you cry. Lord bless you! you know how
fond I am of you, and always was since you was a little tottering thing,
and couldn't say my name right. Don't you cry. You shall wear 'em as
often as you like, and I'll go behind you in the street, and if anybody
only so much as says half a word to you, I'll be down upon 'em. Fetch
'em now and put 'em on, my dear."

Johanna must have laughed if her life had depended upon her gravity, for
all that Ben said upon the subject was uttered in the sheer simplicity
of a kind heart, and well she knew that in his rough way he doated on
her, and thought there was not such another being in the whole world as
she. And yet he looked upon her as a child, and the imperceptible flight
of time had made no difference in Ben's ideas concerning Johanna. She
was still to him the sweet little child he had so often dandled upon his
knee, and brought fruit and sweetmeats to, when such things were great
treasures. After a few moments he let her go, and Johanna was able to
draw breath again.

"Ben," she said, "I will tell you all."

"All what?"

"How I came to put on--the--the--"

"Oh, these here--very good. Cut on, and let's know all the particulars.
I suppose you felt cold, my dear, eh?"

"No--no."

"No? Well then, tell it quick, for I was always a mortal bad hand at
guessing. Your father is fitting an old gentleman with a pair of
spectacles, and he seems hard to please, so we shall have lots of time.
Go on."

"Your good opinion is of such moment to me," said Johanna, "for I have
very few to love me; now that you have seen me in such a disguise, I
should feel unhappy if I did not tell why I wore it."

Ben lent the most attentive ear to what she said, and then Johanna
briefly and distinctly told him all the story of Mark Ingestrie, and how
he had, as she thought, mysteriously disappeared at the barber's shop in
Fleet-street. It will be seen that she still clung to the idea that the
Thornhill of the arrived ship was no other than her lover. Ben heard her
all out with the most fixed attention. His mouth and eyes gradually
opened wider and wider as she proceeded, partly from wonder at the whole
affair, and partly from intense admiration at the way in which she told
it, which he thought was better than any book he had ever read. When she
had concluded, Ben again folded her in his arms, and she had to struggle
terribly to get away.

"My dear child," he said, "you are a prodigy. Why, there's not an animal
as ever I knew comes near you; and so the poor fellow had his throat cut
in the barber's for his string of pearls?"

"I fear he was murdered."

"Not a doubt of it."

"You really think so, Ben?"

The tone of agony with which this question was put to him, and the look
of utter desolation which accompanied it, alarmed Ben, and he hastily
said--

"Come, come, I didn't mean that. No doubt something has happened; but it
will be all right some day or another, you may depend. Oh, dear!--oh,
dear! The idea of your going to watch the barber with some boy's clothes
on!"

"Tell me what I can do, for my heart and brain are nearly distracted by
my sufferings?"

Ben looked all round the room, and then up at the ceiling, as though he
had a hope and expectation of finding some startling suggestion written
legibly before his eyes somewhere. At length he spoke, saying--

"I tell you what, Johanna, my dear, whatever you do, don't you put on
them things again. You leave it all to me."

"But what will you do?--what can you do, Ben?"

"Well, I don't know exactly; but I'll let you know when it's done."

"But do not run into any danger for my sake."

"Danger? danger? I should like to see the barber that would interfere
with me. No, my dear, no; I'm too well used to all sorts of animals for
that. I'll see what I can do, and let you know all about it to-morrow,
and in the meantime, you stick to the petticoats, and don't be putting
on those thingamies again. You leave it to me--will you now?"

"Until to-morrow?"

"Yes, I'll be here to-morrow about this time, my dear, and I hope I
shall have some news for you. Well, I declare, it's just like a book, it
is. You are quite a prodigy."

Ben would have treated Johanna to another of the suffocating embraces,
but she contrived to elude him; and, as by this time the old gentleman
in the shop was suited with a pair of spectacles, Mr. Oakley returned to
the parlour. Johanna placed her finger upon her lips as an indication to
Ben that he was to say nothing to her father of what had passed between
them, for, although Mr. Oakley knew generally the story of his
daughter's attachment to Mark Ingestrie, as the reader is aware, he knew
nothing of the expedition to Fleet-street in disguise. Ben, feeling that
he had now an important secret to keep, shut his mouth hard, for fear it
should escape, and looked so mysterious, that any one more sharp-sighted
than the old spectacle-maker must have guessed that something very
unusual was the matter. Mr. Oakley, however, had no suspicions; but as
this state of things was very irksome to Ben, he soon rose to take his
leave.

"I shall look in again to-morrow," he said, "Cousin Oakley."

"We shall be glad to see you," said Mr. Oakley.

"Yes," added Johanna, who felt it incumbent upon her to say something,
"we shall be very glad to see you indeed."

"Ah," said her father, "you and Ben were always great friends."

"And we always shall be," said Ben. Then he thought that he would add
something wonderfully clever, so as completely to ward off all
suspicions of Oakley's, if he had any, and he added--"She ain't like
some young creatures that think nothing of putting on what they
shouldn't. Oh dear, no--not she. Bye, bye. I'll come to-morrow."

Ben was quite pleased when he got out of the house, for among the things
that he (Ben) found it difficult to do, was to keep a secret.

"Well," he said, when he was fairly in the open air, "if I ain't rather
nonplussed at all this. What shall I do?"

This was a question much easier asked than answered, as Ben found; but,
however, he felt an irresistible desire to go and have a look at the
shop of Sweeney Todd.

"I can easily," he said, "go to Fleet-street, and then, if I find myself
late, I can take a boat at Blackfriars for the Tower-stairs, and after
all get in to dinner comfortably enough."

With this conclusion, Ben set off at a good pace down Snow-hill, and was
soon at the beginning of Fleet-street. He walked on until he came to
Sweeney Todd's shop, and there he paused. Now we have previously
remarked that there was one great peculiarity in the shop-window of
Todd, and that was that the articles in it were so well arranged that
some one always was in the way of obtaining any view from the outside
into the establishment. Todd was therefore secure against the dangers
arising from peeping and prying. Big Ben placed himself close to the
window, and made an attempt, by flattening his nose against the panes of
glass, to peep in; but it was all in vain. He could not obtain the
smallest glimpse into the inside.

"Confound it," he cried, "what a cunning sort of animal this is to be
sure--he won't let one peep through the bars of his cage, that he
won't."

Now Sweeney Todd became aware, by the additional darkness of his shop,
that some one must be quite close to the window, and therefore, availing
himself of a peep-hole that he had expressly for the purpose of
reconnoitering the passing world without, he took a long look at Big
Ben. It was some moments before Ben caught sight of a great eye in the
window of Sweeney Todd glancing at him. This eye appeared as if it were
set in the centre of a placard, which announced in glowing language the
virtues of some condiment for the hair or the skin, and it had a most
ferocious aspect. Big Ben looked fascinated and transfixed to the spot,
and then he muttered to himself--

"Well, if that's his eye, it's a rum 'un. Howsomdever, it's no use
staying outside: I'll pop in and get shaved, and then I shall be able to
look about me. Who's afraid?"

As Ben turned round, he saw a plainly-attired man close to his elbow;
but he took no notice of him, although from his close proximity to him
it was quite impossible that the plain-looking man could have failed to
overhear what Ben said. In another moment Big Ben was in Todd's shop.

"Shaved or dressed, sir?" said Todd.

"Shaved," said Ben, as he cast his eyes round the shop.

"Looking for anything, sir?" said Todd.

"Oh, no--nothing at all. Only a friend of mine, you see, said this was
such a nice shop, you understand, to be shaved in."

"Was your friend finished off here, sir?"

"Well, I rather think he was."

"Pray sit down. Fine weather, sir, for the season. Now, pussy, my dear,
get out of the way of the hot water." Todd was addressing an imaginary
cat. "Are you fond of animals, sir? Lord bless me, I'm fond of all the
world. God made us all, sir, from a creeping beetle to a beef-eater."

"Very likely," said Big Ben, as he seated himself in the barber's chair.

"And so," added Todd, as he mixed up a lather, and made the most
horrible faces, "we ought to love each other in this world of care. How
is your friend, sir, who was so kind as to recommend my shop?"

"I should like to know."

"What, is he in eternity? Dear me!"

"Well, I rather think he is."

"Was it the gentleman who was hung last Monday, sir?"

"Confound you, no. But there's somebody else who I think will be hung
some Monday. I tell you what it is, Mr. Barber, my friend never got
further than this infernal shop, so I'm come to enquire about him."

"What sort of man, sir?" said Todd, with the most imperturbable
coolness.

"What kind of man?"

"Yes, sir. If you favour me with his description, perhaps I may be able
to tell you something about him. By the bye, if you will excuse me for
one moment, I'll bring you something that a gentleman left here one
day."

"What is it?"

"I will satisfy you directly, sir, and I'm quite certain your mind will
be at rest about your friend, sir, whoever he was. Remarkable weather,
sir, for the time of year."

Todd had got only half way from the shop to the parlour, when the
shop-door opened, and the plain-looking man walked in--the very same
plain man who had stood so close to Big Ben at Todd's window.

"Shaved," he said.

Todd paused.

"If, sir, you will call again in a few minutes, or if you have any call
to make and can conveniently look in as you come back--"

"No, I'll take a seat."

[Illustration: Todd And The Beefeater Have Some Words.]

The plain-looking man sat down close to the door, and looked as calm and
as unconcerned as any one possibly could. The look with which Todd
regarded him for a moment, and only one moment, was truly horrible. He
then quietly went into his back parlour. In a moment he entered with a
common kid glove, and said to Ben--

"Did this belong to your friend?--a gentleman left it here one day."

Ben shook his head.

"I really don't know," he said. "Come, Mr. Barber, finish the shaving,
for that gentleman is waiting."

Ben was duly shaved; while the plain-looking man sat quietly in the
chair by the door, and when the operation was finished, Ben looked in
Todd's face, and said, solemnly--

"A string of pearls."

"Sir," said Todd, without changing countenance in the least.

"A string of pearls.--Murder!"

"A what, sir?"

Ben look staggered. He well knew that if he had cut any one's throat for
a string of pearls, that such words said to him would have driven him
frantic, but when he saw no change in Todd's face, he begun to think
that, after all, the accusation must be unfounded, and muttering to
himself--

"It must be nothing but the child's fancy after all," he hastily threw
down twopence and left the shop.

"Now, sir," said Todd, to the plain-looking man.

"Thank you."

The plain-looking man rose, and as he did so he seemed just to glance
through the door into the street as it was opened by Ben. Immediately
his face was full of smiles, as he cried--

"Ah, Jenkins, is that you? Ha, ha! I missed you this morning.--Excuse
me, Mr. Barber, I'll look in again. My old friend Jenkins has just gone
by."

With this, out he flew from Todd's shop like a shot, and was gone
towards Temple Bar, before the barber could move or lay down the shaving
cloth which he had in his hands all ready to tuck under his chin. Todd
stood for a few moments in an attitude of irresolution. Then he spoke--

"What does all this mean?" he said. "Is there danger? Curses on them
both, I would have--; but no matter, I must be wrong--very wrong. That
string of pearls may yet destroy me.--Destroy! no--no--no. They must
have yet more wit before they get the better of me, and yet how I
calculated upon the destruction of that man. I must think--I must
think."

Todd sat down in his own strong chair, and gave himself up to what is
popularly denominated a brown study.




                             CHAPTER XLIX.
                      THE VAULTS OF ST. DUNSTAN'S.


A ponderous stone was raised in the flooring of St. Dunstan's church.
The beadle, the churchwarden, and the workmen shrunk back--back--back,
until they could get no further.

"Ain't it a _norrid_ smell," said the beadle.

Then the plain-looking man who had been at Sweeney Todd's advanced. He
was no other than Sir Richard Blunt, and whispering to the churchwarden,
he said--

"If what I expect be found here, we cannot have too few witnesses to it.
Let the workmen be dismissed."

"As you please, Sir Richard. Faugh! what an awful--fuff!--stench there
is. I have no doubt they won't be sorry to get away. Here, my men,
here's half-a-crown for you. Go and get something to drink and come back
in an hour."

"Thank yer honour!" cried one of the men. "An' sure, by St. Patrick's
bones, we want something to drink, for the stench in the church sticks
in my blessed throat like a marrow bone, so it does."

"Get out," said the beadle; "I hates low people, and _hirish_. They
thinks no more of beetles than nothink in the world."

The workmen retired, laughing; and when the church was clear of them,
the churchwarden said to Sir Richard Blunt--

"Did you ever, Sir Richard, smell such a horrid charnel-house sort of
stench as comes up from that opening in the floor of the old church?"

Sir Richard shook his head, and was about to say something, when the
sound of a footstep upon the pavement of the church made him look round,
and he saw a fat, pursy-looking individual approaching.

"Oh, it's Mr. Vickley, the overseer," said the beadle. "I hopes as yer
is well, Mr. Vickley. Here's a horrid smell."

"God bless me!" cried the overseer, as with his fat finger and thumb he
held his snub nose. "What's this? It's worse and worse."

"Yes, sir," said the beadle; "talking of the smell, we have let the cat
out of the bag, I think."

"Good gracious! put her in again, then. It can't be a cat."

"Begging your pardon, Mr. Vickley, I only spoke _anatomically_. If you
comes here, sir, you'll find that all the smell comes out of this here
opening."

"What! An opening close to my pew! My family pew, where I every Sunday
enjoy my repose--I mean my hopes of everlasting glory? Upon my life, I
think it's a piece of--of d--d impudence to open the floor of the
church, close to my pew. If there was to be anything of the sort done,
couldn't it have been done somewhere among the free sittings, I should
like to know?"

"Mr. Vickley," said Sir Richard, "pray be satisfied that I have
sufficient authority for what I do here; and if I had thought it
necessary to take up the flooring of your pew while you had been in it,
I should have done it."

"And pray, sir," said Mr. Vickley, swelling himself out to as large a
size as possible, and glancing at his watch chain, to see that all the
seals hung upon the convexity of his paunch as usual--"who are you?"

"Oh, dear--oh, dear," said the beadle. "Conwulsions!--conwulsions! What
a thing it is to see authorities a-going it at each other.
Gentlemen--gentlemen. Conwulsions!--ain't there lots of poor people in
the world? Don't you be a-going it at each other."

"I am a magistrate," said Sir Richard.

"And I am an over--seer. Ah!"

"You may be an overseer or an underseer, if you like. I am going to
search the vaults of St. Dunstan's."

The churchwarden now took the overseer aside, and after a while
succeeded in calming down his irascibility.

"Oh, well--well," said Mr. Vickley. "Authorities is authorities; and if
so be as the horrid smell in the church can be got rid of, I'm as
willing as possible. It has often prevented me sleeping--I mean
listening to the sermon. Your servant, sir--I shall, of course, be very
happy to assist you."

The beadle wiped his face with his large yellow handkerchief as he
said--

"Now this here is delightful and affecting, to see authorities agreeing
together. Lord, why should authorities snap each other's noses off, when
there's lots o' poor people as can be said anything to and done anything
to, and they may snap themselves?"

"Well, well," added Mr. Vickley. "I am quite satisfied. Of course, if
there's anything disagreeable to be done in a church, and it can be done
among the free seats, it's all the better; and indeed, if the smell in
St. Dunstan's could have been kept away from the respectable part of the
congregation, I don't know that it would have mattered much."

"_Conwulsions!_" cried the beadle. "It wouldn't have mattered at all,
gentlemen. But only think o' the bishop smelling it. Upon my life,
gentlemen, I did think, when I saw the Right Rev. Father in God's nose a
looking up and down, like a cat when she smells a bunch o' lights, and
knowed as it was all owing to the smell in the church, I did think as I
could have gone down through the floor, cocked hat and all, that I did.
_Conwulsions_--that was a moment."

"It was," said the churchwarden.

"Mercy--mercy," said Mr. Vickley.

The beadle was so affected at the remembrance of what had happened at
the confirmation, that he was forced to blow his nose with an energy
that produced a trumpet-like sound in the empty church, and echoed again
from nave to gallery. Sir Richard Blunt had let all the discourse go on
without paying the least attention to it. He was quietly waiting for the
foul vapours that arose from the vaults beneath the church to dissipate
a little before he ventured upon exploring them. Now, however, he
advanced and spoke.

"Gentlemen, I hope I shall be able to rid St. Dunstan's of the stench
which for a long time has given it so unenviable a reputation."

"If you can do that," said the churchwarden, "you will delight the whole
parish. It has been a puzzle to us all where the stench could come
from."

"Where is the puzzle now?" said Sir Richard Blunt, as he pointed to the
opening in the floor of the church, from whence issued like a steamy
vapour such horrible exhalations.

"Why, certainly it must come from the vaults."

"But," said the overseer, "the parish books show that there has not been
any one buried in any of the vaults directly beneath the church for
thirty years."

"Then," said the beadle, "it's a very wrong thing of respectable
parishioners--for, of course, them as has waults is respectable--to keep
quiet for thirty years and then begin stinking like blazes. It's
uncommon wrong--_conwulsions_!"

Sir Richard Blunt took a paper from his pocket and unfolded it.

"From this plan," he said, "that I have procured of the vaults of St.
Dunstan's, it appears that the stone we have raised, and which was
numbered thirty, discloses a stone staircase communicating with two
passages, from which all the vaults can be reached. I propose searching
them; and now, gentlemen, and you, Mr. Beadle, listen to me."

They all three looked at him with surprise as he took another letter
from his pocket.

"Here," he said, "are a few words from the Secretary of State. Pray read
them, Mr. Vickley."

The overseer read as follows--

"The Secretary of State presents his compliments to Sir Richard Blunt,
and begs to say that as regards the affair at St. Dunstan's, Sir Richard
is to consider himself armed with any extraordinary powers he may
consider necessary."

"Now, gentlemen," added Sir Richard Blunt, "if you will descend with me
into the vaults, all I require of you is the most profound secrecy with
regard to what you may see there. Do you fully understand?"

"Yes," stammered Mr. Vickley, "but I rather think I--I would as soon not
go."

"Then, sir, be silent regarding the going of others. Will you go, sir?"
to the churchwarden.

"Why yes, I--I think I ought."

"I shall be obliged to go. I may feel the want of a witness. We will
take you with us, Mr. Beadle, of course."

"Me--me? Conwulsions!"

"Yes--yes. You go, you know, _ex officio_."

"Ex, the deuce, I don't want to go. Oh conwulsions! conwulsions!"

"We cannot dispense with your services," said the churchwarden. "If you
refuse to go, it will be my duty to lay your conduct before the vestry."

"Oh--oh--oh!"

"Get a torch," said Sir Richard Blunt, "and I will lower it down the
opening in the floor. If the air is not so bad as to extinguish the
light, it will not be too bad for us to breathe for a short space of
time."

Most reluctantly, and with terrible misgivings of what might be the
result of the frightful adventure into which he was about to be dragged,
the beadle fetched a link from the vestry. It was lighted, and Sir
Richard Blunt tying a string to it, let it down into the passage beneath
the church. The light was not extinguished, but it burnt feebly and with
but a wan and sickly lustre.

"It will do," said Sir Richard. "We can live in that place, although a
protracted stay might be fatal. Follow me; I will go first, and I hope
we shall not have our trouble only for our pains."




                               CHAPTER L.
                       THE DESCENT TO THE VAULTS.


Sir Richard commenced the descent.

"Come on," he said. "Come on."

He got down about half a dozen steps, but finding that no one followed
him he paused, and called out--

"Remember that time is precious. Come on!"

"Why don't you go?" said the churchwarden to the beadle.

"What! Me go afore a blessed churchwarden? Conwulsions--no! I thinks and
I hopes as I knows my place better."

"Well, but upon this occasion, if I don't mind it--"

"No--no, I could not. Conwulsions--no!"

"Ah!" said Sir Richard Blunt. "I see how it is; I shall have to do all
this business alone, and a pretty report I shall have to make to the
Secretary of State about the proceedings of the authorities of St.
Dunstan's."

The churchwarden groaned.

"I'm a coming, Sir Richard--I'm a coming. Oh dear, I tell you what it
is, Mr. Beadle, if you don't follow me, and close too, I'll have you
dismissed as sure as eggs is eggs."

"Conwulsions! conwulsions! I'm a coming."

The churchwarden descended the stairs, and the beadle followed him.
Down--down they went, guided by the dim light of the torch carried by
Sir Richard, who had not waited for them after the last words he had
spoken.

"Can you fetch your blessed breath, sir?" said the beadle.

"Hardly," said the churchwarden, gasping. "It is a dreadful place."

"Oh, yes--yes."

"Stop--Stop. Sir Richard--Sir Richard!"

There was no reply. The light from the torch grew more and more
indistinct as Sir Richard Blunt increased his distance from them, and at
length they were in profound darkness.

"I can't stand this," cried the churchwarden; and he faced about to
ascend to the church again. In his effort to do so quickly, he stretched
out his hand, and seized the beadle by the ancle, and as that personage
was not quite so firm upon his legs as might be desired, the effort of
this sudden assault was to upset him, and he rolled over upon the
churchwarden, with a force that brought them both sprawling to the
bottom of the little staircase together. Luckily they had not far to
fall, for they had not been more than six or eight steps from the foot
of the little flight. Terror and consternation for a few moments
deprived each of them of the power of speech. The beadle, however, was
the first to recover, and he in a stentorian voice called--

"Murder! Murder!"

Then the churchwarden joined in the cries, and they buffeted each other
in vain efforts to rise, each impeding the other to a degree that
rendered it a matter of impossibility for either of them to get to their
feet. Mr. Vickley, who was waiting in the church above, with no small
degree of anxiety, the report from below, heard these sounds of
contention and calls for help with mingled horror. He at once made a
rush to the door of the church, and, no doubt, would have endangered the
success of all Sir Richard Blunt's plans, if he had not been caught in
the arms of a tall stout man upon the very threshold of the church door.

"Help! murder! Who are you?"

"Crotchet they calls me, and Crotchet's my name. London my birth place,
is yourn the same? What's the row?"

"Call a constable. There's blue murder going on in the vaults below."

"The devil there is. Just you get in there, will you, and don't you stir
for your life, old fellow."

So saying, Mr. Crotchet, who knew the importance of secrecy in the whole
transaction, and who had been purposely awaiting for Sir Richard Blunt,
thrust Vickley into a pew, and slammed the door of it shut. Down fell
the overseer to the floor, paralysed with terror; and then Mr. Crotchet
at once proceeded to the opening in the floor of the church, and
descended without a moment's hesitation.

"Hilloa!" he cried, as he alighted at the bottom of the stairs upon the
churchwarden's back. "Hilloa, Sir Richard, where are you?"

"Here," said a voice, and with the torch nearly extinguished, Sir
Richard Blunt made his appearance from the passage. "Who is there?"

"Crotchet, it is."

"Indeed. Why, what brought you here?"

"What a row."

"Why--why, what's all this? You are standing upon somebody. Why bless my
heart it's--"

Out went the torch.

"Fire!--help!--murder!" shouted the beadle, "I'm being suffocated. Oh,
conwulsions! Here's a death for a beadle. Murder! robbery.
Fire--oh--oh--oh."

The churchwarden groaned awfully.

"Ascend, and get a light," said Sir Richard. "Quick, Crotchet, quick!
God only knows what is the matter with all these people."

Both Crotchet and Sir Richard Blunt scrambled over the bodies of the
churchwarden and the beadle, and soon reached the church. The
churchwarden made a desperate effort, and, shaking himself free of the
beadle, he ascended likewise, and rolled into a pew, upon the floor of
which he sat, looking a little deranged.

"If you don't come up," said Sir Richard Blunt, directing his voice down
the staircase, "we will replace the stone, and you may bid adieu to the
world."

"Conwulsions!" roared the beadle. "Oh, don't--conwulsions!"

Up he tumbled, with the most marvellous celerity, and rolled into the
church, never stopping until he was brought up by the steps in front of
the communion-table, and there he lay, panting and glaring around him,
having left his cocked hat in the regions below. Sir Richard Blunt
looked ghastly pale, which Crotchet observing, induced him to take a
small flask from his pocket, filled with choice brandy, which he handed
to his chief.

"Thank you," said Sir Richard.

The magistrate took a draught, and then he handed it to the
churchwarden, as he said--

"I'll fill it again."

"All's right."

The churchwarden took a pull at the brandy, and then the beadle was
allowed to finish it. They were both wonderfully recovered.

"Oh, Sir Richard," said the churchwarden, "what have you seen?"

"Nothing particular."

"Indeed!"

"No. You can have the stone replaced as soon as you like, over the
opening to the vaults."

"And you have seen nothing?" said the beadle.

"Nothing to speak of. If you have any doubts or any curiosity, you can
easily satisfy yourself. There's the opening. Pray descend. You see I
have escaped, so it cannot be very dangerous to do so. I will not myself
go again, but I will wait for either of you, if you please. Now,
gentlemen, go, and you will be able to make your own discoveries."

"Me?" cried the beadle. "Me? Oh, conwulsions! I thinks I sees me."

"Not I," said the churchwarden. "Cover it up--cover it up. I don't want
to go down. I would not do so for a thousand pounds."

A covert smile was upon the lips of Sir Richard Blunt as he heard this,
and he added--

"Very well; I have no objection, of course, to its being at once covered
up; and I think the least that is said about it, will be the better."

"No doubt of that," said the churchwarden.

"Conwulsions! yes," said the beadle. "If I was only quite sure as all my
ribs was whole, I shouldn't mind; but somebody stood a-top of me for a
good quarter of an hour, I'm sure."

Some of the workmen now began to arrive, and Sir Richard Blunt pointed
to them, as he said to the churchwarden--

"Then the stone can be replaced without any difficulty, now; and, sir,
let me again caution you to say nothing about what has passed here
to-day."

"Not a word--not a word. If you fancy somebody stood upon your ribs, Mr.
Beadle, I am quite sure somebody did upon mine."

The workmen were now directed to replace the stone in its former
position; and when that was completely done, and some mortar pressed
into the crevices, Sir Richard Blunt gave a signal to Crotchet to follow
him, and they both left the church together.

"Now, Crotchet, understand me."

"I'll try," said Crotchet.

"No one, for the future, is to be shaved in Sweeney Todd's shop alone."

"Alone?"

"Yes. You will associate with King, Morgan, and Godfrey; I will stand
all necessary expenses, and one or the other of you will always follow
whoever goes into the shop, and there wait until he comes out again.
Make what excuses you like. Manage it how you will; but only remember,
Todd is never again to have a customer all to himself."

"Humph!"

"Why do you say humph?"

"Oh, nothing partickler; only hadn't we better grab him at once?"

"No; he has an accomplice or accomplices, and their discovery is most
important. I don't like to do things by halves, Crotchet; and so long as
I know that no mischief will result from a little delay, and it will
not, if you obey my instructions, I think it better to wait."

"Very good."

"Go at once, then, and get your brother officers, and remember that
nothing is to withdraw your and their attention from this piece of
business."

"All's right. You know, Sir Richard, you have only to say what's to be
done, and it's as good as done. Todd may shave now as many people as he
likes, but I don't think he'll polish 'em off in his old way quite so
easy."

"That's right. Good day."

"When shall we see you, Sir Richard?" "About sunset."

By the time this little conversation was over, Sir Richard Blunt and
Crotchet had got through Temple Bar, and then they parted, Crotchet
taking his way back to Fleet Street, and Sir Richard Blunt walking
hastily to Downing Street. When he got there he entered the official
residence of the Secretary of State for the Home Department, and being
well known to the clerk, he was at once conducted into a little room
carefully hung round with crimson cloth, so as to deaden the sound of
any voices that might be raised in it. In the course of a few minutes a
small door was opened, and a shabby looking man entered, with a
hesitating expression upon his face.

"Ah, Sir Richard Blunt," he said, "is that you?"

"Yes, your lordship, and if you are disengaged for a few minutes, I have
something to communicate."

"Ah, some new plot. Confound those Jacobin rascals!"

"No, my lord, the affair is quite domestic and social. It has no shade
of politics about it."

The look of interest which the face of the secretary had assumed was
gone in a moment, but still he could not very well refuse now to hear
what Sir Richard Blunt had to say, and the conference lasted a quarter
of an hour. At its termination, as Sir Richard was leaving the room, the
secretary said--

"Oh, yes, of course, take full discretionary powers, and the Home-office
will pay all expenses. I never heard of such a thing in all my life."

"Nor I, my lord."

"It's really horrible."

"It is even so far as we know already, and yet I think there is much to
learn. I shall, of course, communicate to your lordship anything that
transpires."

"Certainly--certainly. Good day."

Sir Richard Blunt left the Secretary of State, and proceeded to his own
residence, and while he is there, making some alteration in his dress,
we may as well take a glance at Crotchet, and see what that energetic
but somewhat eccentric individual is about. After parting with Sir
Richard Blunt at Temple Bar, he walked up Fleet Street, upon Sweeney
Todd's side of the way, until he overtook a man with a pair of
spectacles on, and a stoop in his gait, as though age had crept upon
him.

"King," said Crotchet.

"All right," said the spectacled old gentleman in a firm voice. "What's
the news?"

"A long job, I think. Where's Morgan?"

"On the other side of the way."

"Well, just listen to me as we walk along, and if you see him, beckon
him over to us."

As they walked along Crotchet told King what were the orders of Sir
Richard Blunt, and they were soon joined by Morgan. The other officer,
Godfrey, who had been mentioned by the magistrate, was sent for.

"Now," said Crotchet, "here we are, four of us, and so you see we can
take it two and two for four hours at a stretch as long as this
confounded barber's shop keeps open."

"But," said Morgan, "he will suspect something."

"Well, we can't help that. It's quite clear he smugs the people, and all
we have got to do is to prevent him smugging any more of 'em you see."

"Well, well, we must do the best we can."

"Exactly; so now keep a bright look out, and hang it all, we have been
in enough rum adventures to be able to get the better of a rascally
barber, I should think. Look out--look out; there's somebody going in
now."




                              CHAPTER LI.
                     JOHANNA RUSHES TO HER DESTINY.


Johanna had enough confidants now. Her father--Colonel Jeffery--Big
Ben--and Arabella Wilmot, all knew

    "The sad story of her love."

It will be a hard case if, among so many councillors, she hits upon the
worst--a most truly hazardous course of proceeding; but then it is a
fault of the young to mistake daring for ability, and to fancy that that
course of proceeding which involves the most personal risk is
necessarily the most likely to be successful. Colonel Jeffery was, of
all Johanna Oakley's advisers, the one who was most likely to advise her
well, but unfortunately he had told her that he loved her, and from that
time, with an instinctive delicacy of feeling which no one could have to
greater perfection than Johanna, she had shunned him. And yet the
reader, who knows the colonel well, knows that, quite irrespective of
the attachment that had sprung up in his bosom for the beautiful and
heart-stricken girl, he would have played the part of a sincere friend
to her and stood manfully between her and all danger. But it was not to
be. From the moment that he had breathed to her the secret of his
attachment, a barrier was, in her imagination, raised between them. Her
father evidently was not one who could or who would advise anything at
all energetic; and as for Big Ben, the conversation she had had with him
upon the subject had quite been sufficient to convince her that to take
him out of the ordinary routine of his thoughts and habits was
thoroughly to bewilder him, and that he was as little calculated to plot
and to plan in any emergency as a child. She would indeed have trembled
at the result of the confidential communication to Big Ben, if she had
been aware of the frightfully imprudent manner in which he had thrown
himself into communication and collision with Todd, the consequences of
which glaring act of indiscretion he was only saved from by Sir Richard
Blunt entering the shop, and remaining there until he (Ben) was shaved.
Under all these circumstances, then, Johanna found herself thrown back
upon her old friend Arabella Wilmot. Now, Arabella was the worst adviser
of all, for the romantic notions she had received from her novel
reading, imparted so strong a tone to her character, that she might be
said in imagination to live in a world of the mind. It was, as the
reader will recollect, to Arabella Wilmot that Johanna owed the idea of
going to Todd in boy's apparel--a measure fraught with frightful danger,
and yet, to the fancy of the young girl, fascinating upon that very
account, because it had the appearance as though she were doing
something really serious for Mark Ingestrie. To Arabella, then, Johanna
went, after Ben had left her, and finding her young friend within, she
told her all that had occurred since they last met.

"What shall I do?" she said. "I tell my tale of woe, and people look
kind upon me, but no one helps me."

"Oh, Johanna, can you say that of me?"

"No, no. Not of you, Arabella, for you see I have come to you again; but
of all others, I can and may say it."

"Comfort yourself, my dear Johanna. Comfort yourself, my dear friend.
Come, now--you will make me weep too, if I see those tears."

"What shall I do?--what shall I do?"

"There, now, I am putting on my things; and as you are dressed, we will
go out for a walk, and as we go along we can talk of the affair, and you
will find your spirits improve by exercise. Come, my dear Johanna. Don't
you give way so."

"I cannot help it. Let us go."

"We will walk round St. Paul's Churchyard."

"No--no. To Fleet Street--to Fleet Street!"

"Why would you wish to add to your sorrows, by again looking upon that
shop?"

"I do not know, I cannot tell you; but a horrible species of fascination
draws me there, and if I come from home, I seem as though I were drawn
from all other places towards that one by an irresistible attraction. It
seems as though the blood of Mark Ingestrie called aloud to me to
revenge his murder, by bringing the perpetrators of it to justice. Oh,
my friend--my Arabella, I think I shall go mad."

Johanna sunk upon her knees by a chair, and hid her fair face in her
hands, as she trembled with excess of emotion. Arabella Wilmot began to
be really alarmed at the consequences of her friend's excited and
overwrought feelings.

"Oh, Johanna--Johanna!" she cried, "cheer up. You shall go when you
please, so that you will not give way to this sorrow. You do not know
how much you terrify me. Rise--rise, I implore you. We will go to Fleet
Street, since such is your wish."

After a time, Johanna recovered from the burst of emotion that had taken
such certain possession of her, and she was able to speak more calmly
and composedly to her friend than she had yet done during that visit.
The tears she had shed, and the show of feeling that had crept over her,
had been a great relief in reality.

"Can you pardon me for thus tormenting you with my grief?" said Johanna.

"Do not talk so. Rather wonder how I should pardon you if you tell your
griefs elsewhere. To whom should you bring them but to the bosom of one
who, however she may err in judgment regarding you, cannot err in
feeling."

Johanna could only press her friend's hand in her own, and look the
gratitude which she had not the language to give utterance to. It being
then settled that they were to go to Fleet Street, it next became a
matter of rather grave debate between them whether they were to go as
they were, or Johanna was to again equip herself in the disguise of a
boy.

"This is merely a visit of observation, Johanna; I will go as I am."

"Very well, dear."

They accordingly set out, and as the distance from the house of Arabella
Wilmot's father was but short to the shop of Sweeney Todd, they soon
caught sight of the projecting pole that was his sign.

"Now be satisfied," said Arabella, "by passing twice; once up Fleet
Street, and once down it."

"I will," said Johanna.

Todd's shop was closed as usual. There was never an open door to that
establishment, so that it was, after all, but a barren satisfaction for
poor Johanna to pass the place where her imagination, strengthened by
many circumstantial pieces of evidence, told her Mark Ingestrie had met
with his death; still, as she had said to Arabella before starting, a
horrible sort of fascination drew her to the spot, and she could not
resist the fearful attraction that the outside of Todd's shop had for
her. They passed rather rapidly, for Arabella Wilmot did not wish
Johanna to pause, for fear she should be unable to combat her feelings,
and make some sort of exhibition of them in the open street.

"Are you content, Johanna?" she said. "Must we pass again?"

"Oh, yes--yes. Again and again; I can almost fancy that by continued
looking at that place I could see what has been the fate of Mark."

"But this is imagination and folly."

"It may be so, but when the realities of life have become so hideously
full of horrors, one may be excused for seeking some consolation from
the fairy cave. Arabella, let us turn again."

They had got as far as Temple Bar, when they again turned, and this time
Johanna would not pass the shop so abruptly as she had done before, and
any one, to see the marked interest with which she paused at the window,
would have imagined that she must have some lover there whom she could
see, notwithstanding the interior of the shop was so completely
impervious to all ordinary gazers.

"There is nothing to see," said Arabella.

"No. But yet--ha!--look--look!"

Johanna pointed to one particular spot of the window, and there was the
eye of Sweeney Todd glaring upon them.

"We are observed," whispered Arabella; "it will be much better to leave
the window at once. Come away--oh, come away, Johanna."

"Not yet--not yet. Oh, if I could look well at that man's face, I think
I ought to be able to judge if he were likely to be the murderer of Mark
Ingestrie."

Todd came to his door.

"Good God, he is here!" said Arabella. "Come away. Come!"

"Never. No! Perhaps this is providential. I will, I must look at this
man, happen what may."

Todd glared at the two young girls like some ogre intent upon their
destruction, and as Johanna looked at him, a painter who loved contrast,
might have indeed found a study, from the wonderful difference between
those two human countenances. They neither spoke for some few moments,
and it was reserved for Todd to break the silence.

"What do you want here?" he cried, in a hoarse rough voice. "Be off with
you. What do you mean by knocking at the window of an honest tradesman?
I don't want to have anything to say to such as you."

"He--he did it!" gasped Johanna.

"Did what?" said Todd, advancing in a menacing attitude, while his face
assumed a most diabolical expression of concealed hatred. "Did what?"

"Stop him! Stop him!" cried a voice from the other side of the street.
"Stop Pison, he's given me the slip, and I'm blessed if he won't pitch
into that ere barber. Stop him. Pison! Pison! Come here, boy. Come here!
Oh, lor, he's nabbed him. I knew'd he would, as sure as a horse's hind
leg ain't a gammon o' bacon. My eyes, won't there be a row--he's nabbed
the barber, like ninepence."

Before the ostler at the Bullfinch, for it was from his lips this speech
came, could get one half of it uttered, the dog--who is known to the
readers by the name of Hector, as well as his new name of Pison--dashed
over the road, apparently infuriated at the sight of Todd, and rushing
upon him, seized him with his teeth. Todd gave a howl of rage and pain,
and fell to the ground. The whole street was in an uproar in a moment,
but the ostler rushing over the way, seized the dog by the throat, and
made him release Todd, who crawled upon all fours into his own shop. In
another moment he rushed out with a razor in his hand.

[Illustration: Hector's Attack On Sweeney Todd.]

"Where's the dog?" he cried. "Where's the fiend in the shape of a dog?"

"Hold hard!" said the ostler, who held Hector between his knees. "Hold
hard. I have got him, old chap."

"Get out of the way. I'll have his life."

"No you won't."

"Humph!" cried a butcher's boy who was passing. "Why that's the same dog
as said the barber had done for his master, and collected never such a
lot of halfpence in his hat to pay the expenses of burying of him."

"You villain!" cried Todd.

"Go to blazes!" said the boy. "Who killed the dog's master? Ah, ah! Who
did it? Ah, ah!"

The people began to laugh.

"I insist upon killing that dog!" cried Todd.

"Do you?" said the ostler; "now, this here dog is a partickler friend of
mine, so you see I can't have it done. What do you say to that now, old
stick-in-the-mud? If you walk into him, you must walk through me first.
Only just put down that razor, and I'll give you such a wolloping, big
as you are, that you'll recollect for some time."

"Down with the razor! Down with the razor!" cried the mob, who was now
every moment increasing.

Johanna stood like one transfixed for a few moments in the middle of all
this tumult, and then she said with a shudder--

"What ought I to do?"

"Come away at once, I implore you," said Arabella Wilmot. "Come away, I
implore you, Johanna, for my sake as well as for your own. You have
already done all that can be done. Oh, Johanna, are you distracted?"

"No--no. I will come--I will come."

They hastily left the spot and hurried away in the direction of Ludgate
Hill, but the confusion at the shop door of the barber did not terminate
for some time. The people took the part of the dog and his new master,
and it was in vain that Sweeney Todd exhibited his rent garments to show
where he had been attacked by the animal. Shouts of laughter and various
satirical allusions to his beauty were the only response. Suddenly,
without a word, Todd then gave up the contest and retired into his shop,
upon which the ostler conveyed Pison over the way and shut him up in one
of the stables of the Bullfinch. Todd, it is true, retired to his shop
with an appearance of equanimity, but it was like most appearances in
this world--rather deceitful. The moment the door was closed between him
and observation he ground his teeth together and positively howled with
rage.

"The time will come--the time will come," he said, "when I shall have
the joy of seeing Fleet Street in a blaze, and of hearing the shrieks of
those who are frying in the flames. Oh, that I could with one torch
ignite London, and sweep it and all its inhabitants from the face of the
earth. Oh, that all those who are now without my shop had but one
throat. Ha! ha! how I would cut it."

He caught up a razor as he spoke, and threw himself into a ferocious
attitude at the moment that the door opened, and a gentleman neatly
dressed looked in, saying--

"Do you dress artificial hair?"




                              CHAPTER LII.
                          TODD'S ANNOUNCEMENT.


"Yes," said Todd, as he commenced stropping the razor upon his hand as
though nothing at all was the matter. "I do anything in an honest and
religious sort of way for a living in these bad times."

"Oh, very well. A gentleman is ill in bed and wants his peruke properly
dressed, as he has an important visit to make. Can you come to his
house?"

"Yes, of course. But can't the peruke be brought here, sir?"

"Yes. But he wants a shave as well, and although he can go in a sedan
chair to pay his visit, he is too ill to come to your shop."

Todd looked a little suspicious, but only a little, and then he said--

"It's an awkward thing that I have no boy at present, but I must get
one--I must get one, and in the meantime, when I am called out I have no
resource but to shut up my shop."

At this moment a stout man came in, saying--

"Shaved--oh, you are busy. I can wait, Mr. Todd--I can wait," and down
he sat.

Todd looked at the new-comer with a strange sort of scowl, as he said--

"My friend, have not I seen you here before, or somewhere else?"

"Very likely," said the man.

"Humph, I am busy and cannot shave you just now, as I have to go out
with this gentleman."

"Very well, I can wait here and amuse myself until you come back."

Todd fairly staggered for a moment, and then he said--

"Wait here--in my shop--and amuse yourself until I come back? No, sir, I
don't suffer any one. But it don't matter. Ha! ha! Come in, I am ready
to attend you. But stop, are you in a very great hurry for two minutes,
sir?"

"Oh, dear no, not for two minutes."

"Then it will only just take me that time to polish off this gentleman;
and if, you will give the address I am to come to, I will be with you
almost as soon, sir, as you can get home, I assure you."

"Oh, dear no," cried the stranger, who had come in to be shaved,
suddenly starting up, "I really could not think of such a thing. I will
call again."

"It's only in Norfolk Street," said the applicant for the dressing of
the artificial hair, "and two minutes can't make any difference to my
friend, at all."

"Do you think," said the other, "that I would really interrupt business
in this way? No, may I perish if I would do anything so unhandsome--not
I. I will look in again, Mr. Todd, you may depend, when you are not
going out. I shall be passing again, I know, in the course of the day.
Pray attend to this gentleman's orders, I beg of you."

So saying, the shaving customer bounced out of the shop without another
word; and as he crossed the threshold, he gave a wink to Crotchet, who
was close at hand, and when that gentleman followed him, he said--

"Crotchet, Todd very nearly got me into a line. He was going out with
the person we saw go to the shop, but I got away, or else, as he said,
he would have polished me off."

"Not a doubt of it, in this here world, Foster," said Crotchet. "Ah,
he's a rum 'un, he is. We haven't come across sich a one as he for one
while, and it will be a jolly lot o' Sundays afore we meets with sich
another."

"It will, indeed. Is Fletcher keeping an eye on the shop?"

"Oh, yes, right as a trivet. He's there, and so is Godfrey."

While this brief conversation was going on between the officers who had
been left to watch Sweeney Todd's shop, that individual himself
accompanied the customer, whom he had been conversing with, to Norfolk
Street, Strand. The well-dressed personage stopped at a good-looking
house, and said--

"Mr. Mundell only lodges here for the present. His state of mind, in
consequence of a heavy loss he has sustained, would not permit him to
stay in his own house at Kensington."

"Mr. Mundell?" said Todd.

"Yes. That is the gentleman you are to shave and dress."

"May I presume to ask, sir, what he is?"

"Oh, he is a--a--kind of merchant, you understand, and makes what use of
his money he thinks proper."

"The same!" gasped Todd.

The door of the house was opened, and there was no retreat, although, at
the moment, Todd felt as though he would much rather not shave and dress
the man of whom he had procured the £8,000 upon the string of pearls;
but to show any hesitation now might beget enquiry and enquiry might be
awkward, so summoning all his natural audacity to his aid, Todd followed
his guide into the house. He was a little puzzled to know who this
person could be, until a woman made her appearance from one of the rooms
upon the ground floor, and cried--

"There now, go out, do. We don't want you any more; you have got your
pocket money, so be off with you, and don't let me see your face again
till night."

"No, my dear," said the well-dressed personage. "Certainly not. This is
the barber."

"Good God, Blisset, do you think I am blind, that I can't see the
barber. Will you go? The captain is waiting for me to pour out his
coffee, and attend to his other concerns, which nobody knows better than
you, and yet you will be perpetually in the way."

"No, my dear. I--I only--"

"Hoity toity, are we going to have a disturbance, Mr. B? Recollect, sir,
that I dress you well and give you money, and expect you to make
yourself agreeable while I attend to the gentlemen lodgers, so be off
with you; I'm sure, of all the troublesome husbands for a woman to have,
you are about the worst, for you have neither the spirit to act like a
man, nor the sense to keep out of the way."

"Ha!" said Todd.

Both the lodging-house keeper and his wife started at the odd sound.

"What was that?" said the woman.

"Only me, madam," said Todd, "I laughed slightly at that blue-bottle
walking on the ceiling, that's all."

"What a laugh," said Blisset, as he left the house; and then the lady of
the mansion turning to Todd, said--

"You are to attend to Mr. Mundell, poor man. You will find him in the
front room on the second floor, poor man."

"Is he ill, madam?"

"Oh, I don't know, I rather think he's grizzling about some of his
money, that's all, but it don't matter one way or the other. They say he
is as rich as a Jew, and I'll take good care he pays enough here."

"Mrs. B--Mrs. B," cried a voice from the parlour.

"Yes, captain, I'm coming.--I'm coming, captain."

The lady bounced into the breakfast-parlour and closed the door, leaving
Todd to find his way up stairs as he best could. After a hideous chuckle
at the thought of Mr. Blisset's singular position in society, he
commenced ascending the stairs. He accomplished the first flight without
meeting with any one, but upon the second he encountered a servant girl
with a pail, and Todd gave her such a hideous glance, accompanied by
such a frightful contortion of his visage, that down went the pail, and
the girl flew up stairs again, and locked herself in one of the attics.
Without waiting to ascertain what effect the descent of the pail might
have upon the nerves of the captain and the landlady, Todd pursued his
course to the room whither he had been directed, and tapped at the door.

"Come in," said a meek, tremulous voice. "Come in."

Todd opened the door, and stood in the presence of the man over whose
long tried skill and habitual cunning he had obtained such a triumph in
the affair of the pearls at Mundell Villa. John Mundell now, though, was
far from looking like the John Mundell of the villa. He sat by the fire,
wrapped up in a flannel dressing-gown, with a beard of portentous
length. His cheeks had fallen in. His brow was corrugated by premature
wrinkles, and the corners of his mouth were drawn down as though a look
of mental distress had become quite a thing of habit with him now.

"Who are you?" he growled out, as Todd came into the room, and with a
show of carefulness closed the door after him. "Who are you, eh?"

"Come to shave you, sir, and dress your hair."

"Ah!" cried Mundell, as he gave a start. "Where have I heard that voice
before? Why does it put me in mind of my loss? My £8000! My money--my
money. Am I to lose another £8000? That will make £16,000. Oh, dear. Oh,
dear. Oh dear! Who are you? Speak, friend. Who are you?"

"Only a barber, sir," said Todd, "come to shave you, and dress your
hair. Ain't you well, sir? Shall I call again?"

"No--no--no! My losses distracts me. Only the barber? Ah, yes to be
sure--only the barber. I must go to court, and ask for the duke of
something. Good God, yes! I will see all the dukes, until I find out my
duke. He who had my £8000, and has left me so poor and so wretched. Oh,
dear! Oh, dear, my money--my hard-earned money. Oh, gracious, if I were
to lose another £8000, I should go mad--mad--mad!"

"Shall I begin, sir?" said Todd.

"Begin? Begin what? Oh, yes, my hair; and I must be shaved too, or they
won't let me in at all. I will have the pearls or my money. I will see
all the dukes, and pounce upon _my_ duke. Oh, yes, I will have the
pearls or the money."

"Pearls, sir?" said Todd, as he began to arrange the shaving apparatus
he had brought with him. "Did you say pearls?"

"Bah! what do you know about pearls, who, I dare say, never saw one.
Bah! You--a poor beggarly barber. But I will have them back, or my
money. I will raise London, but I will find them. I will see the queen
herself, and know what duke she gave the pearls to, and then I will find
him and have my money."

"Now, sir. A little this way." "Oh, dear--oh, dear! What do you charge?"

"Anything you please, sir. When I come to a gentleman, I always leave it
to his generosity to pay me what he pleases."

"Ah! more expense. More expense. That means that I am to pay for the
service done me, and something else besides for the sake of a compliment
upon my liberality. But I ain't liberal. I won't be generous. Where's my
money, my pearls; and now to go to all sorts of expense to go to court,
and see dukes. Oh, the devil. Eh? Eh?"

"Sir?"

"Stop. What an odd thing. Why, you are very--very--"

"Very what, sir?" said Todd, making a hideous face.

"Like the duke, or my fancy leads me astray. Wait a bit. Don't move."

Mundell placed his hands over his eyes for a moment, and then suddenly
withdrawing them he looked at Todd again.

"Yes, you are like the duke. How came you to be like a duke, the
villain. Oh, if I could but see my pearls."

"What duke, sir?"

"I would give £500--no, I mean £100, that is £50, to know what duke,"
screamed Mundell with vehemence. Then suddenly lapsing into quietness,
he added--"Shave me. Shave me, I will go to court, and St. James's shall
ring again with the story of my pearls. Lost! lost! lost! Did he abscond
from his wife with them, or was he murdered? I wonder? I wonder?--£8000
gone all at once. I might have borne such a loss by degrees, but d--n
it--"

"Really, sir, if you will go on talking about pearls and dukes, the
shaving brush will go into your mouth, and there's no such thing as
avoiding it."

"Confound you. Go on. Shave me and have done with it. Oh, dear! Oh,
dear!"

John Mundell now contented himself by uttering drawn sighs, with now and
then the accompaniment of a hideous groan, while Todd lathered his face
with great affected care. The sighs and the groans both, however, ceased
soon, and Todd became aware that the eyes of John Mundell were fixed
upon him with a steady stare. No doubt, the usurer was recalling bit by
bit to his memory the features of the sham duke, and comparing them with
Todd's. To be sure, upon the occasion of his visit to Mundell Villa,
Todd had taken every precaution to disguise his features; but then it
must be admitted that the features of the barber were rather peculiar,
and that John Mundell was professionally a more than ordinary keen
observer, and thus it was that, as Todd lathered away, he became more
and more impressed by the fact that there was a startling resemblance
between Todd and the nobleman who had borrowed £8000 upon the string of
pearls.

"What's your name?" he said.

"Todd."

"Humph! a well-to-do man?"

"Poor as Job."

"How very like you are to a great man. Do you ever go to court? I
think--I am sure I have seen you somewhere."

"Very likely," said Todd, "for I often go there."

"What, to court?"

"Nay, sir, not to court, but somewhere. Will you have the whiskers left
just as they are, or taken off entirely, sir?"

Tap! tap! came at the chamber door, and a boy peeped in, saying--

"Please, sir, the tailor has brought the things."




                             CHAPTER LIII.
                       THE MURDER OF THE USURER.


"Come in! Come in! More expense. More losses. As if an honest man, who
only does what he can with his own, could not come to the court with a
hope of meeting with a civil reception, unless he were decked out like a
buffoon. Come in. Well, who are you?"

"Augustus Snipes, sir, at your service. Brought home the clothes, sir.
The full dress suit you were so good as to order to be ready to-day,
sir."

"Oh, you are a tailor?"

"Oh, dear no, sir. We are not tailors now a days. We are artists."

"Curse you, whatever you are. I don't care. Some artist I'm afraid has
done me out of £8000. Oh, dear. Put down the things. What do they come
to?"

"Eighteen pounds ten shillings and threepence, sir."

John Mundell gave a deep groan, and the tailor brushed past Todd to
place the clothes upon a side table. As he returned he caught sight of
Todd's face, and in an instant his face lighting up, he cried--

"Ah! how do? How do?"

"Eh!" said Todd.

"How did the Pompadour coloured coat and the velvet smalls do, eh?--Fit
well? Lord, what a rum start for a barber to have a suit of clothes fit
for a duke."

"Duke!" cried Mundell.

Todd lifted one of his huge feet and gave the "artist" a kick that sent
him sprawling to the door of the room.

"That," he said, "will teach you to make game of a poor man with a large
family, you scoundrel. What, you won't go, won't you? The--"

The artist shot out at the door like lightning, and flew down the stairs
as though the devil himself was at his heels. Todd carefully closed the
door again, and fastened it by a little bolt that was upon it. A strange
expression was upon the countenance of John Mundell. His face looked
perfectly convulsed, and he slowly rose from his chair. Todd placed one
of his huge hands upon his breast and pushed him back again.

"What's the matter?" said Todd.

"He--he--knows you."

"Well."

"The Pompadour coloured coat! Ah, I recollect the Pompadour coloured
coat, too. I thought I knew your face. There was a something, too, about
your voice that haunted me like the remembrance of a dream.
You--you--are--"

"What?"

"Help--help! Tell me if I be mad, or if you are a duke in the disguise
of a barber, or a barber in the likeness of a duke. Ah, that Pompadour
coloured coat, it sticks--sticks in my throat."

"I wish it did," growled Todd. "What do you mean, Mr. Mundell?--Pray
express yourself. What do you mean by those incoherent expressions?"

"Are you human?"

"Dear me, I hope so. Really, sir, you look quite wild."

"Stop--stop--let me think--the face--the voice--the Pompadour coat--the
costume fit for a duke. It must be so.--Man or devil, I will grapple
with you, for you have got my pearls and my money. My £8000--my gold
that I have lived, that I have toiled for--that I have schemed, and
cheated to keep up--that I have shut my eyes to all sights for--and my
heart to all tender emotions. You have my money, and I will denounce
you!"

"Stop," said Todd.

The usurer paused in what he was saying, but he still glared at Todd
fiercely, and his eyes protruded from their orbits, while the muscles of
his mouth worked as though he were still trying to utter audible sounds,
but by some power was denied the capacity to utter them.

"You say you have lost pearls?"

"Yes--yes.--Orient pearls."

Todd dived his hand into the breast of his apparel and produced the
string of pearls. He held them before the ravished and dazzled eyes of
John Mundell, as he said--

"Were they like these?"

With a cry of joy Mundell grasped at the pearls. Tears of gratified
avarice gushed from his eyes.

"My own--my own pearls--my beautiful pearls!--Oh, blessed chance--my
pearls back again. Ha! ha! ha!"

"Ha!" echoed Todd, as he stepped behind the chair on which John Mundell
was sitting.

With his left hand he took one vigorous grasp of the remaining
hair upon the head of the usurer, and forced his back against the
chair. In another instant there was a sickening gushing sound.
Todd, with the razor he held in his right hand, had nearly cut
John Mundell's head off. Then he held him still by the hair.
Gasp--gasp--gasp--bubble--gasp--bubble.--Ah! ah! ah!--Goggle--goggle. A
slight convulsive movement of the lashes, and the eyes set, and became
opaquely dim. The warm blood still bubbled, but John Mundell was dead.
Todd picked up the pearls and carefully replaced them in his bosom
again.

"How many strange events," he said, "hang upon these baubles. Ah, it's
only one more--a dirty job rather--but business is business!"

He stood in the room as silent as a statue, and listened intently. Not
the slightest sound indicative of the proximity of any one came upon his
ears. He felt quite convinced that the deed of blood had been done in
perfect secrecy. But then there he was.--Who but he could be accused?
There he stood, the self-convicted murderer. Had he not done the deed
with the weapon of his handicraft that he had brought to the house? How
was Todd to escape the seeming inevitable cold-blooded murder? We shall
see. Huddled up in the chair, was the dead body. Mundell had not fallen
out of the capacious easy seat in which he sat when he breathed his
last. The blood rolled to the floor, where it lay in a steaming mass.
Todd was careful--very careful not to tread in it, and he looked down
his garments to see if there were any tell-tale spots of gore; but
standing behind the chair to do the deed, as he had done, he had been
saved from anything of the sort. There he stood, externally spotless,
like many a seeming and smirking sinner in this world--but oh, how black
and stained within!

"Humph!" said Todd; "John Mundell was half distracted by a heavy loss.
He was ill, and his mind was evidently affected. He could not even shave
himself. Oh, it is quite evident that John Mundell, unable to bear his
miseries, real or ideal, any longer, in a fit of partial insanity, cut
his throat. Yes, that will do."

Todd still kept the razor in his grasp. What is he going to do?--Murder
again the murdered?--Is he afraid that a man,

    "With twenty murders on his head!"

will jostle him from his perilous pinnacle of guilty safety?--No. He
takes one of the clammy dead hands in his own--he clasps the half rigid
fingers over the handle of the razor, and then he holds them until, in
the course of a minute or so, they have assumed the grasp he wishes, and
the razor, with which he, Todd, did the deed of blood, is held
listlessly, but most significantly, in the hand of the dead.

[Illustration: The Murder Of The Usurer.]

"That will do," said Todd.

The door is reached and unfastened, and the barber slips out of the
room. He closes the door again upon the fetid hot aroma of the blood
that is there, fresh from the veins of a human being like
himself--no--no--not like himself.--No one can be like Sweeney Todd. He
is a being of his own species--distinct, alone, an incarnation of evil!
Todd was in no particular hurry to descend the stairs. He gained the
passage with tolerable deliberation, and then he heard voices in the
parlour.

"What a man you are!" said Mrs. Blisset.

"Ah, my dear, I am indeed. Who would not be a man for your sake? As for
Mr. Blisset, I don't think him worth attention."

"Nor I," said the lady, snapping her fingers, "I don't value him that.
The poor mean-spirited wretch--he's not to be compared to you, captain."

"I should think not, my love. Have you got any change in your pocket?"

"Yes. I--I-think I have about seven shillings or so."

"That will do. Much obliged to you, madam--I mean, my dear Mrs. B. Ah,
if you would but smother Blisset, so that I might have the joy of making
you Mrs. Captain Coggan, what a happy man I should be."

Todd tapped at the door.

"What was that?" cried the captain in evident alarm; "Is it Blisset?"

"No, captain--oh, no; I should like to see him interrupt me, indeed. A
pretty thing that I cannot do what I like in the house I keep. Come in."

Todd just opened the door far enough to introduce his hideous head; and
having done so, stared at the pair with such a selection of frightful
physiognomical changes, that they both sat transfixed with horror. At
length Todd broke the silence by saying--

"He's frightfully nervous."

"What?--what?--who?" gasped the captain.

"What?" repeated Mrs. Blisset.

"What's his name, upstairs, that I was sent for to shave just now."

"What, Mr. Mundell. Ah, poor man, he has been in a very nervous state
ever since he has been here. He continually talks of a heavy loss he has
had."

"Yes," said Todd, "I suppose he means you to pay me."

"Me?"

"Yes, ma'am. He says he is too nervous and excited for me to shave him
just now, but he has borrowed a razor from me and says he will shave
himself in the course of an hour or so, and send it back to me."

"Oh, very well. Your money will be sent with the razor, no doubt; for
although Mr. Mundell is so continually talking of his losses, they tell
me he is as rich as a Jew."

"Thank you, ma'am. Good morning; good morning, sir."

The captain cast a supercilious glance upon Todd, but did not deign to
make the remotest reply to the mock civility with which he was bidden
good morning. No one stands so much upon his dignity, as he whose title
to any at all is exceedingly doubtful. The female heart, however, is
mollified by devotion, and Mrs. Blisset returned the adieu of Todd. When
he got into the passage, he uttered one of his extraordinary laughs, and
then opening the street door, he let himself out. Todd by no means
hurried back to Fleet Street, but as he walked along he now and then
shrugged his shoulders and shook his huge hands, which, to those
acquainted with his peculiarities, would have been sufficient
indications of the fact that he was enjoying himself greatly. At length
he spoke--

"So--so--what a Providence we have, after all, watching over us. The
moment I am in any real danger as regards the string of pearls, up
starts some circumstance that enables me to ward it off. Well, well,
some day I almost think I shall turn religious and build a church, and
endow it. Ha!"

Todd was so tickled at the idea of his building a church and endowing
it, that he stopped at the corner of Milford Lane, to enjoy an unusual
amount of laughter; as he did so he saw no other than Mrs. Ragg, slowly
coming towards him.

"Ah," he said, "Tobias's mother. The mother of the Tobias that was!--I
will avoid her."

He darted on, and was through Temple Bar before Mrs. Ragg could make up
her mind which way to run, for run she fully intended to do, when she
saw Todd standing at the corner of Milford Lane. But she had no occasion
for hurrying from him, as he walked in the direction of his shop as
speedily as possible. Although he was perfectly satisfied with the
clever manner he had ridded himself of the usurer, who probably might
have been a source of annoyance to him, and who might eventually have
been the means of bringing him to justice, he thought that he might be
losing opportunities of making more victims for the accumulation of his
ill-gotten wealth.




                              CHAPTER LIV.
                     SIR RICHARD BLUNT'S PROGRESS.


We will now return, and see with what zeal Sir Richard Blunt and his
active co-operators are at work, and how that persevering gentleman has
taken the cause of humanity in hand, with a determined will to bring the
atrocious criminals to a just tribunal. Sir Richard and his men
continued to pass and repass Todd's window, and one or other had an eye
upon the door, so that it was almost impossible for any one to go in
without the officers seeing them; and as some one of the officers
followed each customer into the shop, under some pretence, and did not
return till the strangers had been shaved, it was impossible that he
could continue his murderous trade. The barouet, however, could not
continue to remain long in the vicinity of Todd's shop without exciting
the suspicions of that crafty demon in human form. Todd seemed very ill
at ease, and his eye was more frequently at the hole which commanded a
view of everything within range of his window, and in spite of the
various guises the officers assumed, he seemed to take a more close
survey of their features than he had done when they had first visited
his shop. It was rarely that his customers came in pairs, otherwise it
would have continually prevented his schemes; but now none came alone,
each one had his companion or attendant. One morning, almost as soon as
the barber had opened his shutters, a seafaring man entered his shop in
haste, and throwing himself on a chair, requested to be shaved
immediately. He appeared to have but lately returned from India, or some
other hot climate, for his features were well bronzed, and from his
general aspect and conversation, he appeared to be a man of superior
station in life. However, in this manner, the barber reasoned and came
to the conclusion that he should have a good morning's work if none of
his tormentors came to avert his intentions.

"A fine morning, sir," said Todd.

"Very," said the stranger; "but make haste and accomplish your task; I
have a payment to make to a merchant in the city this morning by nine
o'clock, and it is now more than half-past eight."

"I will polish you off in no time," said the barber, with a grin; "then
you can proceed and transact your business in good time. Sit a little
nearer this way, sir, the chair will only stand firmly in one position,
and it is exceedingly uncomfortable for gentlemen to remain, even for a
few moments, on an unsteady chair."

Todd adjusted the chair, by dint of what appeared to the stranger to be
a deal of unnecessary trouble, and he said--

"You seem remarkably anxious to put the chair in what you call a
comfortable position, but we sailors are rather rough, therefore you
need not make so much fuss about my comfort for so short a time, but
proceed with the business."

Todd seemed rather disconcerted at the stranger's remarks, and could not
understand whether his words were uttered by chance, or imported more
than Todd liked.

"It is a maxim of mine, sir," said Todd, "to make everybody that comes
to my shop as comfortable as possible during the short time they remain
with me. One half-inch further this way, sir, and you will be in a
better position."

As he spoke he drew the chair to the spot he wished it, which
circumstance seemed to please him, for he looked around him, and
indulged in one of those hideous grins he executed just when he was on
the point of committing some diabolical act. The gurgling noise he made
in his throat caused the seaman to give a sudden start, which Todd
perceiving, said--

"Did you hear the noise my poor old cat made, sir? she often does so
when strangers come in, sir."

"It did not sound much like a cat; but if I had an animal that made such
a demoniacal noise, I should soon send her to rest. Every one to their
taste, though; I suppose you term the noise, that almost startled me,
agreeable."

"Yes, sir," said the barber; "I like to hear her, because I think she is
enjoying herself; and you know men and beasts require a something to
stimulate the system."

By this time the lather was over the seaman's face. He could not speak,
except at the imminent risk of swallowing a considerable quantity of the
soap that Todd had covered his face with. The barber seemed dexterously
to ply a razor on the seaman's face, which caused him to make wry faces,
indicating that the operation was painful; the grimaces grew more
fantastic to the beholder, but evidently less able to be withstood by
the person operated upon.

"Good God, barber," he at length ejaculated, "why the devil don't you
keep better materials?--I cannot stand this. The razor you are
attempting to shave me with has not been ground, I should think, for a
twelvemonth. Get another and finish me off, as you term it, in no time."

"Exactly, sir--I will get one more suited to your beard, and will return
in one minute, when you will be polished off to my satisfaction."

He entered the little parlour at the back of the shop, but previously he
took the precaution of putting his eye to the hole that gave a sight
into the street; turning round, apparently satisfied with his scrutiny,
he went in search of the superior razor he spoke of. A low grating
sound, like that of a ragged cord commencing the moving of pullies, was
to be heard, when Sir Richard Blunt threw the door open, and took a seat
in the shop near where the stranger was sitting. He was so disguised
that Todd could not recognise him as the same person that had been in
his shop so many times before. The barber's face was purple with rage
and disappointment; but he restrained it by an immense effort, and spoke
to Sir Richard in a tolerably calm tone--

"Hair cut, sir, or shaved, sir? I shall not be long before I have
finished this gentleman off--perhaps you would like to call in again in
a few minutes?"

"Thank you; I am not in a particular hurry, and being rather tired I
will rest myself in your shop, if you have no objection."

"My shop is but just open, and our ventilation being bad, it is much
more pleasant to inhale the street air for a few minutes, than the
vitiated air of houses in this neighbourhood."

"I am not much afraid of my health for a few minutes, therefore would
rather take rest."

Todd turned his face away and ground his teeth, when he found that all
his arguments were unavailing in moving the will of his new customer;
therefore he soon finished shaving the first customer.

"At your service, sir," said Todd to Sir Richard, who seemed absorbed in
reading a newspaper he took from his pocket. He looked up, and saw that
the stranger was nearly ready to leave, therefore he continued reading
till the stranger was in the act of passing out of the shop, when he
said--

"What time do the royal family pass through Temple-bar to the City this
morning?"

"Half-past nine," said Todd.

"Then I have not time to be shaved now--I will call in again. Good
morning." Saying which he also left the shop.

In a few minutes after leaving the shop of Todd, Sir Richard and the men
employed by him were in consultation; and he urged strongly that the men
should remain nearer to the shop than they had hitherto done, for if Sir
Richard had been two minutes later, most likely he who had escaped the
angry billows, would have been launched into eternity by the villanous
barber.

For the remainder of the day Todd was more closely besieged than ever,
and when night came on, Sir Richard Blunt, with two of his men, set
watch upon the house of Mrs. Lovett. Sir Richard had provided himself
with skeleton keys, candles, and other housebreaking implements, for the
purpose of entering Mrs. Lovett's house after that lady had retired, as
he had the full sanction of the law to use every means he could think of
in bringing the culprits to justice. About eleven o'clock Mrs. Lovett
was seen in her bedroom, with a candle in her hand, and making every
preparation for retiring; in a few minutes the light was put out, and
everything seemed still as death. Nothing was to be heard in the
adjoining streets but the monotonous tread of the watchmen, with an
occasional drawling forth of the hour of the night. This was the time
Sir Richard had waited for--it was the time for him to act. He
approached the street door and applied his implements with success, for
the door yielded to the baronet's tools, and he soon was in the shop of
the piemaker. As complete a silence reigned within as was maintained
without.

He waited for some time yet, though, before he moved. Finding, at
length, that all was profoundly still, and feeling quite convinced that
Mrs. Lovett had really retired for the night, the magistrate set about
procuring a light. By the aid of some chemical matches that he had with
him, this was soon accomplished, and a faint blue light shone upon the
various articles in the pie-shop of Mrs. Lovett. He then took a small
piece of wax taper from his pocket, and lit it. This gave him sufficient
light to enable him to distinguish with accuracy any object in the
place. Once again he listened, in order to be quite sure that Mrs.
Lovett was not stirring, and then, finding himself perfectly satisfied
upon that head, he fearlessly commenced an examination of the shop.
There was nothing to excite any very particular attention, except the
apparatus for lowering the platform upon which the pies were sent up
from the ovens below, and in a few moments the whole attention of Sir
Richard Blunt was concentrated upon that contrivance. He did not meddle
with it further, than looking at it sufficiently to fully comprehend it,
for he had other views just then. After, then, making himself quite
master of the details of that piece of machinery, he turned his whole
attention to the parlour. By the aid of a skeleton-key which he took
from his pocket, he opened the door with ease, and at once entered that
room, where lay the remains of the supper which Mrs. Lovett had so
liberally provided for Sweeney Todd. This parlour was rather a large
rambling-room, with a number of snug, handy looking cupboards in various
corners. It was towards those cupboards that Sir Richard Blunt directed
his attention. They were all locked, but with the means he had with him,
ordinary locks presented no impediment to the prosecution of his
research.




                              CHAPTER LV.
                          MRS. LOVETT'S WALK.


Suddenly he heard, or fancied he heard a noise above in the house, like
the sudden shutting of a door.

"Oh," thought Sir Richard, "all is safe. She is shutting herself in for
the night, I suppose. Well, Mrs. Lovett, we will see what we can find in
your cupboards."

The little bit of wax light, which Sir Richard had lighted, gave but a
weak kind of twilight while he moved about with it in his hand, but when
he stuck it on a corner of the mantel-shelf it burnt much clearer, and
was sufficient to enable him just to see what he was about. So
thoroughly impressed was he with the idea that Mrs. Lovett had retired
to rest, that he paid no sort of attention to the house, and may be
said, in a manner of speaking, to have negligently shut his ears to all
sounds that did not violently attack them. He opened a cupboard, in
which were some books, and on the top-shelf, lying in a confused kind of
heap, were some watches, and several sets of very rich buckles for
shoes. There were, likewise, several snuff-boxes in the lot. Were these
little trifles presented to Mrs. Lovett, by Todd, as proofs of the
thriving business he was carrying on? Sir Richard put two of the watches
in his pocket.

"These may be identified," he said. "And now, if I can but find the door
by which she descends to the oven below, I--"

At this moment he was startled by a sudden accession of light in the
room. His first idea, and a natural enough one too, was, that the little
wax light was playing some vagaries incidental to all lights, and he
turned rapidly from the cupboard to look at it. What was his
astonishment to see the door that led to the upper part of the house
open, and Mrs. Lovett, partially undressed, standing upon the threshold
with a chamber-candlestick in her hand in which was a rushlight, the dim
and dubious rays from which had produced the extra illumination that had
first startled Sir Richard Blunt. No wonder that, with amazement upon
his countenance, he now glanced upon this vision, for such it looked
like at the moment; and yet he saw that Mrs. Lovett it was to all
intents and purposes, and that he was discovered in his exploring
expedition in her parlour appeared to be one of those facts it would
have required no small share of moral hardihood to dispute. Seeing,
however, should not always be believing, despite the venerable saying
which asserts as much.

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett In A State Of Somnambulism.]

"I must apprehend her, now," thought Sir Richard Blunt; "I have no
resource but to apprehend her at once."

With this object he was about to dart forward, when something strange
about the appearance of Mrs. Lovett arrested his attention, and stayed
his progress. He paused and remained leaning partly upon the back of a
chair, while she slowly advanced into the room, and then as she came
nearer to him he became convinced of what he had begun to suspect,
namely--that she was walking in her sleep. There is something awful in
this wandering of the mortal frame when its senses seem to be locked up
in death. It looks like a resurrection from the grave--as though a
corpse was again revisiting

    "The glimpses of the pale moon;"

and even Sir Richard Blunt, with all his constitutional and acquired
indifference to what would be expected to startle any one else could not
help shrinking back a little, and feeling an unusual sort of terror.
This transient nervousness of his, though, soon passed away, and then he
set himself to watch the actions of Mrs. Lovett with all the keenness of
intense interest and vividly awakened curiosity. She did not disappoint
him. Moving forward into the room with a slow and stately action, so
that the little flame of the rushlight was by no means disturbed, she
reached the middle of the parlour and then she paused. She assumed such
a natural attitude of listening, that Sir Richard Blunt voluntarily
shrunk down behind the chair, for it seemed to him at the moment that
she must have heard him. Then, in a low and slightly indistinct tone,
she spoke--

"Hush! hush! So still. The poison! Where is the poison?--Will he take
it? Ah, that is the question, and yet how clear it is. But he is
fiend-like in his suspicions. When will he come?"

She moved on towards the cupboard, in which the decanter of poisoned
wine had been placed, and opening it, she felt in vain upon the shelf
for it. It was still upon the table, and if anything more than another
could have been a convincing proof of the mere mechanical actions of the
somnambulist, this fact, that she passed the wine where it was, and only
recollected where it had been, would have been amply sufficient. After
finding that her search was ineffectual, she turned from the cupboard,
and stood for a few moments in silence. Then a horror shook her frame,
and she said--

"They must all die. Bandage your eyes, and you will shut out the death
shrieks. Yes, that will be something, to get rid of those frightful
echoes. Bandage after bandage will, and shall do it."

Sir Richard stood silently watching; but such was the horror of the
tones in which she spoke, that even his heart felt cold, as though the
blood flowed but sluggishly through its accustomed channels.

"Who," he thought to himself, "for the world's wealth, would have this
woman's memory of the past?"

She still held the light, and it appeared to him as though she were
about to go into the shop, but she paused before she reached the
half-glass door of communication between it and the parlour, and shook
like one in an ague.

"Another!--another!" she said. "How strange it is that I always know.
The air seems full of floating particles of blood, and they all fall
upon me! Off, off. Oh, horror! horror! I choke--I choke. Off, I say. How
the hot blood steams up in a sickly vapour. There--there, now! Why does
Todd let them shriek in such a fashion?"

She now shook so, that Sir Richard Blunt made sure she would either drop
the light she carried, or, at all events, shake it out, but neither of
these contingencies took place; and, after a few moments, she got more
calm. The violent agitation of her nerves gradually subsided. She spoke
horrors, but it was in a different tone; and abandoning, apparently, the
intention of going into the shop, she approached a portion of the
parlour which had not yet been subjected to the scrutiny of Sir Richard
Blunt, although it would not ultimately have escaped him. The appearance
of this part of the room was simply that there was there a cupboard, but
the back of this seeming cupboard formed, in reality, the door that led
down the flight of stairs to the other strong iron door that effectually
shut in the captive cook to his duties among the ovens. This was just
the place that Sir Richard Blunt wanted to find out; and here we may as
well state, that Sir Richard had an erroneous, but very natural idea,
under the circumstances, that the cook or cooks were accomplices of Mrs.
Lovett in her nefarious transactions. Had he been at all aware of the
real state of affairs below, our friend, who had become so thoroughly
disgusted with the pies, would not have been left for so long in so
precarious a situation. Mrs. Lovett paused, after opening the lock of
the cupboard, and in a strange, sepulchral sort of voice, she said--

"Has he done it?"

"Done what?" Sir Richard would fain have asked; but, although he had
heard that people, when walking in their sleep, will answer questions
put to them under such circumstances, he was doubtful of the fact, and
by no means wished to break the trance of Mrs. Lovett.

"Has he done it?" she again repeated. "Is he no more? How many does it
make? One--two--three--four--five--six--seven. Yes, seven, it must be
the seventh, and I have heard all. Hush! hush! Todd--Todd--Todd, I say.
Are you dead? No--no. He would not drink the wine. The devil, his
master, whispered to him that it had in it the potent drug that would
send his spirits howling to its Maker, and he would not drink. God! he
would not drink! No--no--no!"

She pronounced these words in such a tone of agony, that her awakening
from the strange sleep she was in, seemed to be a natural event from
such a strong emotion, but it did not take place. No doubt Mrs. Lovett
had been long habituated to these nocturnal rambles. She now began
slowly and carefully the descent of the stairs leading to the oven; but
she had not got many paces, when a current of air from below, and which,
no doubt, came through the small grating in the iron door, extinguished
her light. This circumstance, however, appeared to be perfectly
unnoticed by her, and she proceeded in the profound darkness with the
same ease as though she had had a light. Sir Richard would have followed
her as he was, but in the dark he did not feel sufficient confidence in
her as a guide to do so; and with as noiseless a tread as possible, he
went back, and fetched from the chimney-piece shelf his own little wax
light, which was still burning, and carefully guarding its flame from a
similar catastrophe to what had happened to Mrs. Lovett's light, he
descended the staircase, slowly and cautiously, after her. She went with
great deliberation, and it was not until being rather surprised at the
total absence of sound from her tread, that upon looking down to her
feet, he found that they were bare. After this, he could have no doubt
but that, almost immediately upon her lying down in bed, this
somnambulistic trance had come over her, and she had risen to creep
below, and go through the singular scene we are describing. Step by step
they both descended, until Mrs. Lovett came to the iron door. She did
not attempt to open it. If she had, Heaven only knows what might have
resulted from the desperate risk the captive cook might have made to
escape. But even in the madness of Mrs. Lovett--for a sort of madness
the scene she was enacting might be called--there was a kind of method,
and she had no idea of opening the iron door that shut the cook from the
upper world. Pausing, then, at the door leading to the ovens, she, with
as much facility as though she had had broad daylight to do it in,
unfastened the small square wicket in the top part of the window. A dull
reddish glare of light came through it from the furnaces, which night
nor day were extinguished.

"Hist! hist!" said Mrs. Lovett.

"Who speaks?" said a dull hollow voice, which sounded as if coming from
the tomb. "Who speaks to me?"

Mrs. Lovett shut the small wicket in a moment.

"He has not done it, yet," she said. "He has not done it
yet. No--no--no. But blood will flow--yes. It must be so.
One--two--three--four--five--six--seven. The seventh, and not the last.
Horrible! horrible!--most horrible! If, now, I could forget--"

She began rapidly to ascend the stairs, so that Sir Richard Blunt had to
take two at a step, and once three, in order to be up before her, and
even then she reached the parlour so close upon him, that it was a
wonder she did not touch him; but he succeeded in evading her by a
hair's breadth, and then she stood profoundly still for a few moments
with her hands clasped. This quiescent state, however, did not last
long, for suddenly, with eagerness, she leaned forward, and spoke again.

"No suspicion!" she said; "all is well!--Dear me, heap up thousands
more. Oh, Todd, have we not enough?--There, clean up that blood!--Here
is a cloth!--Stop it up--don't you see where it is running to, like a
live thing?--He is not dead yet.--How clumsy.--Another blow with the
hammer!--There--there--on the forehead!--What a crash!--Did the bone go
that time?--Why the eyes have started out!--Horror! horror!--Oh, God,
no--no--no--I cannot come here again.--Oh, God!--Oh, God!"

She sunk down upon the floor in a huddled up mass, and Sir Richard
Blunt, who could not forbear shuddering at the last words that had come
from her lips now he thought that her trance was over, rapidly
approaching her, said--

"Wretched woman, your career is over."

She suddenly rose, and with the same stately movement as before, she
made her way from the parlour by the door leading to the staircase.
During all the strange scenes she had gone through, she had not
abandoned the light, and although the air in the narrow passage of the
staircase had extinguished it, she still continued to carry it with the
same care as though it lit her on her way. Seeing that she still walked
in that strange and hideous sleep, the magistrate let her pass him, nor
did he make any attempt to follow her.

"Be it so," he said. "Let her awaken once again in the fancied security
of her guilt. The doom of the murderess is hanging over her, and she
shall not escape. But there is time yet."

He watched her until, by the turn of the stairs, she disappeared from
his sight, and then he sat down to think. And there, for a brief space,
we leave Sir Richard, while we take a peep at Tobias.




                              CHAPTER LVI.
                        TOBIAS UNBOSOMS HIMSELF.


Mrs. Ragg, when she met Sweeney Todd, after he had so comfortably put
out of this world of care, John Mundell, the usurer, was really upon a
mission to Minna Gray, to tell her that Tobias was, to use her own
expressive phraseology--"Never so much better." Together with this news,
Mrs. Ragg, at the colonel's suggestion, sought the company of Minna to
tea upon that afternoon; and the consent of all parties whom it might
concern being duly obtained to that arrangement, we will suppose Minna
upon her way to Colonel Jeffery's. Timidly, and with a bashful boldness,
if we may use the expression, did the fair young girl ring the area bell
at the colonel's. But he and his friend, Captain Rathbone, were both in
the parlour, and saw her advance, so that she was at once welcomed into
that portion of the house. The colonel, like most gentlemen, had the
happy knack of making those with whom he spoke at their ease, so that
Minna in a very short time recovered her first agitation--for if she had
gone a thousand times to that house, agitated she would have been at
first--and was able to discourse with all that gentle fervour and candid
simplicity which belongs to such minds as hers.

"A most favourable change," said the colonel, "has taken place in
Tobias--a change which I attribute to the strong influence which your
visit had upon him; such an opinion is not a mere fancy of mine, for the
medical gentleman who is in attendance upon him fully concurs in that
view of the case."

Minna had no need to say that she was pleased, for she looked all the
delight that such a communication was calculated to give her.

"Under these circumstances, then," continued the colonel, "that which
was only a faint hope of his recovery, has become a certainty."

Minna's eyes filled with tears.

"Yes," added Captain Rathbone, "and we expect that to you he will make
such revelations as shall bring proper punishment upon all those who
have in any way been the cause of this calamity."

"Oh, forgive them all, now," said Minna. "Since he recovers, we can
forgive them all, you know, now."

"That cannot be, for the persecution that Tobias has endured is but part
of a system which he will be the means of exposing. Will you come up
stairs at once now, Miss Gray, and see him?"

"Oh, yes--yes."

How her heart beat as she ascended the staircase, and how quickly she
inspired and respired when she actually got to the door of Tobias's
room. But then she heard the kind, although not very musical voice of
Mrs. Ragg from within, say--

"But, my dear, you will give her time to come?"

"A long time, mother," said Tobias.

Ah, how well Minna knew that voice. It was the voice of Tobias as of
old. The same voice, in tone perhaps only a little weakened, and
rendered more soft by sickness than it had been, but to her it was like
the soft memory of some well remembered tone that she had heard, and
wept with joy to hear in happier days.

"I am here, Tobias! I am here."

"Minna--Minna!"

She entered the room radiant and beautiful as some fairy come to breathe
joy by the magic of some spell, Tobias stretched out his arms towards
her. She paused a moment, and then with a soft and gentle movement,
embraced him. It was but for an instant she held him in her arms, and
then she stepped back a pace or two and looked at him.

"Quite well," said Tobias, understanding the look.

"Quite?"

"Oh, yes, Minna, and as happy--as--as--fifty kings."

"Are kings happy?"

"Well, I don't know that they are, Minna, but at all events if they are,
they can't possibly be happier than I am."

"Bless the boy," said Mrs. Ragg, "how he does talk, to be sure."

"Why, Tobias," said Colonel Jeffery, "you are wonderfully improved
within this last hour."

"Yes, sir, and still more wonderfully since the best physician in the
world has come to see me."

The direction of his eyes towards Minna Gray let them know, if they had
not guessed it before, who Tobias considered the best physician in the
world to him. Minna shook her head, and said--

"But, Tobias, it is to this gentleman that you owe your life."

"Yes," replied Tobias, "and if ever I forget to be grateful to him for
all that he has done for me, I shall consider myself the worst person in
the world. Aye, as bad, quite as--as Sweeney Todd."

Tobias shuddered perceptibly as he pronounced Todd's name, and it was
quite evident that even in safety, as he could not but feel himself, and
profoundly protected from the deadly malice of his late master, he could
not divest himself of the absolute horror which even a mere remembrance
of him engendered.

"Well, Tobias," said the colonel, as he drew a chair close to him,
"since you have named Todd, pray tell us all about him."

"All?"

"Yes, all, Tobias."

"I will tell all I know. Come closer to me, Minna; I feel, when you are
near me, as though God had sent one of his angels to keep Todd from me.
Oh, yes, I will tell all I know. How can he harm me now?"

"How indeed, Tobias?" said Minna.

Tobias still trembled. What a shock that bold, bad, unscrupulous man had
given to the nerves of that boy. His bodily health might be restored,
and his mind once more be brought back to sanity, but if Tobias Ragg
were to live to the age of a patriarch, the name of Todd would be to him
a something yet to shrink from, and the tone of his nervous system could
never be what it once was. Minna looked up in his face, and the colonel,
too, gazed fully upon him, so that Tobias found he was absolutely called
upon to say something.

"Yes," he began, "I remember that people came to the shop, and--and that
they never went out of it again."

"Can you particularise any instance?"

"Yes, the gentleman with the dog."

Colonel Jeffery showed by his countenance how much he was interested.

"Go on," he said. "What about the gentleman with the dog?"

"I don't know how it was," added Tobias, "but that circumstance seemed
to tell more upon my fancy than any other. I suppose it was the conduct
of the dog."

"What sort of a dog was it?"

"A large handsome dog, and Todd would not let it remain in the shop, so
his master made him wait outside."

"Did he name the dog?"

Tobias passed his hand across his brow several times, and then his
countenance suddenly brightening up, he said--

"Hector! Yes, Hector!"

Colonel Jeffery nodded.

"What then happened, Tobias?" said Minna.

"Why, I think Todd sent me out upon some message, and when I came back
the gentleman was gone, but not the dog."

"Now, Tobias, can you tell us what sort of a man the man with the dog
was?"

"Yes, fresh-coloured, and good-looking rather, with hair that curled. I
should know him again."

"Ah, Tobias," said the colonel, "I am afraid we shall none of us ever
see him again in this world."

"Never!" said Tobias. "Todd killed him. How he did it, or what he did
with the body, I know not; but he did kill him, and many more, I am
certain as that I am now here. Many people came into the shop that never
left it again."

"No doubt; and now, Tobias, how came you in the street by London Bridge
so utterly overcome and destitute?"

"The madhouse."

"Madhouse?"

"Yes, I shall recollect it all. Where are you, mother?"

"Bless us and save us!--here, to be sure," said Mrs. Ragg.

"Did I not come to you at your room and find you ironing, and did I not
tell you that I had something to say about Todd, and ask you to fetch
somebody?"

"To be sure."

"Well, when you left, Todd came, and after once looking in his face, I
almost forgot what happened, except that there was a madhouse and a man
named Watson."

"Watson?" said Colonel Jeffery, as he made a note of the name.

"Yes," added Tobias, "and Fogg."

"Good! Fogg, I have it. Now, Tobias, where did you encounter this Fogg
and Watson?"

"That I cannot tell. I recollect trees, and a large house, and rooms,
and a kind of garden, and some dark and dismal cells, and then my mind
seems, when I think of all those things, like some large room full of
horrors, and anything comes before me just like some dreadful dream. I
recollect falling, I think, from some wall, and then running at my
utmost speed until I fell, and then the next thing that I remember was
hearing the voice of Minna in this house."

"One thing," said Captain Rathbone, "is pretty certain, and that is,
that this madhouse, if it were one in reality, must be in the immediate
vicinity of London, or else the strength of Tobias would not have
enabled him to run so far as to London from it."

"Mrs. Ragg, I believe Todd told you that he had placed Tobias in a
madhouse, did he not?" said the colonel.

"Yes, sir, he did, the wagabone!"

"Well, I am inclined to think that it was a madhouse--one of those
private dens of iniquity which are, and have been for many years, a
disgrace to the jurisprudence of this country."

"If so, then," said the captain, "there will be no great difficulty in
finding it with the clue that Tobias has given us respecting the names."

"I will not be satisfied until I have rooted out that den," said the
colonel, "but at present all our exertions must be directed to ascertain
the fate of poor Ingestrie. Every circumstance appears really to combine
in favour of the opinion of Johanna Oakley, to the effect that this
Thornhill and Mark Ingestrie were the same."

"It does look marvellously probable," said the captain.

"Do you recollect any more, Tobias?" said Minna.

"Not clearly, Minna, and I am afraid that what I have recollected is not
very clear, but it was the dog that made an impression upon my memory.
Many things are, however, now each moment crowding to my mind, and I
think that I shall soon be able to recollect much more."

"Not a doubt, Tobias. Do not attempt to strain your memory too far now.
Things will come back to you gently, and by degrees."

"I have no doubt of that, sir, but--but--"

"But what, Tobias?"

"Oh, sir, you are quite sure--"

"Sure of what?"

"That when I least expect it, round the curtains of my bed, or from
behind some chair, or from some cupboard about twilight, I shall not see
the hideous face of Sweeney Todd, and feel his eyes glancing upon me?"

Poor Tobias covered his eyes with both his hands, as he gave almost
frenzied utterance to these words, and both Colonel Jeffery and his
friend, the captain, looked on with aspects of deep commiseration. The
former, after the pause of a few moments, to allow the renewed
excitement of Tobias fully to subside, spoke to him in a kind but firm
voice.

"Tobias, listen to me. Do you hear me?"

"Yes, sir--oh, yes."

"Then I have to tell you that it is impossible Sweeney Todd can now come
upon you in the way you mention, or in any other way."

"Impossible, sir?"

"Yes, quite. He is now watched by the officers of justice, day and
night. His house door is never lost sight of for a moment while he is
within it, and when he is abroad, he is closely followed and carefully
watched by men, any one of whom is more than a match for him; so be at
peace upon that head, for Sweeney Todd is more securely kept now than
any wild beast in his den."




                             CHAPTER LVII.
               SIR RICHARD BLUNT'S ADVENTURES CONTINUED.


All left Sir Richard Blunt, not in a critical situation, but in what may
be called an embarrassing one, inasmuch as he could not very well make
up his mind what to do next. He had heard much towards her enunciation
from the lips of Mrs. Lovett, and he had possessed himself of some
property, which he hoped would be authenticated as having belonged to
some of Todd's victims. He had likewise found out the mode of secret
communication with the ovens below, but whether or not to make any
further use of that information just then was a question. While he was
debating these matters in his mind, he saw that his little wax light was
expiring. He accordingly produced another from his pocket, and lit it,
and during the process of so doing, he made up his mind to risk a
descent into the regions below, so far as the iron door. He at first
took his light in his hand to take it with him, but a few moments'
reflection decided him to go in the dark, and placing it upon a corner
of the shelf, as he had done before, he opened the cupboard, at the back
of which was the secret door, and soon found himself upon the little
staircase. Of course, the object of Sir Richard Blunt was to make what
discovery he could, without betraying the fact of his own presence; and,
accordantly with such a design, hastened lightly as foot could fall, so
that he was some few minutes in reaching the iron door, which he felt
with his left hand, which he kept during his progress outstretched
before him. The next object was to get the little wicket open without
noise, for he recollected that Mrs. Lovett had made a sharp sound by the
sudden withdrawal of a bolt that secured it on the side next to the
staircase. By carefully feeling over the door, he at last lit upon this
bolt, and then, by taking his time over it, he succeeded in drawing it
back without creating the least sound. When this was done, the wicket
yielded easily, for it had no other fastening than that bolt, and when
it opened, which it did towards the stairs, the same dull reddish glare
came through the small aperture that he had noticed when Mrs. Lovett was
there, but he found what he had not noticed upon that occasion, namely,
that when the wicket was removed there were iron bars farther securing
the opening, so that it was quite clear it was intended to be a thing of
strength. When, however, the magistrate found that there was nothing
between him and the region of the ovens but this grating, he placed his
ear close to it, in order to listen if any one was stirring. After a few
moments, he heard a deep groan. Somewhat startled at this sound--for it
was certainly unexpected--he tried to pierce with his eyes the obscurity
of the place, but the darkness, although not absolute, was of that
puzzling character that the more he looked the more all sorts of odd
images seemed to be conjured up before his eyes. He began, too, to think
that the groan must have been only some accidental sound that he had
mistaken, but he was quickly relieved from such an opinion by hearing it
again, much more distinctly and unequivocally than it had before sounded
upon his ears. There was no possibility of mistaking this groan now; but
while the certainty that a groan it was came upon his ears, he became
only the more puzzled to account for it; and this state of feeling in
him certainly arose from the difficulty he naturally had in conceiving
the possibility of any one being upon the premises, and engaged in the
service of Mrs. Lovett, unless they were accomplices of that lady. The
idea of the captive cook was not at all likely to cross the imagination
of any one, and in her revelations upon that head, during her
somnambulistic tour, Mrs. Lovett had not been sufficiently explicit to
enable Sir Richard Blunt to come to a different conclusion.

"I will listen for it again," he thought.

After a few moments more he was rewarded for his patience by not only
hearing another groan, but a voice, in accents of the most woe-begone
character, said--

"I cannot sleep. It is of no avail. Alas! who dare sleep here! God help
me, for I am past all human aid."

"Who on earth can this be?" said the magistrate to himself.

"It would be better for them to kill me at once," continued the voice.
"Anything would be preferable to this continued horror; but I suppose
they have not suited themselves yet with some one to take my place, so I
am not to be sent to see my old friends. Oh, bitter--bitter fate. I
would that I were dead!"

[Illustration: The Captive Piemaker Contemplates Suicide.]

There was a heartiness in the pronunciation of the last word, that quite
convinced Sir Richard Blunt of their sincerity; but yet he thought he
ought to listen to a little more before he ran the risk of falling into
any trap that might be laid for him by Mrs. Lovett or her satellites, if
she had any. He had not to wait long, for whoever it was that was
speaking had got into a good train of groaning, and did not seem
inclined to leave off for some time.

"Is she a woman, or the devil in petticoats?" said the voice.

"Humph!" thought Sir Richard Blunt, "that would be rather a hard
question to answer upon oath."

"How much longer am I to bear this load of misery?" continued the voice.
"No sleep--no food, but just what will sustain nature in her continued
sufferings. Oh, it is most horrible. Have I been preserved from death
under many adventurous and fearful circumstances, at last to die here
like a rat in a hole?"

"What on earth can be the matter with this man?" thought Sir Richard.

There was a pause in the lamentations of the man now for a few seconds,
during which he only groaned once or twice, just as if by way of letting
any one know, who might be listening, that he was not pacified. At
length, with a sudden burst of passion, he cried--

"I can bear it no longer. Death of my own seeking, and by my own choice
as to method, is far preferable to this state of existence. Farewell,
all--farewell to you, fair and gentle girl, whom I loved and whose
falseness first gave me a pang such as the assassin's dagger could not
have inflicted. Farewell, dear companions of my youth, whom I had hoped
to see again!"

"Stop!" said Sir Richard Blunt.

The captive cook was still.

"Stop!" cried Sir Richard Blunt again.

"Good God! who is that?" said the voice from the region of the oven.

"Your good genius, if I save you from doing anything rash; who and what
are you? Tell me all."

"To be betrayed. Ah, you are some spy of Mrs. Lovett's of course, and
you only wish to draw me into conversation for my destruction."

"What were you going to do just now?"

"Take my own life."

"Well, if you find I am an enemy instead of a friend, as I profess to
be, you can but carry out your intention."

"That's true."

The captive cook pronounced these two words in such a solemn tone, that
the magistrate was more than ever convinced of his sincerity, and that
he was far more a victim of Mrs. Lovett and her associate, the barber,
than an accomplice.

"Speak freely," said Sir Richard. "Who and what are you?"

"I am the most unhappy wretch that ever breathed. I am cribbed and
cabined and confined, I live upon raw flour and water. I curse the hour
that I was born, and wish I had been a blind kitten and drowned, rather
than what I am."

"But what do you do here?"

"Make numberless pies."

"Well?"

"It's all very fine for you to say well, whoever you are, but it is
anything but well with me. Where are you?"

"Upon the staircase, near an iron door."

"Ah, you are at the aperture through which that abominable Mrs. Lovett
issues to me her commands and her threats. If you have any compassion in
your nature, and the smallest desire to hear a story that will curdle
your blood, you will find out the means of opening that door, and then I
will climb up to it and make one effort for freedom."

"My good friend, I am very much afraid it would materially derange my
plans to do so."

"Derange your what?"

"My plans."

"And are any plans to be placed in competition with my life and liberty?
Oh, human nature--human nature, what a difference there is in you when
you are upon the right side of the door from what you are when you are
upon the wrong."

"My friend," said Sir Richard Blunt, "that is a very philosophical
remark, and I compliment you upon it. But now answer me truly one
question, and for your own sake, and for the sake of justice, I beg you
to answer me truly."

"What is it?"

"Are you in present fear of death?"

"No. Not while I continue to make the pies."

"Very good!"

"Very good? Now by all that's abominable, I only wish you had but to
make them here for one week, and at the same time know as much as I
know--I rather suspect that you would never say very good again."

"One week?"

"Yes, only a week."

"Pray how long have you been here?"

"I have lost count of the long weary days and the anxious nights. Oh,
sir, be you whom you may, do not sport with me, for I am very--very
wretched!"

"If I could but be sure that you are a victim of the woman who lives
above," said Sir Richard.

"Sure that I am a victim? Oh, God, you suspect me of being her
accomplice. Well, well, it is but natural, finding me here--I ought to
expect as much. What can I say--what can I do to convince you of the
contrary?"

"Reveal all."

"Do you not know then that--that--"

"That what? I may suspect much, but I know nothing."

"Then--then--"

The man's voice sunk to a husky whisper, and when he had spoken a few
words there was a death-like silence between him and Sir Richard Blunt.
The latter at length said--

"And you affirm this?"

"I am willing to swear to it. Release me from here and take me to any
court of justice you please, and I will affirm it. If you have any
suspicion of my good faith, manacle me--bind me up in iron until I tell
all."

"I am convinced."

"Oh, joy, I shall look upon the blessed sun again. I shall see the green
fields--I shall hear the lark sing, and drink in the odour of sweet
flowers. I--I am not quite desolate."

Sir Richard Blunt could hear him sobbing like a child. The magistrate
did not interrupt this burst of feeling. He was, on the contrary, quite
glad to be a witness of it, for it convinced him of the sincerity of the
man. He could not think it possible he should find attending upon Mrs.
Lovett's ovens so consummate an actor as it would have taken to play
that part. After a few moments, however, he spoke, saying--

"Now, my friend, are you one who will listen to reason in preference to
merely acting upon the feelings and suggestions of the moment?"

"I hope so."

"Well, then, I think I could set you free to-night, but to do so would
materially interfere with the course of that justice which is about
speedily to overtake Mrs. Lovett. By remaining here you will keep things
as they are for the present, and that, I assure you, is a great object.
You say that while you continue making pies, your life is not in
positive peril; I ask of you, for the sake of justice, to put up with
your present position a short time longer."

"Liberty is sweet."

"It is, but you would not like such a woman as Mrs. Lovett to take the
alarm and escape the consequences of her crimes."

"Oh! no--no. I will remain. For how long will it be?"

"I cannot say exactly, but the time may be counted by hours, and not one
shall be lost. Have but a little patience, and I will come to you again.
When next you hear my voice at the grating, it will be to give the
signal of liberty."

"How can I thank you?"

"Never mind that. Good night, and take care of yourself. All will be
well."

"Good night. Good night."




                             CHAPTER LVII.
                       BIG BEN MAKES A DISCOVERY.


At seven o'clock on the morning following these strange events, there
were early prayers at St. Dunstan's, and the bells called together the
devout at half-past six. Todd was there! Is the reader surprised? Has he
never yet in his mundane experience met with a case of sanctimonious
villany? Does he think that going to prayer is incompatible with such a
life as Todd's? Pho--pho! Live and learn. Todd met the beadle upon the
steps of the church.

"Ah, Mr. T.," said that functionary. "It does one good to see you, that
it does--a deal of good. I say that, of all the tradesmen in Fleet
Street, you is the _piousest_."

"We owe a duty to our creator," said Todd, "which all the pomps and
vanities of this world ought to make us neglect."

"Have you heard o' the suicide in Norfolk Street?"

Todd shook his head.

"Why, the beadle of St. Clement's was asking of me only last night, what
sort of man you was."

"I?"

"Yes, to be sure. It's a gentleman as you went to shave, and as you lent
a razor to, as has cut his blessed throat in Norfolk Street."

"God bless me," said Todd, "you don't mean that? Dear! dear! We are
indeed here to-day and gone to-morrow. How true it is that flesh is
grass;--and so the gentleman cut his throat with my razor, did he?"

"Above a bit."

"Well, well, it is to be hoped that the Lord will be merciful to the
little frailties of his creatures."

"Conwulsions! Do you call that a little frailty?"

Todd had passed on into the body of the church, and any minute observer
might have noticed, that when he got there, there was a manifest and
peculiar twitching of his nose, strongly resembling the evolutions of a
certain ex-chancellor. Then, in a low tone to himself, Todd muttered--

"They make a great fuss about the smell in St. Dunstan's, but I don't
think it is so very bad after all."

Perhaps one of Todd's notions in going to early morning prayers was to
satisfy himself upon the point of the stench in the church. The morning
service was very short, so that Todd got back to his shop in ample time
to open it for the business of the day. He gave a glance at the window,
to be quite sure that the placard announcing the want of a pious lad was
there, and then with all the calmness in the world he set about
sharpening his razors. Not many minutes elapsed ere a man came in,
leading by the hand a boy of about thirteen years of age.

"Mr. Todd," he said, "you want a lad."

"Yes."

"You don't know me, but I am Cork, the greengrocer in the market."

"Oh," said Todd.

"You see this is Fred, by the first Mrs. C., and the second Mrs. C.
thinks he'd better go out to something now; if you will take him
'prentice we will provide him, and he can run into our place for his
meals and tell us all the gossip of the shop, which will amuse Mrs. C.,
as she's in a delicate condition, and I have no doubt you will find him
just the lad for you."

"Dear! dear!" said Todd.

"What's the matter, Mr. T.?"

"I'm so aggravated.--Is he pious?"

"Decidedly."

"Does he know his catechism and his belief?"

"Oh, yes. Only ask him, Mr. Todd. Only ask him."

"Come here, my dear boy. Who was Shindrad, the great uncle of Joshua,
and why did Nebuchadnezar call him Zichophobattezer the cousin of
Neozobulcoxacride?"

"Eh?" said the boy. "Lor!"

"What learning!" said the greengrocer. "Ah, Mr. Todd, you are one too
many for Fred, but he knows his catechiz."

"Well," said Todd, "if the boy that I have promised to think about don't
suit me, I'll give you a call, Mr. Cork. But, you see, I am such a slave
to my word, that if I promise to think about anything, I go on thinking
until it would astonish you how I get through it."

"Well, I'm sure we are very much obliged to you, Mr. Todd. Come along,
Fred."

"Indeed!" said Todd, when he was once more alone. "That would suit me
certainly. A lying, gossiping boy, to be running home three or four
times a day with all the news of the shop. Good--very good indeed."

Todd stropped away at the razors with great vehemence, until he suddenly
became aware that some one must be blocking up nearly the whole of the
window, for a sudden darkness, like an eclipse, had stolen over the
shop. We have before had occasion to remark that Todd had a kind of
peephole amid the multifarious articles which blocked up his windows, so
that he was enabled to look out upon the passing world when he pleased.
Upon this occasion he availed himself of this mode of ascertaining who
it was that had stopped the light from making its way into the shop. It
was no other than our old acquaintance, Big Ben from the Tower, who was
on his way to Mr. Oakley's. The heart of Ben had been sensibly touched
by the distress of Johanna, and he was going to give her a word or two
of comfort and encouragement, which would wholly consist of advising her
to "never mind." But still Ben's intention was good, however weak might
be the means by which he carried it out. As for passing Todd's window
without looking in, he could no more help having a good stare, than he
could help doing justice to a flagon of old ale, if it were placed
before him; and upon this occasion the little placard, announcing the
want of a pious youth, fixed the whole of Ben's wonder and attraction.

"A pious lad!" said Ben. "Oh, the villain. Never mind. Easy does
it--easy does it."

"Curses on that fellow!" muttered Todd. "What is he staring at?"

"A pious lad!" ejaculated Ben. "Pious--oh--oh. Pious!"

"Shaved this morning, sir?" said Todd, appearing at his door with a
razor in his hand. "Shaved or dressed? Polish you off surprisingly, in
no time, sir."

"Eh?"

"Walk in, sir--walk in. A nice comfortable shave makes a man feel quite
another thing. Pray walk in, sir. I think I have had the pleasure of
seeing you before."

Ben cast an indignant look at Sweeney Todd; and then, as upon the spur
of the moment--for Ben was rather a shrewd thinker--he could not find
anything strong enough to say, he wisely held his peace, and walked on.
Todd looked after him with a savage scowl.

"Not much plunder," he muttered, "but suitable enough in another point
of view. Well--well, we shall see--we shall see."

Ben continued his course towards the city, ever and anon repeating as he
went--"A pious lad!--a pious lad. Oh, the rascal."

When he reached within a few doors of the spectacle-maker's, he saw a
boy with a letter in his hand looking about him, and probably seeing
that Ben had a good-humoured countenance, he said to him--

"If you please, sir, can you tell me which is Mr. Oakley's?"

"Yes, to be sure. Is that letter for him?"

"No, sir, it's for Miss Oakley."

Ben laid his finger upon the side of his nose, and tried to think.

"Miss Oakley," he said. "A letter for Miss Oakley;" and then, as nothing
very alarming consequent upon that proposition presented itself to him,
he said, "Easy does it."

"Do you know the house, sir?" asked the boy.

"Yes, to be sure. Come along, boy."

"Yes, sir."

"Who's the letter from?"

"A gentleman, sir, as is waiting at the Unicorn, in Addle Street."

"A gentleman as is waiting at the Addle in Unicorn Street," said Ben;
and then, not being able still to hit upon anything very outrageous in
all that, he contented himself once more with an "Easy does it."

The boy accompanied him to the door of Mr. Oakley's, and then Ben said
to him--

"I'll give the letter to Miss Oakley if you like, and if you don't like,
you can wait till I send her to you. Easy does it."

"Thank you, sir," said the boy, "I'd rather give it to the young lady
myself."

"Very good," said Ben. "Rise betimes, and hear early chimes."

With this effort of proverbial lore, Ben marched into the shop, where
old Oakley was, with a magnifying glass fitted to his eyes, performing
some extraordinary operation upon a microscope. Ben merely said "How is
you?" and then passed on to the back-room, having received from the old
optician a slight nod by way of a return of the friendly salutation. Ben
always esteemed it a stroke of good fortune when he found Johanna alone,
which, in the present instance, he did. She rose to receive him, and
placed one of her small hands in his, where for a moment or two it was
completely hidden.

"All right?" said Ben.

"Yes, as usual. No news."

"I saw a boy at the door with a letter from a unicorn."

"From a what?"

"No, an addle--no. Let me see. A unicorn, waiting with a gentleman in
addle something. Easy does it. That ain't it, neither. Where is she?"

Guessing that it was some one with a communication from some friend to
her, Johanna had glided to the door, and got the letter from the boy.
She came with it to the parlour at once, and opened it. It was from
Colonel Jeffery, and ran as follows:--

    "DEAR MISS OAKLEY,--If you will oblige me with another meeting in
    the Temple Gardens this evening, at or about six, I have something
    to tell you, although I am afraid nothing cheering.--Believe me to
    be your sincere friend,

    "JOHN JEFFERY."

She read it aloud to Ben, and then said--

"It is from the gentleman who, I told you, Ben, had interested himself
so much in the fate of poor Mark."

"Oh, ah," said Ben. "Easy does it. Tell him, if he'd like to see the
beasts at the Tower any time, only to ask for me."

"Yes, Ben."

"Well, my dear, I came by the barber's, and what do you think?"

Johanna shook her head.

"Guess again."

"Spare me, Ben. If you have any news for me, pray tell me. Do not keep
me in suspense."

Ben considered a little whether what he had to say was news or not; and
then taking rather an enlarged view of the word, he added--

"Yes, I have. Todd wants a pious boy."

"A what?"

"A pious boy. He's got a bill in his window to say that he wants a pious
boy. What do you think of that, now? Did you ever hear of such a
villain? Easy does it. And he came out, too, and wanted to 'polish me
off.'"

"Oh, Ben."

"Oh, Johanna. Take things easy."

"I mean that you should be very careful indeed not to go into that man's
shop. Promise me that you will never do so."

"All's right. Never be afeard, or you'd never tame the beastesses. If I
was only to go into that fellow's shop and fix a eye on him so--you'd
see!"

Ben fixed one of his eyes upon Johanna in such a manner, that she was
glad to escape from its glare, which was quite gratifying to him (Ben),
inasmuch as it was a kind of tacit acknowledgment of the extraordinary
powers of his vision.

"Easy does it," he said. "All's right. Do you mean to meet this
colonel?"

"Yes, Ben."

"All's right. Only take care of yourself down Fleet Street, that's all."

"I will, indeed."

"What do you say to taking me with you?"

"Where, Ben?"

"Why, where you go to meet the colonel, my dear."

"Personally, I should not entertain the smallest objection; but there is
no danger in the transaction. I know that Colonel Jeffery is a man of
honour, and that in meeting him upon such an occasion I am perfectly
safe."

"Good again," said Ben. "Easy does it. Hilloa! what's that in the shop?"

"Only my mother come home."

"Only? The deuce! Excuse me, my dear, I must be off. Somehow or another
your mother and I don't agree, you see, and ever since I had that
dreadful stomach ache one night here, it gives me a twinge to see her,
so I'll be off. But remember--easy does it."




                             CHAPTER LVIII.
                 THE GRAND CONSULTATION IN THE TEMPLE.


With this sage aphorism, Ben effected a hasty retreat from the
optician's house by the private door, so that he should not run the risk
of encountering Mrs. Oakley, who had made her appearance by the shop
way. When Johanna was alone, she once again read the little missive from
the colonel; and then, burying her face in her hands, she tried still to
think that it was possible he might have some good news to tell her. And
yet, if such had been the case, would he not have written it? Would he,
feeling for her as she knew he did, have kept her in a state of suspense
upon such a subject? Ah, no. He would rather have, in spite of all
obstacles, made his way into the shop, and called to her--"Johanna, Mark
Ingestrie lives," if he had really been in a position to say so much. As
these thoughts chased each other through the mind of the young girl, she
shed abundance of tears; and so absorbed was she in her grief, that she
was not aware that any one was present, until she felt a light touch
upon her shoulder, and upon starting round suddenly, she saw her friend
Arabella Wilmot standing close to her.

"Johanna?"

"Yes--yes, Arabella. I am here."

"Yes, dear Johanna. But you are weeping."

"I am--I am. To you these tears shall be no secret, Arabella. Alas!
alas! You, who know my heart, know how much I have to weep for. You can
bear with me. You are the only one in all the world whom I would
willingly let see these bitter--bitter tears."

At those words, Johanna wept afresh, and the heart of her young friend
was melted; but recovering sooner than Johanna, Arabella was able to
speak somewhat composedly to her, saying--

"Have you heard anything, Johanna, new?"

"No--no. Except that Mr. Jeffery wishes to see me again to tell me
something, and as he has not said in his letter what it is, I can guess
it is no good news."

"Nay; is not that assuming too much?"

"No--no. I know he would, if he had had any joyous intelligence for me,
have written it. He would feel of what a suspense even a few hours would
be upon such a subject. No, Arabella, I feel that what he has to say is
some terrible confirmation of my worst fears."

Arabella found it no easy task to combat this course of reasoning upon
the part of Johanna. She felt its force, and yet she felt at the same
time that it was somewhat incumbent upon her to resist it, and to make
at least the endeavour to ward off the deep depression that had seized
upon Johanna.

"Now listen to me," she said. "Perhaps what Colonel Jeffery has to say
to you is, after all, a something hopeful; but, at the same time, being
only hopeful, and nothing positive, he may have felt how difficult it
was to write it, without exciting undue effects in your mind, and so
prefers saying it, when he can accompany it by all the little collateral
circumstances which alone can give it its proper value."

There was something like a gleam of sunshine in this idea.

"Do you understand me, dear Johanna?"

"Yes--yes."

Johanna spoke more firmly than before. The last argument of her friend
had had all its weight with her, and had chased away many of the gloomy
thoughts that had but a few moments before possessed her. What a strange
compound is the human mind, and how singularly does it take its texture,
cameleon-like, from surrounding circumstances? But a few moments since,
and, to Johanna the brief epistle of the colonel was suggestive of
nothing but despair. How different now was its aspect? Arabella Wilmot
had, by a few simple words, placed it in a new light, so that it started
to the imagination of Johanna symbols of life.

"Ah! you are hoping now," said Arabella.

"I am--I am. Perhaps it is as you say, Arabella. I will think it is."

Miss Wilmot was now almost afraid that she had gone too far, and
conjured up too much hope; but she could not bear the idea of dashing
down again the fairy fabric of expectation she had moved in the bosom of
Johanna, and merely added--

"Well, Johanna, since you find that the letter will, at all events, bear
two interpretations, I am sure that, until you may be convinced it owns
to the worst, you will be as composed as possible."

"I will. And now, Arabella, will you, and can you accompany me this
evening to the Temple Gardens, to meet Colonel Jeffery?"

"Yes, Johanna. I both can and will, if such is your wish."

"It is, Arabella, much my wish, for I feel that if what our friend, the
colonel, has to say, should not be of a hopeful character, I should
never be able to repeat it to you, so as to have your opinion of it."

"Then we will go together. But we will not pass that dreadful man's
shop."

"Todd's?"

"Yes."

"Why not, Arabella? I feel, the moment that I leave this house, as
though some irresistible fascination dragged me there, and I think I
could no more pass down Fleet Street without directing my eyes to that
building, which perchance has proved fatal to poor Mark, than I could
fly."

"But--but, I shrink from that man recognising us again."

"We will pass upon the other side of the way, Arabella; but do not say
nay to me, for pass I must."

There was such a frantic sort of earnestness in the manner in which
Johanna urged this point, that Arabella no longer made any sort of
opposition to it, and the two young girls soon arranged a time of
meeting, when they would proceed together to the Temple Gardens, to give
Colonel Jeffery the meeting he so much desired. As nothing of a very
particular character occurred that day, we will at once follow Arabella
and Johanna upon the mission, premising that the hours have slipped away
which intervened between the time of Johanna receiving the note from
Colonel Jeffery, and the time when, if she kept the appointment with
him, it would be necessary for her to start from home to do so. Both the
young girls made as great alterations in their attire as they could upon
this occasion, so that they should not be strikingly recognisable again
by Todd; and then Arabella reminding Johanna that the bargain between
them was to pass upon the other side of the way, they both set off from
the old spectacle-maker's. As they neared Fleet Street, the agitation of
Johanna became more and more apparent, and Arabella was compelled to
counsel her to calmness, lest the passers-by should notice how much she
felt, from some cause to them unknown.

"My dear Johanna," she said. "Your arm trembles in mine. Oh! pray be
calm."

"I will--I will. Are we near?"

"Yes. Let us cross."

They reached the other side of the way from that on which Todd's shop
was situated, to the great relief of Arabella, who as yet knew not of
the placard that Todd had exhibited in his window, announcing the want
of a pious youth. The sight of the shop, however, seemed to bring that
circumstance to the mind of Johanna, and she told her young friend of it
at once.

"Oh! Johanna," said Arabella, "does it not seem as though--"

She paused, and Johanna looked enquiringly at her, saying--

"What would you say, Arabella? What would you say?"

"Nothing now, Johanna. Nothing now. A thought struck me, and when we
return from this meeting with your friend, the colonel, I will
communicate it to you. Oh! do not look opposite. Do not."

All such injunctions were thrown away upon Johanna. Look opposite she
did, and as she herself had truly said, it would have been quite
impossible for her to avoid the doing so, even if the greatest personal
risk had been risked in the action. But Todd's shop, to look at from the
other side of the way, presented no terrors. It simply presented the
idea of a little barber's shop, of no very great pretensions, but of
sufficient respectability, as barber's shops were in those days, not to
make any decent person shrink from going into it. No doubt, in the crowd
of Fleet Street--for Fleet Street was then crowded, although not to the
extent it is now--Johanna and her friend passed quite unnoticed by Todd,
even if he had been looking out. At all events, they reached Temple Bar
without any obstruction or adventure. Finding, then, that they had
passed the main entrance to the Temple, they went down the nearest
adjacent street, and pursuing a circuitous route through some
curious-looking courts, they reached their destination yet a little
before the appointed hour. Colonel Jeffery, however, was not likely to
keep Johanna Oakley waiting.

"There," said Arabella. "Is that the colonel?"

Johanna looked up just as the colonel approached, and lifted his hat.

"Yes, yes."

In another moment he was with them. There was a look upon the
countenance of Colonel Jeffery of deep concern, and that look, at one
glance that was bestowed upon it by Johanna Oakley, was quite sufficient
to banish all hidden hopes that she might yet have cherished regarding
the character of the news that he had to impart to her. Arabella Wilmot,
too, was of the same opinion regarding the physiognomical expression of
the colonel, who bowed to her profoundly.

[Illustration: Johanna And Arabella Meet And Consult Colonel Jeffery, In
Temple Gardens.]

"I have brought my dearest friend with me," said Johanna, "from whom I
have no secrets."

"Nor I," said the colonel, "now that I hear she stands in such an
enviable relation to you, Miss Oakley."

Arabella slightly bowed; and Johanna fixing her eyes, in which tears
were glistening, upon him, said--

"You have come to tell me that I may abandon all hope?"

"No--no; Heaven forbid!"

A bright flush came over the face of the young girl, and clasping her
hands, she said--

"Oh, sir, do not play with feelings that perhaps you scarcely guess at.
Do not tamper with a heart so near breaking as mine. It is
cruel--cruel!"

"Do I deserve such a charge," said the colonel, "even by implication?"

"No--no," said Arabella. "Recollect yourself, Johanna. You are unjust to
one who has shown himself to be your friend, and a friend to him whom
you hope to see again."

Johanna held out her little child-like hand to the colonel, and looking
appealingly in his face, she said--

"Can you forgive me? It was not I who spoke, but it was the agony of my
heart that fashioned itself at the moment into words my better judgment
and my better feelings will not own. Can you forgive me?"

"Can I, Miss Oakley! Oh, do not ask me. God grant that I could make you
happy."

"I thank you, sir, deeply and truly thank you; and--and--now--now--"

"Now, you would say, tell me my news."

"Yes. Oh, yes."

"Then let us walk upon this broad path, by the river, while, in the
first instance, I tell you that it was only from a deep sense of duty,
and a feeling that I ought not, upon any consideration, to keep anything
from you, that I came here to-day to give you some more information, and
yet fresh information."

"You are very--very good to me, sir."

"No--no, do not say that, Miss Oakley. I am a friend. I am only very
selfish; but, in brief, the lad who was in the barber's service at the
time we think Mark Ingestrie called at the shop with the string of
pearls in his possession, has told us all he knows upon the subject,
freely."

"Yes--yes; and--and--"

"He knows very little."

"But that little?"

"Just amounts to this:--That such a person did come to the shop, and
that he is quite clear that he never left it."

"Quite clear that he never left it!" repeated Johanna--"that he never
left it. Quite clear that--that--"

She burst into tears, and clung to Arabella Wilmot for support. The
colonel looked inexpressibly distressed, but he did not speak. He felt
that any common-place topics of consolation would have been an insult;
and he had seen enough of human feelings to know that such bursts of
passionate grief cannot be stemmed, but must have their course, and that
such tears will flow like irresistible torrents into the ocean of
eternity. Arabella was greatly distressed. She had not expected that
Johanna would have given way in such a manner, and she looked at Colonel
Jeffery as though she would have said--"Is it possible that you can say
nothing to calm this grief?" He shook his head, but made no reply in
words. In a few moments, however, Johanna was wonderfully recovered. She
was able to speak more composedly than she had done since the
commencement of the interview.

"Tell me all, now," she said. "I can bear to hear it all."

"You know all, Miss Oakley. The poor boy, in whose fate I have felt
sufficiently interested to take him into my care, says that such a man
as Thornhill did come to his master's shop. That he (the boy) was sent
out upon some trivial errand, merely to get him out of the way, and
that, pending his return, the visitor disappeared. He deposes to the
fact of the dog watching the door."

"The dog?"

"Yes. Thornhill, it seems, had a faithful dog with him."

"Ah, Arabella, we must have seen that dog."

"Has not the creature, then, fallen a victim to Todd's malevolence?"

"We think not, sir," said Arabella.

"Go on--go on," said Johanna; "what more?"

"The boy states that he is certain he saw the hat of the visitor with
the dog in Todd's house, after Todd had declared he had left, and
proceeded to the city."

"The hat--the dog. Alas! alas!"

"Nay, Miss Oakley, do not forget one thing, and that is, that neither
you nor any one else have as yet identified this Mr. Thornhill as Mr.
Ingestrie."

"No, not positively; but my heart tells me--"

"Ah, Miss Oakley, the heart is the slave of the feelings and of the
imagination. You must not always trust to its testimony or emotions upon
cold fact."

"There is yet hope, then, Johanna," said Arabella. "A bright hope for
you to cling to, for, as this gentleman says, there is nothing positive
to prove that Mr. Thornhill was Mark Ingestrie. I would not, were I you,
abandon that hope on any account, while I lived, and could still clutch
it. Would it not be a great thing, sir, if any papers or documents which
this Thornhill might have had about him, could be recovered?"

"It would indeed."

Arabella at first seemed upon the point of saying something contingent
upon this remark of the colonel's, or rather this acquiescence of his in
her remark, but she thought better of it, and was silent, upon which
Johanna spoke, saying--

"And that is really all, sir?"

"It is, Miss Oakley."

"But will nothing be done? Will no steps be taken to bring this man,
Todd to justice?"

"Yes, everything will be done; and indeed, anything that can be done
consistently with sound policy is actually now. Sir Richard Blunt, one
of the most acute, active, and personally daring of the magistrates of
London, has the affair in hand, and you may be quite assured that he
will pursue it with zeal."

"And what is he doing?"

"Collecting such evidence against Todd, that at a moment the law will be
enabled to come upon him with a certainty that by no ingenious quibble
can he escape."

Johanna shuddered.

"I thank you, sir, from my heart," she said, "for all the kindness
and--and--I need not again trespass upon your time or your patience."

"Ah, Miss Oakley, will you deny me your friendship?"

"Oh, no--no."

"Then why deny me the privilege of a friend to see you sometimes. If I
cannot say to you anything positively of a consoling character regarding
him whom you so much regret, I can at least share your sorrows, and
sympathise with your feelings."

Johanna was silent, but after a few moments she began to feel that she
was acting both with harshness and injustice towards one who had been
all that the kindest and most generous friend could be to her. She held
out her hand to the colonel, saying--

"Yes, sir, I shall be always happy to see you."

The colonel pressed her hand in his, and then turning to Arabella
Wilmot, they parted at the garden.




                              CHAPTER LIX.
                       THE PROPOSAL OF ARABELLA.


"Johanna," said Arabella Wilmot, as they passed out of the Temple by the
old gate at Whitefriars, "Johanna, if there had been no Mark Ingestrie
in the world, could you not have loved some one else truly?"

"No, no--oh, no."

"Not such a one as Colonel Jeffery?"

"No, Arabella, I respect and admire Colonel Jeffery. He comes fully up
to all my notions of what a gentleman should be, but I cannot love him."

Arabella sighed. The two young girls passed Todd's shop upon the other
side of the way, and Johanna shuddered as she did so, and repeated in a
low voice--

"He went there, but he never left."

"Nay, but you should remember that was Thornhill."

"Yes, Thornhill, alias Ingestrie."

"You will cling to that idea."

"I cannot help it, Arabella. Oh, that I could solve the dreadful doubt.
You speak to me of finding consolation and hope from the possibility
that this Thornhill might not have been Ingestrie; but I feel, Arabella,
that the agony of that constant doubt, and the pangs of never ending
thought and speculation upon that subject will drive me mad. I cannot
endure them--I must be resolved one way or the other. It is suspense
that will kill me. I might in the course of time reconcile myself to the
fact that poor Mark had gone before me to that world where we shall
assuredly meet again; but the doubt as to his fate is--is indeed
madness!"

There was a manner about Johanna, as she pronounced these words, that
was quite alarming to Arabella. Perhaps it was this alarm which went a
long way towards inducing her, Arabella, to say what she now said to
Johanna--

"Have you forgotten your idea of going disguised to Todd's, Johanna? And
have you forgotten what Mr. Ben, your friend from the Tower, told you?"

"What? Oh, what, Arabella--what did he tell me that I should remember?"

"Why that Todd had placed a placard in his window, stating that he
wanted a boy in his shop. Oh, Johanna, it would be so romantic; and to
be sure, I have read of such things. Do you think you would have courage
sufficient to dress yourself again in my cousin's clothes, and go to
Todd's shop?"

"Yes, yes--I understand you--and apply for the vacant situation."

"Yes, Johanna; it might, you know, afford you an opportunity of
searching the place, and then, if you found nothing which could assure
you of the presence at one time there of Mark Ingestrie, you would come
away with a heart more at ease."

"I should--I should. He could but kill me?"

"Who? who?"

"Sweeney Todd."

"Oh, no--no, Johanna, your stay would not exceed a few short hours."

"Oh, what long hours they would be."

"Well, Johanna, I almost dread the counsel I am giving to you. It is
fraught probably with a thousand mischiefs and dangers, that neither you
nor I have sufficient experience to see; and now that I have said what I
have, I beg of you to think no further of it, and from my heart I wish
it all unsaid."

"No, Arabella, why should you wish it unsaid? It is true that the course
you suggest to me is out of the ordinary way, and most romantic, but,
then, are not all the circumstances connected with this sad affair far
out of the ordinary course?"

"Yes, yes--and yet--"

"Arabella, I will do it."

"Oh, Johanna, Johanna--if any harm should come to you--"

"Then absolve yourself, Arabella, from all reproach upon the subject.
Remember always that I go upon my own responsibility, and against your
wishes, feelings, and advice. All that I now ask of you is that you will
once more lend me that disguise, and assist me in further making myself
look like that I would represent myself, and I shall then, perhaps, ask
no more of your friendship in this world."

Arabella was horrified. The plan she had proposed had, from her course
of romantic reading, such charms for her imagination, that she could not
have forborne mentioning it, but, now that in earnest Johanna talked of
carrying it out, she became terrified at what might be the consequences.
In the open streets she was afraid of making a scene by any further
opposition to Johanna, whose feelings, she saw, were in a great state of
excitement; but she hoped that she would be able yet to dissuade her
from her purpose when she got her home.

"Say no more now of it, Johanna, and come home with me, when we will
talk it over more at large."

"I am resolved," said Johanna. "The very resolution to do something bold
and definite has given me already a world of ease. I am different quite
in feeling to what I was. I am sure that God is, even now, giving me
strength and calmness to do this much for him who would have risked
anything for me."

To reason with any one impressed with such notions would have been folly
indeed, and Arabella forbore doing so at that juncture. She could not
but be amazed, however, at the firmness of manner of Johanna now, in
comparison with the frantic burst of grief which she had so recently
been indulging in. Her step was firm, her lips were compressed, and her
countenance, although more than usually pale, was expressive in every
feature of highly-wrought determination.

"She will do it or die," thought Arabella, "and if anything happens to
her, I shall wish myself dead likewise."

In this state of feeling--not a very amiable one--the two young girls
reached the abode of Arabella Wilmot. The strongly marked feeling of
composure and determination by no means left Johanna, but, if anything,
seemed to be rather upon the increase, while occasionally she would
mutter to herself--

"Yes--yes; I will know all--I will know the worst."

When they were alone in the little chamber of Arabella--that little
chamber which had witnessed so many of the mutual confidences of those
two young girls--Arabella at once began to say something that might
provoke a discussion about the propriety of the hazardous expedition to
Todd's, but Johanna stopped her by saying as she laid her hands gently
upon her arm--

"Arabella, will you do me two favours?"

"A hundred; but--"

"Nay, hear me out, dear friend, before you say another word. The first
of those favours is, that you will not, by word or look, try to dissuade
me from my purpose of going in disguise to Todd's. The second is, that
you will keep my secret when I do go."

"Oh! Johanna! Johanna!"

"Promise me."

"Yes. I do--I do."

"I am satisfied. And now, my own dear Arabella, let me tell you that I
do not think that there is any such danger as you suppose in the
expedition. In the first place, I do not think Todd will easily discover
me to be aught else than what I pretend to be, and if I should see that
I am in any danger, Fleet Street, with all its living population, is
close at hand, and such a cry for aid as I, being, as I am, forearmed by
being forewarned, could raise, would soon bring me many defenders."

Arabella sobbed.

"And then, after all, I only want to stay until, by one absence of
Todd's from the house, I shall be able to make a search for some
memorial of the visit of Mark Ingestrie there. If I find it not, I
return to you at once better satisfied, and with better hopes than I
went forth. If I do find it, I will call upon the tardy law for
justice."

"Johanna--Johanna, you are not the same creature that you were!"

"I know it. I am changed. I feel that I am."

Arabella looked at the sweet childish beauty of the face before her, and
her eyes filled with tears again at the thought that something near akin
to despair had implanted upon it that look of unnatural calmness and
determination it wore.

"You doubt me?" said Johanna.

"Oh! no--no. I feel now that you will do it, and feeling that, I
likewise feel that I ought not to drive you to seek assistance from
another, in your enterprise. But something must be arranged between us."

"In what respect?"

"Such as, if I should not hear of you within a certain time, I--I--"

"You would feel bound to find me some help. Be it so, Arabella. If I do
not come to you or send to you, before the midnight of to-morrow, do
what you will, and I shall not think that you have committed any breach
of faith."

"I am content, Johanna, to abide by those conditions; and now I will say
nothing to you to bend you from your purpose, but I will pray to Heaven
that you may become successful, not in finding any record of Mark
Ingestrie, but in procuring peace to your mind by the utter absence of
such record."

"I will go now."

"No--no, Johanna. Bethink you what pain your unexplained absence would
give to your father. Something must be said or done to make him feel at
ease during the, perhaps, many hours that you will be absent."

"It is well thought of, Arabella. Oh! how selfish we become when
overwhelmed by our own strange emotions! I had forgotten that I had a
father."

It was now agreed between the two young girls that Johanna should go
home, and that Arabella Wilmot should call for her, and ask Mr. Oakley's
permission for her (Johanna) to come to her upon a visit for two days.
It was no very unusual thing for Johanna to pass a night with her
friend, so that it was thought such a course now would have the effect
of quieting all anxiety on account of the absence of the young girl from
her parental home.




                              CHAPTER LX.
                           TODD FINDS A BOY.


"Temporary insanity, and a dividend of one shilling upon the razor!"

Such was the enlightened verdict of twelve sapient shopkeepers in the
Strand upon John Mundell--peace to his manes! He is gone where there are
no discounts--no usury laws--no unredeemed pledges, and no strings of
pearls! Good day to you, John Mundell!

"Ha! Ha! Ha!" laughed Sweeney Todd. "That affair is settled in an
uncommonly satisfactory manner. What an odd thing it is, though, that
nobody now comes into my shop, but somebody else, upon some shuffling
excuse or another, comes in within two minutes afterwards. Now, if I
were superstitious, which--I--I am not--"

Here Todd looked first over his right shoulder and then over his left,
with two perceptible shudders.

"If, as I say, I were superstitious which--Hilloa! who's this?"

"Oh, I beg your pardon, Mr. Todd," said a woman in widow's weeds, as she
entered the shop, "but they do say that--that--"

"What?" screamed Todd, "what?"

"That you are charitable to the poor."

"Oh, that's all. I--I. That's all. Very good. I am charitable to the
poor. Very--very charitable to the poor. What may your business be,
madam?"

"You don't know me, Mr. Todd, I dare say, but my name is Slick."

"Slick--Slick? No, madam, I have not the pleasure of knowing you; and
may I again ask why I am honoured with the visit?"

"Why, sir, I have got up a little humble petition. You see, sir, my
husband, Solomon Slick, is a watch-maker, and one day, about a month
ago, he went out to go to the city with two chronometers, to take to
Brown, Smuggins, Bugsby, and Podd, who employ him, and he was never
afterwards heard of, leaving me with six children, and one at the
breast. Now, Mr. Brown is a kind sort of man, and spoke to Podd about
doing something, but Bugsby and Smuggins, they will have it that my
husband ran away with the watches, and that we are only watching the
best time to go to him; but my aunt, Mrs. Longfinch, in Bedfordshire,
will do something for us if we go there; so I am trying to get up a
pound or two to take me and the little ones."

Todd made a chuckling noise, like a hen in a farm-yard, and looked the
picture of compassionate commiseration.

"Dear--dear, what a shocking thing."

"It is indeed, sir."

"And have you no idea of what has become of him, madam?"

"Not in the least, sir--not in the least. But I said to myself--'I dare
say Mr. Todd will be so good as to assist us in our necessities.'"

"Certainly, madam--certainly. Do you know what is the most nourishing
thing you can give to your children?"

"Alas! sir, the poor things, since their poor father went, have had
little choice of one thing or another. It was he who supported them. But
what is it, sir?"

"Mrs. Lovett's pies."

"Ah, sir, they had one a-piece, poor things, the very day after poor
Solomon Slick disappeared. A compassionate neighbour brought them, and
all the while they ate them, they thought of their father that was
gone."

"Very natural, that," said Todd. "Now, Mrs. Slick, I am but a poor man,
but I will give you my advice, and something more substantial. The
advice is, that if anybody is moved to compassion, and bestows upon you
a few pence for your children, you go and lay it out in pies at Mrs.
Lovett's; and as for the more substantial something, take that, and read
it at your leisure."

Todd, as he spoke, took from a drawer a religious tract, entitled "The
Spiritual Quartern Loaf for the Hungry Sinner," and handed it to Mrs.
Slick. The poor woman received it with a look of disappointment, and
said, with a slight shudder--

"And is this all you can do, Mr. Todd?"

"All!" cried Todd. "All? Good gracious, what more do you want?
Recollect, my good woman, that there is another world where the poor
will have their reward, provided that in this they are not too annoying
to the rich and the comfortable. Go away. Dear--dear, and this is
gratitude. I must go and pray for the hardness of heart and the Egyptian
darkness of the common and the lower orders in general, and you in
particular, Mrs. Slick."

The woman was terrified at the extraordinary faces that Todd made during
the delivery of this harangue, and hastily left the shop, having dropped
the "Spiritual Quartern Loaf for Hungry Sinners" in the doorway.

"Ha! ha!" said Todd when she was gone. "They thought of their father,
did they, while they ate Lovett's pies. Ha! ha!"

At this moment a man made his appearance in the shop, and looked with a
sly twinkle at Sweeney Todd. The latter started, for in that man he
imagined no other than an under attendant at the establishment of Mr.
Fogg, at Peckham. That this man came with some message from Fogg, he did
not for a moment doubt, but what could it possibly be, since he (Todd)
fully believed that Tobias Ragg was no more.

"Do you know me?" said the man.

As a general proposition, Todd did not like to say yes to anything, so
he looked dubious, and remarked that he thought it might rain soon, but
if he (the man) wanted a clean shave, he (Todd) would soon do for him.

"But, really, Mr. Todd, don't you know me?"

"I know nobody," said Todd.

The man chuckled with a hideous grimace, that seemed habitual to him,
for he at times indulged in it, when, to all appearance, no subject
whatever of hilarity was on the topic, and then he said--

"I come from Fogg."

"Fogg's, not Fogg?"

The man did not at first seem to understand this nice distinction that
Todd drew between coming from Fogg's establishment and coming from Fogg
himself; but after knitting his brows, and considering a little, he
said--

"Oh--ah--I see. No, I don't come from Fogg, confound him, he don't use
me well, so I thought I'd come to tell you--"

The shop door opened, and a stout burly-looking man made his appearance.
Todd turned upon him, with a face livid with passion, as he said--

"Well, sir, what now?"

"Eh?" said the stout burly man. "Ain't this a barber's shop?"

"To be sure it is; and, once for all, do you want to be shaved, or do
you not?"

"Why, what else could I come in for?"

"I don't know; but you have been here more than once--more than
twice--more than thrice, and yet you have never been shaved yet."

"Well, that is a good one."

"A good what?"

"Mistake, for I have only just come to London to-day; but I'll wait
while you shave this gentleman. I am in no hurry."

"No, sir," said Todd; "this gentleman is a private friend of mine, and
don't come to be shaved at all."

The stout burly-looking man seemed rather confused for a moment, and
then he turned to the stranger, and said--

"Are you really a private friend of Mr. Todd's?"

"Very," said the other.

"Then I scorn to interrupt any one in their confidential discourse, just
because my beard happens to be a day old. No; I trust that time, and old
English politeness, will ever prevent me from doing such a thing; so,
Mr. Todd, I will look in upon some other occasion, if you please."

"No--no," said Todd, "sit down: business is business. Pray sit down. You
don't know how disappointed I shall feel if I don't polish you off, now
that you are here, sir."

"Could not think of it," said the other, in whom the reader has, no
doubt, recognised one of Sir Richard Blunt's officers. "Could not for a
moment think of it. Good day."

Before Todd could utter another remonstrance, he was out of the shop,
and when he got about twelve paces off, he met Crotchet, who said--

"Well, what do yer bring it in now?"

"I must cut it. Todd is beginning to recollect me, and to think there is
something odd going on."

Mr. Crotchet gave a slight whistle, and then said--

"Wery good; but did you leave a _hindevidel_ in the shaving crib, to be
done for?"

"Yes; but he said he was a private friend of Todd's."

"Good agin, that will do. He's safe enough, I dare say, and if he isn't,
why he ought to be more _petikler_ in a-dressing of his acquaintances.
Do you know where the governor is?"

"No. I have not seen him; but will you tell him, Crotchet, why I think
it's better for me to be scarce for a day or two?"

"To be sure, old fellow. You can go on some other day."

"Surely--surely."




                              CHAPTER LXI.
               TODD RECEIVES SOME STARTLING INTELLIGENCE.


It took Todd, master as he was, or used to be, in the art of
dissimulation, some few minutes to recover his composure, after the
officer had left the shop, and during that time, the gentleman from
Fogg's looked at him with the quiet sniggering kind of laugh so peculiar
to him. Todd was evidently, day by day, losing that amount of nerve
which had at one time formed his principal characteristic. It was
getting, in fact, clear to himself that he was not near so well fitted
for the business he was carrying on as he had been. Turning to the man
from Fogg's, he said, while he put on as bland a smile as he could--

"Well, my friend, I suppose you have sought me with some motive? Pray
speak out, and tell me what it is."

The man laughed.

"I have had a row with Fogg," he said, "and we parted in anger. I told
him I would split upon the den, but he is a deep one, and he only
coughed. Fogg, though, somehow don't laugh as he used. However, as well
as he could laugh, he did, and, says he, 'Peter, my lad,' says he, 'if
you do split upon the old den, I'll get you transported, as safe as you
think yourself.'"

"Well?"

"Well. I--I--didn't like that."

"Then you are probably," said Todd in a bland manner--"you are probably
aware that you may be obnoxious to the law."

"A few!" said the fellow.

"And what followed?"

"'Why, Peter,' added Fogg, 'you may leave me if you like, and once a
month there will be a couple of guineas here for you. There's the door,
so away, I insist;' and it has struck me, that if Fogg gives me a couple
of shiners a month to hold my tongue, other gentlemen might do as much,
and through one and another, I might pick up a crust and something to
moisten it with."

The man laughed again. Todd nodded his head, as much as to say--"You
could not have explained yourself clearer," and then he said--

"Peter, in your way you have a certain sort of genius. I might just
remark, however, that after paying Fogg handsomely for what he has done,
it is rather hard that Fogg's cast-off officials should come upon Fogg's
best customers, and threaten them out of any more."

"I know it's hard," said the man.

"Then why do you do it?"

"Because, to my thinking, it would be a deuced sight harder for me to
want anything; and besides, I might get into trouble, and be in the
hands of the police, when who knows but that in some soft moment some
one might get hold of me, and get it all out of me. Wouldn't that be
harder still for all?"

"It would."

"Ah! Mr. Todd, I always thought you were a man of judgment, that I did."

"You do me infinite honour."

"Not at all. I say what I think, you may take your oath of that. But
when I saw you come about that last boy, I said to myself--'Mr. Todd is
carrying on some nice game, but what it is I don't know. Howsomdever he
is a man with something more than would go into a small tea-spoon
here-abouts.'"

Mr. Peter tapped his forehead with his finger as he spoke, to intimate
that he alluded to the intellectual capacity of Todd.

"You are very obliging," said Todd.

"Not at all. Not at all. How much will you stand, now?"

"I suppose, if I say the same as Mr. Fogg, you will be satisfied, Mr.
Peter. Times are very bad, you know."

Peter laughed again.

"No, no! Mr. Todd, times are not very bad, but I do think what you say
is very fair, and that if you stand the same as Fogg, I ought not to say
one word against it."

"How charming it is," said Todd, casting his eyes up to the ceiling, as
though communing with himself or some higher intelligence supposed to be
in that direction. "How charming it is to feel that you are at any time
transacting business with one who is so very obliging and so very
reasonable."

Somehow Peter winced a little before the look of Todd. The barber had
come into his proposal a little too readily. It almost looked as though
he saw his way too clearly out of it again. If he had declaimed loudly,
and made a great fuss about the matter, Mr. Peter would have been better
pleased, but as it was he felt, he scarcely knew why, wonderfully
fidgetty.

"That boy," he said, "to change the conversation. That boy, used to say
some odd things of you, Mr. Todd."

"Insanity," said Todd, "is a great calamity."

"Oh, very."

"And so clouds the faculties, that the poor boy no doubt said things of
me, his best friend, that, if he had been restored to reason, he would
have heard spoken of with a smile of incredulity."

"Ha! ha! By the bye--Ha! ha!"

"Well, sir?" said Todd, who did not in the smallest degree join in the
odd laugh of Peter. "Well, sir?"

"I was merely going to say. Have you, by any chance, heard anything more
of him?"

Todd walked close to Peter, and placed his two brawny hands upon his
shoulders, as he slowly repeated--

"Have I by any chance heard anything more of him? What do you mean?
Speak out, or by all that's powerful, this is the last moment of your
existence. Speak out, I say."

"Murder!"

"Fool! Be more explicit, and you are safe. Be open and candid with me,
and not a hair of your head shall suffer injury. What do you mean by
asking me if I have heard anything more of him?"

"Don't throttle me."

"Speak."

"I--I can't while you hold me so tight. I--I--can--hardly--breathe."

Todd took his hands off him, and crossing his arms over his breast, he
said in tones of most unnatural calmness--

"Now speak."

"Well, Mr. Todd--I--I--only--."

"You only what?"

"Asked you naturally enough, if you had heard anything of the boy Tobias
Ragg, you know, since he ran away from Fogg's. That's all."

"Since he what?"

"Ran away from Fogg's one night."

"Then he--he is not dead? The villain Fogg sent word to me that he was
dead."

"Did he though? Well I never. That was so like Fogg. Only to think now.
Lord bless you, Mr. Todd, he made his escape and ran away, and we never
heard anything more of him from that time to this. The idea now of Fogg
telling you he was dead. Well, I did wonder at your taking the thing so
easy, and never coming down to enquire about it."

"Not dead? Not dead?"

"Not as I know on."

"Curses!"

"Ah! that will do you good, Mr. Todd. Whenever I am put out, I set to
swearing like a good one, and that's the way I come round again. Don't
mind me. You swear as long as you like. It was a shame for Fogg not to
tell you he had bolted, but I suppose he thought he'd take his chance."

"The villain!"

"_Worser!_ _worser!_ nor a _willain_!" said Peter. "Who knows now what
mischief may be done, all through that boy. Why, he may be now being
gammoned by the police and a parson to tell all he knows. Oh, dear! Oh,
dear!"

Todd sunk upon a chair--not the shaving one--and resting his hand upon
his head, he uttered a sepulchral groan.

Peter shook himself.

"You don't seem well, Mr. Todd. I didn't think you was the sort of man
to be down on your blessed luck in this sort of way. Cheer up. What's
the use of grieving? as the old song says."

Todd groaned again.

"And if so be as the kid," continued Peter, "did run away, my opinion is
as he'd seen enough and felt enough, while he was at Fogg's, to make him
as mad as a March hare."

There was hope in that suggestion, and Todd looked up.

"You really think, then, Mr. Peter, that--that his intellects--"

"His what?"

"His mind, I mean, has not withstood the shock of what he went through
while he was in Fogg's establishment?"

"How could it? Once or twice things very nigh infected me, and how
should he stand up agin 'em? But arter all, Mr. Fogg, what was it all
about? That's what used to bother me. Was there anything in what he
said, or wasn't there?"

"My good fellow," said Todd, "I have only one question to ask you--"

"Fire away."

"And that is, if you would prefer to have a sum of money down, and not
trouble me any more?"

"Down!"

"Yes, down."

"On the nail? Well, its temptatious, I own. Let me see. Thus Fogg's
riglar annuity, as a fellow may call it, and a good round sum down from
you, Mr. T. I think you said a good round sum down on the nail, didn't
you?"

"Yes--yes. Any sum in reason."

"Done, then. I'll do it. Honour bright and shining. Mr. T., when I says
a thing, it's said, and no mistake, and if I takes something down, you
won't hear no more of me; whatever you may think, Mr. T., I ain't one of
them fellows as will spend their tin, and then come asking for more--not
I. Oh, dear no! Only give me what's reasonable down, and the thing's
settled."

"Very good," said Todd, in a voice which was calm and composed. "Just
step this way, into the back parlour, and I'll satisfy you. As for
troubling me any more, I am, I assure you, as perfectly easy upon that
point as it is at all possible to be."




                             CHAPTER LXII.
                     TODD CLEARS OFF CIRCUMSTANCES.


The arrangement come to between Todd and his visitor seemed to give
equal satisfaction to both, and Mr. Peter, if he had what the
phrenologists call an organ of caution at all developed, must have had
acquisitiveness so large as completely to overpower its action at the
present time. The idea of getting from Todd's fears a sum of money at
once, and from Fogg's fears a regular small annuity, was to him a most
felicitous combination of circumstances, and his reflections upon the
pleasant consequences resulting therefrom had such full possession of
him, that his scruples vanished, and as he followed Todd into the back
parlour from the shop, he muttered to himself--

"I'll try and get enough out of him to open a public-house."

Todd heard the wish, and turning quickly with what he intended should be
an engaging smile, he said--

"And why not, Peter--and why not? Nothing would give me more sincere
gratification than seeing you in a public-house, for although a man may
be a publican, he need not be a sinner, you know."

"Eh?"

"I say he need not be a sinner; and there would be nothing in the world,
Peter, to prevent you from having prayers night and morning, and I am
sure I should be most happy to come now and then, if it were only to say
'Amen!'"

"Humph!" said Peter. "You are too good, you are. Much too good, really."

"Not at all, Peter. Let us be as good as we may, we cannot be too good.
Human nature is a strange compound, you know, mixed up of several things
opposite to each other, like a lather in a shaving dish."

With this sentiment Todd held open the door of the sanctum behind his
shop, and by a cautious wave of his hand invited Mr. Peter to enter.
That gentleman did so.

"Now," said Todd, in quite a confidential tone, "what is your peculiar
affection in the--"

Here Mr. Todd went through the pantomimic action of draining a glass.
Peter laughed, and then shaking his head waggishly, he said--

"What a rum 'un you are! Fogg had his funny ways, but I do think you
beat him, that you do. Well, if I must say I have a partiality, it's to
brandy. Do you know, I think, between you and me and the post, that a
drop of good brandy is rather one of them things that makes human nature
what it is."

"What a just remark," said Todd.

Peter looked as sage as possible. He was getting upon wonderfully good
terms with his own sagacity--a certain sign that he was losing his
ordinary discretion. Todd opened a small cupboard in the wall--what a
number of small cupboards in the wall Todd had--and produced a
long-necked bottle and a couple of glasses. He held the bottle up to the
dim light, saying--

"That's the thing, rather."

"It looks like it," said Peter.

"And it is," said Todd, "what it looks. This bottle and the liquor
within it have basked in the sun of a fairer clime than ours, Peter, and
the laughing glades of the sweet south have capped it in beauty."

Peter looked puzzled.

"What a learned man you are, Mr. T.," he said. "You seem to know
something of everything, and I dare say the brandy is to the full as
good as it looks."

This was decidedly a quiet sort of hint to decant some of it without
further loss of time, and Todd at once complied. He filled Peter's glass
to the brim, and his own more moderately; and as the golden liquor came
out with a pleasant bubble from the bottle, Peter's eyes glistened, and
he sniffed up the aroma of that pure champaign brandy with the utmost
complaisance.

"Beautiful! beautiful!" he exclaimed.

"Pretty well," said Todd.

"Pretty well? It's glorious!"

Mr. Peter raised the glass to his lips, and giving a nod to Todd over
the rim of it, he said--

"I looks towards you."

Todd nodded, and then, in another moment Peter put down his empty glass.

"Out and out!" he gasped. "Out and out! Ah, that is the stuff."

Todd tossed off the glass, with the toast of "A long life, and a merry
one!" which was duly acknowledged by Peter, who replied--

"The same to you, Mr. T., and lots of 'em."

"It's like milk," said Todd, as he filled Peter's glass again. "It's for
all the world like milk, and never can do any one any harm."

"No--no. Enough. There--stop."

Todd did stop, when the glass was within a hair's breadth of running
over, but not before; and then again he helped himself, and when he set
the bottle upon the table, he said--

"A biscuit?"

"Not for me. No."

"Nay. You will find it pleasant with the brandy. I have one or two here.
Rather hard, perhaps, but good."

"Well, I will, then. I was afraid you would have to go out for them,
that was all, Mr. T., and I wouldn't give you any trouble for the world.
I only hope we shall often meet in this quiet comfortable way, Mr. T. I
always did respect you, for, as I often said to Fogg, of all the
customers that come here, Mr. Todd for me. He takes things in an easy
way, and if he is a thundering rogue, he is at all events a clever one."

"How kind!"

"No offence, I hope, Mr. Todd?"

"Offence, my dear fellow? Oh, dear me! How could you think of such a
thing? Offence, indeed! You cannot possibly offend me!"

"I'm rejoiced to hear you say so, Mr. T., I am really; and this is--this
is--the--very best--ah--brandy that ever I--where are you going, Mr.
T.?"

"Only to get the biscuits. They are in the cupboard behind you; but
don't stir, I beg. You are not at all in the way."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite."

Todd stepped easily between Peter's chair and the wall, and opening
another of the mysterious small cupboards, he laid his hand upon a
hammer, with a long handle, that was upon the shelf.

"If this," said Peter, "was the last word I had to say in the world, I
would swear to the goodness of the brandy."

As he uttered the words he turned his head sharply, and faced Todd. The
hammer was upraised, and would, if he had not so turned, have descended
with fatal effect upon the top of his head. As it was, Peter had only
time to utter one shriek, when down it came upon the lower part of his
face. The crush was hideous. The lower jaw fell crushed and mangled,
and, with a frightful oath, Todd again raised the hammer: but the victim
closed with him, and face to face they grappled. The hammer was useless,
and Todd cast it from him as he felt that he required all his strength
to grapple with the man who, at that moment, fastened on him with the
strength of madness. Over chair--over the table, to the destruction of
all that was on it, they went, coiled up in each other's
embrace--dashing here and there with a vehemence that threatened
destruction to them both, and yet not a word spoken. The frightful
injury that Peter had received effectually prevented him from
articulating, and Todd had nothing to say. Down! down they both come;
but Todd is uppermost. Yes; he has got his victim upon the floor, and
his knee is upon his chest! He drags him a few inches further towards
the fire-place--inches were sufficient, and then grappling him by the
throat, he lifts his head and dashes it against the sharp edge of an
iron fender! Crash!--crash!--crash! The man is dead! Crash again! That
last crash was only an injury to a corpse! Once more Todd raised the now
lax and smashed skull, but he let it go again. It fell with a heavy blow
upon the floor!

"That will do," said Todd.

[Illustration: Sweeney Todd Butchers The Turnkey.]

He slowly rose, and left his cravat in the hands of the dead man. He
shook himself, and again that awful oath, which cannot be transcribed,
came from his lips. Rap! rap! rap! Todd listened. What's that? Somebody
in the shop? Yes, it must be--or some one wanting to come in, rather,
for he had taken the precaution to make the outer door fast. Rap! rap!
rap!

"I must go," said Todd. "Stop.--Let me see."

He snatched a glass from the wall, and looked at himself. There was
blood upon his face. With his hand, he hastily wiped it off, and then,
walking as composedly as he could into the shop, he opened the door. A
man stood upon the threshold with quite a smile upon his face, as he
said--

"Busy, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir," said Todd. "I was just finishing off a gentleman. Shaved or
dressed, sir?"

"Shaved, if you please. But don't let me hurry you, by any means. I can
wait a little."

"Thank you, sir, if you will oblige me for a moment or two. You will
find some amusements, sir, from the _Evening Courant_, I dare say."

As he spoke, he handed the then popular newspaper to his customer, and
left him. Todd took good care to close the door leading into the
parlour, and then proceeding up to the body of the murdered Peter, he,
with his foot, turned it over and over, until it was under the table,
where it was most completely hidden by a cover that hung down to within
an inch of the floor. Before Todd had got this operation well completed,
he heard his shop door open. That door creaked most villanously; by so
doing, while he was otherwise engaged, he could always hear if it was
opened or attempted to be opened. Todd was in the shop in a moment, and
saw a respectable-looking personage, dressed in rather clerical costume,
who said--

"You keep powder?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Then I wish my hair powdered; but do not let me interrupt this
gentleman. I can wait."

"Perhaps, sir, if you could make it convenient to look in again," said
Todd, "you will probably be more amused by looking at the shops, than by
waiting here while this gentleman is shaved."

"Thank you, you are very kind; but I am rather tired, and glad of the
opportunity of having a rest."

"Certainly, sir. As you please. The _Courant_, sir, at your service."

"Thank you--thank you."

The clerical looking old gentleman sat down to read the _Courant_, while
Todd commenced the operation of shaving his first customer. When that
operation was half completed, he said--

"They report, sir, that St. Dunstan's is giving way."

"Giving way," said the clerical looking gentleman. "How do you mean
about giving way?"

"Why, sir," said Todd, with an air quite of reverential respect, "they
say that the old church has a leaning towards Temple Bar, and that, if
you stand at the opposite side of the way, you may just see it. I can't,
but they do say so."

"Bless me," said the clerical looking gentleman. "That is a very sad
thing indeed, and nobody can be more sorry than I am to hear such a tale
of the old church."

"Well sir, it may not be true."

"I hope not, indeed. Nothing would give me greater pain than to be
assured it was true. The stench in the body of the church that so much
has been said about in the parish is nothing to what you say, for who
ought to put his nose into competition with his eternal welfare?"

"Who, indeed, sir! What is your opinion of that alarming stench in old
St. Dunstan's?"

"I am quite at a loss to make it out."

"And so am I, sir--so am I. But begging your pardon, sir, if I am not
making too free, I thought as you were probably a clergyman, sir, you
might have heard something more about it than we common folks."

"No--no. Not a word. But what you say of the church having a leaning to
Temple Bar is grievous."

"Well, sir, if you were to go and look, you might find out that it was
no such thing, and by the time you return I shall have completely
finished off this gentleman."

"No--no. I make no sort of doubt in the world but that you would by that
time have finished off the gentleman, but as for my going to look at the
old church with any idea that it had a leaning to anything but itself, I
can only say that my feelings as a man and a member of the glorious
establishment will not permit me."

"But, my dear sir, you might satisfy yourself that such was really not
the case."

"No--no. Imagination would make me think that the church had a leaning
in all sorts of directions, until at last fancy might cheat me into a
belief that it actually tottered."

The clerical-looking gentleman pronounced these words with so much
feeling, that the person who was being shaved nearly got cut by twisting
his head round in order to see him.

"True, sir," said Todd. "Very true--very true indeed, and very just;
imagination does indeed play strange freaks with us at times, I well
know."

The horrible face that Todd made as he spoke ought to have opened the
eyes of any one to the fact that he was saying anything but what he
thought, but no one saw it. When he pleased, Todd generally took care to
keep his faces to himself.

"I don't wonder, Rev. sir," he said, "that your feelings prompt you to
say what you do. I'm afraid I have taken off a little too much whisker,
sir."

"Oh, never mind. It will grow again," said the person who was being
shaved.

Todd suddenly struck his own head with the flat of his hand, as a man
will do to whose mind some sudden thought has made itself apparent, and
in a voice of doubt and some alarm, he pronounced the one word--

"Powder!"

"What's the matter? You are a long time shaving me."

"Powder!" said Todd again.

"Gunpowder," said the three-quarter shaved man, while the
clerical-looking personage entirely hid his face, with the _Courant_.

"No," said Todd. "Hair powder. I told this gentleman, whose feelings
regarding the church do him so much honour, that I had hair powder in
the house, and it has just come over me like a wet blanket that I have
not a particle."

The clerical-looking gentleman quickly laid down the _Courant_, and said
wildly--

"Are you sure you have none?"

"Quite sure, sir."

"Then I won't occupy your shop and read your _Courant_ for nothing, and
as I am here I will have a shave."

"That's very kind of you, sir," said Todd. "Very kind."

"Not at all," said the gentleman, taking up the paper again with all the
coolness in the world. "Not at all. Don't mention it, I always like to
carry out the moral maxim of--Do unto others as you would that others
should do unto you."

"How charming!" exclaimed Todd, lifting up his hands, in one of which
was the razor. "How charming it is in this indifferent and selfish age
to meet with any one who is so charitable as to do more than merely
speak of such a sentiment as a curiosity in morals."

"You are above your condition as regards education," said the
clerical-looking gentleman.

"Why, to tell the truth, sir--"

"Psha!" said he who was being or rather not being shaved--"psha! And all
this while the very soap is drying upon my face."

"A thousand pardons," said Todd.

"Many apologies," said the clerical gentleman, hastily resuming the
perusal of the _Courant_.

"Sir," added Todd, as he finished the shaving and whipped off the cloth
from the patient. "Sir, I should have finished you five minutes ago, so
that I am sure no one would have heard the slightest complaint from you,
but for the truly engaging conversation of this gentleman here, whom I
shall have great pleasure now in polishing off."

"Oh, don't name it," said the shaved customer, laying down a penny.
"Don't name it, I said I was in no hurry, so I can hardly blame you for
taking your time."

He went through the usual operation of a partial sloush of cold water
from a pewter basin, and then dried himself upon a jack towel, and left
the shop.

"Now, sir," said Todd.

The clerical-looking gentleman waved his hand as though he would have
said--

"For goodness sake don't interrupt me until I have finished this
paragraph."

Todd fixed his eyes upon him, and began slowly stropping the razor he
had been recently using.

"Now, sir, if you please."

"One moment--one--mo--ment, I shall get through the deaths in an
in--stant."

Todd continued stropping the razor, when suddenly the _Courant_ dropped
from the hands of the clerical-looking gentleman, and he uttered a groan
that made Todd start.

"Hopkins--Hopkins--Gabriel Hopkins!"

"Sir."

"Hop--kins! my friend--my councillor--my fellow student--my
companion--my Mentor--my--my Hopkins."

The clerical-looking gentleman shut up his face in his hands, and rocked
to and fro in an agony of grief.

"Good God, sir," cried Todd, advancing. "What is the meaning of this?"

"In that paper you will find the death of Hopkins inserted, sir. Yes, in
the obituary of that paper. Gabriel Hopkins--the true--the gentle--the
affectionate--the christian--Hop--kins!"

"How sorry I am, sir," said Todd. "But, pray sit in this chair, sir, a
shave will compose your feelings."

"A shave! You barbarian. Do you think I could think of being shaved
within two minutes of hearing of the death of the oldest and best friend
I ever had in the world. No--no. Oh, Hopkins--Hop--kins!"

The Rev. gentleman in a paroxysm of grief rushed from the house, and
Todd himself sunk upon the shaving chair.

"It is, it must be so," cried Todd, as his face became livid with rage
and apprehension. "There is more in these coincidences than mere chance
will suffice to account for. Why is it that, if I have a customer here,
some one else will be sure to come in, and then after waiting until he
is gone himself, leave upon some frivolous excuse? Do I stand upon a
mine? Am I suspected?--am I watched? or--or more terrible, ten times
more terrible question still, am--am I at length, with all my care,
discovered?"




                             CHAPTER LXIII.
                       JOHANNA STARTS FOR TODD'S.


We will leave Todd to the indulgence of some of the most uncomfortable
reflections that ever passed through his mind, while we once again seek
the sweet companionship of the fair Johanna, and her dear romantic
friend, Arabella Wilmot. The project which these two young and
inexperienced girls were bent upon, was one that might well appal the
stoutest heart that ever beat in human bosom. It was one which, with a
more enlarged experience of the world, they would not for one moment
have entertained, but by long thought and much grief upon the subject of
her hopeless love, Johanna had much observed that clearness of
perception that otherwise would have saved her from what to all
appearance is a piece of extravagance. As for Arabella, she had
originally conceived the idea from her love for the romantic, and it was
only when it came near to the execution of it that she started at the
possible and indeed highly probable danger of the loss to one whom she
loved so sincerely as she loved Johanna. But all that has passed away.
The remonstrances have been made, and made in vain; Arabella is
silenced, and nothing remains but to detail to the reader the steps by
which the courageous girl sought to carry out a plan so fraught with a
thousand dangers. Both Arabella and Johanna sought the abode of the
latter's father, for the first step in the affair was to say something
there which was to account seemingly satisfactorily for any lengthened
stay of Johanna from home. This was by no manner of means a task of any
difficulty, for in addition to the old spectacle maker being innocence
itself as regarded the secreting anything in the shape of a plot,
Arabella Wilmot was the very last person in all the world he would have
thought capable of joining in one. As for Mrs. Oakley, she was by far
too intent, as she said herself frequently, upon things which are
eternal, to trouble herself much about terrestrial affairs, always
except they came to her in the shape of something enticing to the
appetites. What a state of things, that a mother should forget the trust
that is placed in her when she is given a child, and fancy she is really
propitiating the Almighty by neglecting a stewardship which He has
imposed upon her! But so it is. There are, we fear, in different ways, a
great many Mrs. Oakleys in the world.

"Ah, my dear Miss Wilmot," said the old spectacle-maker to Arabella,
when he saw her. "How glad I am to see you. How fresh you look."

Arabella's face was flushed with excitement, and some shame that the
errand she came upon was to deceive. She had not heard yet of the
spurious philosophy that the end sanctifies the means.

"I have come to--to--to--"

"Yes, my dear. To stay awhile, and let us look at your pretty face.
Come, my dear Johanna, your mother is out. What can you get for your
friend, Miss Wilmot? Here, my dear, take this half-crown and get some
sweetmeats, and I will open for you a bottle of the old Malaga wine."

[Illustration: Johanna's Farewell Of Her Father Prior To Her Encounter
With Todd.]

Johanna's eyes filled with tears, and she was compelled to turn aside to
conceal those tell-tale traces of emotion from her father. Arabella saw
that if anything was to be said or done in furtherance of the affair
upon which Johanna had now set her heart, she must do it or say it.
Summoning all her courage, she said--

"My dear sir--"

"Sir?--sir? Bless me, my child, when did you begin to call your old kind
friend sir?"

"My dear Mr. Oakley--"

"Ah, that's nearer the old way. Well, my dear Arabella, what would you
say to me?"

"Will you trust Johanna with me to-night, and perhaps to-morrow night?"

"I don't think Johanna can come to much harm with you, my dear," said
Mr. Oakley. "You are older than she a little, and at your age a little
goes a long way, so take her, Arabella, and bring her back to me when
you like."

With what a shrill of agony did Arabella hear Johanna thus committed to
her care. She was compelled to grasp the back of the old
spectacle-maker's chair for support.

"Yes, yes, sir," she said. "Oh, yes, Mr. Oakley."

"Well, my dears, go, and God bless you both."

To both Arabella and Johanna's perception there was something ominous
about this blessing, at such a time, and yet it had really about it
nothing at all unusual, for Mr. Oakley was very much in the habit of
saying to them "God bless you," when they left him; but feeling, as they
did, the hazard that she (Johanna) might encounter before again she
heard that voice say "God bless you," if, indeed, she ever again heard
it, no wonder the words sank deep into their hearts, and called up the
most painful emotions. Johanna certainly could not speak. Arabella tried
to laugh, to hide an emotion that would not be hidden, and only
succeeded in producing an hysterical sound, that surprised Mr. Oakley.

"What's the matter, my dear?" he said.

"Oh, nothing--nothing, dear Mr. Oakley, nothing."

"Well, I'm glad to hear it. Perhaps I only fancy it; but you both
seem--seem--"

"What do we seem, father?" said Johanna, looking very pale, and speaking
with a great effort.

"Not quite as usual, my darling."

"That--that," gasped Johanna, "can only be--be fancy."

"Of course not," said Oakley. "Fancy, I think I said it was, or if I did
not, I meant to say so, my love."

"Come," said Arabella.

"Yes--yes. Father--father. Good day."

She kissed his cheek; and then, before the old man could say another
word, she rushed to the door.

"Farewell!" said Arabella. "Good day, Mr. Oakley. I--I thank you, sir.
Good day, sir."

"Dear, dear," said the old man, "what is the matter with the girls? How
odd they both seem to-day. What can be the cause of it? I never before
saw them so strange in their manner. Ah! I have it. My wife has met
them, I dare say, and has said some unkind things to them about hats or
ribbons, or some harmless little piece of girlish pride. Well--well. All
that will pass away. I'm glad I hit upon it, for--"

At this moment old Oakley was astounded by the sudden entrance of
Johanna, who, clasping him in her arms, cried in a voice, half choked
with tears--

"Good bye, father--good bye. God help me!"

Without, then, waiting for a word from the spectacle-maker, she again
rushed from the shop, and joining Arabella a few doors off, they both
hurried to the house of the latter. Old Oakley tottered back until he
came to a seat, upon which he sank, with an air of abstraction and
confusion, that threatened to last him for some time; and in that, for
the present, we must leave him, while we look narrowly at the conduct of
the two young creatures, who have, in the pride of their virtue and
their nobleness of purpose, presumed to set up their innocence against
the deep craft of such a man as Sweeney Todd. Well might Johanna say
"God help me!"

"It is done!" said Johanna, as she clutched her friend by the arm. "It
is done now. The worst is over."

"Oh, Johanna--Johanna--"

"Well, Arabella, why do you pause? What would you say?"

"I scarcely know, and yet I feel that it ought to be something that I
have promised you. I would not say."

"Let your lips be sealed, then, dear friend; and be assured that now
nothing but the visible interposition of God shall turn me from my
purpose. I am calm and resolved."

These words, few as they were, were too significant, and spoken with too
evident sincerity to permit a doubt of their deep intensity and truth,
and from that moment Arabella Wilmot looked upon the scheme of Johanna
going in disguise to Todd's as quite settled so far as regarded the
attempt. It was the result now only that had to be looked to.

"I will say no more, Johanna, except as regards detail. In that I may
offer you advice."

"Oh, yes--yes, Arabella. Thankfully received advice, as well you know.
What is it you would say?"

"That you ought to wait until the morning."

"And so perhaps lose precious hours. Oh, no--no. Do not ask me now to
submit to any delays, Arabella."

"But if there be reason, Johanna?"

"Well, the reason, then--the reason?"

"I think that, if possible, it would be well to avoid the necessity of
remaining a night at Todd's; and so if you go in the morning, you see,
Johanna, you may have an opportunity before nightfall of making all the
discoveries you wish, or of satisfying yourself that they are not to be
made at all."

"It might be so, and yet--yet I almost think night will be the best time
of all."

"But by waiting until to-morrow morning, Johanna, you will have both day
and night."

"Yes, yes. I wish I knew what would be the best, Arabella. My feelings
are wound up to this enterprise, and I am altogether in such a frightful
state of excitement concerning it, that--that I know not how I should be
able to support myself under the delay of the remainder of to-day and
the whole of the ensuing night."

"In the night you will have repose, and to-morrow morning, with much
more calmness and effect, you will be able to start upon your errand.
Believe me, Johanna, I don't counsel this delay with any hope, or wish,
or expectation, that it will turn you from your purpose, but simply
because I think it will the better ensure its successful termination."

"Successful! What will you call successful, Arabella?"

"Your coming back to me uninjured, Johanna."

"Ah, that speaks your love for me, while I--I love him for whose sake I
am about to undergo so much, sufficiently to feel that were I sure he
was no more, my own death at the hands of Sweeney Todd would be
success."

"Johanna--Johanna, don't speak in such a strain. Have you no thought for
me? have you no thought for your poor father, to whom, as you well know,
you are the dearest tie that he has in the world? Oh, Johanna, do not be
so selfish."

"Selfish?"

"Yes, it is selfish, when you know what others must suffer because they
love you, to speak as though it were a thing to be desired that you
should die by violence."

"Arabella, can you forgive me? can you make sufficient allowances for
this poor distracted heart, to forgive its ravings?"

"I can--I do, Johanna, and in the words of your father, I am ever ready
to say 'God bless you!' You will not go till to-morrow?"

After the pause of a few moments, Johanna said faintly--

"I will not--I will not."

"Oh that is much. Then at least for another night we shall enjoy our old
sweet companionship."

They by this time had reached the home of Arabella, and as it was an
understood thing that Johanna was not expected home, the two young girls
retired to converse in unrestrained freedom upon all their hopes and
fears.




                             CHAPTER LXIV.
                       TODD COMMENCES PACKING UP.


"Yes," said Todd, as he suddenly with a spring rose from the
shaving-chair, upon which we left him enjoying reflections of no very
pleasant character. "Yes, the game is up."

He stood for a few moments now in silence, confronting a small piece of
looking glass that hung upon the wall exactly opposite to him, and it
would appear that he was struck very much by the appearance of his own
face, for he suddenly said--

"How old and worn I look."

No one could have looked upon the countenance of Todd for one moment
without fully concurring in this opinion. In truth, he did look old and
worn. But a comparatively short time has elapsed since we first
presented him to the readers of this most veracious narrative. Then he
was a man whose hideous ugliness was combined with such a look of cool
triumphant villany, that one did not know which most to ponder upon. Now
his face had lost its colour; a yellowish whiteness was the
predominating tint, and his cheeks had fallen. There was a wild and an
earnest restlessness about his eyes that made him look very much like
some famished wolf, with a touch of hydrophobia to set him off; and
certainly, take him for all in all, one would not be over anxious

    "To see his like again!"

"Old and worn," he repeated, "and the game is up; I am decided. Off and
away! is my game--off and away!--I have enough to be a prince anywhere
where money is worshipped, and that of course must be the case in all
civilised and religious communities. I must keep in some such. In the
more savage wilds of nature man is prized for what he is, but, thank
God, in highly cultivated and educated states he is only prized for what
he has been. Ha! ha! If mankind had worshipped virtue, I would have been
virtuous, for I love power."

A thought seemed suddenly to strike Todd; and he went into the parlour
muttering to himself--

"My friend Peter must be effectually disposed of."

He raised the cover which was upon the table, and with a grunt of
satisfaction, added--

"Gone!--that will do."

There was no trace of the body that he had kicked under the table. By
some strange mysterious agency it had entirely disappeared, and then
Todd went somehow to the back of the house and got a wet mop, by the aid
of which he got rid of some stains of blood upon the floor and the
fender.

"All's right," he said, "I have done some service to Fogg, and I will,
when I am far enough off for any sting not to recoil upon myself, take
good care that the law pays him a visit. The villain as well as the
fool, to deceive me regarding the boy Tobias. What can have become of
him?"

This was a question that gave Todd some uneasiness, but at length he
came to the conclusion that the dreadful treatment he, Tobias, had
received at the asylum had really driven him mad, and that in all human
probability he had fallen or cast himself into the river, or gone into
some field to die.

"Were it otherwise," he said, "I should and must have heard something of
him before now."

Todd then fairly began packing up. From beneath several tables in the
room he dragged out large trunks, and opening then some of the drawers
and cupboards that abounded in his parlour, he began placing their
valuable contents in the boxes.

"My course is simple enough," he said--"very simple; I must and will, by
violence--for she is by far too wily and artful to allow me to do so by
any other means--get rid of Mrs. Lovett. Then I must and will possess
myself of all that she calls her share of the proceeds of business.
Then, at night--the dead hour of the night--after having previously sent
all my boxes full of such valuables as from their likelihood to be
identified I dare not attempt to dispose of in England, to Hamburgh, I
will set the whole house in a flame."

The idea of burning down his house, and if possible involving a great
portion of Fleet Street in the conflagration, always seemed to be
delightful enough to Todd to raise his spirits a little.

"Yes," he added, with a demoniac grin. "There is no knowing what amount
of mischief I may do to society at large upon that one night, besides
destroying amid the roar of the flames a mass of accumulated evidence
against myself that would brand my memory with horrors, and, for aught I
know, cause a European search after me."

As he spoke, watches--rings--shoe buckles--brooches--silver heads of
walking canes--snuff boxes, and various articles of bijouterie were
placed row upon row in the box he was packing.

"Yes," he added, "I know--I feel that there is danger; I know now that I
have spies upon me--that I am watched; but it is from that very
circumstance that I ground my belief that as yet I am safe. They fancy
there is something to find out, and they are trying to find it out. If
they really knew anything, of course it would be--Todd, you are wanted."

Having placed in one of the boxes as many articles of gold and silver as
made up a considerable weight, Todd lifted it at one end, and feeling
satisfied that if he were to place any more metal in the box it would be
too heavy for carriage, he opened a cupboard which was full of hats, and
filled up the box with them. By this means he filled up the box, so that
the really valuable articles within it would not shake about, and then
he securely locked it.

"One," he said. "Some half-dozen of such will be sufficient to carry all
that I shall think worth the taking. As for my money, that will be
safest about me. Ah, I will outwit them yet, I will be off and
away--only just in time. Suspicion will take a long time to ripen into
certainty, and before it does, the flaming embers of this house will be
making the night sky as fair and magnificent as the most golden sunset
of summer." Another box was now opened, and in that, as it was of
considerable length, he began to pack swords of a valuable character. He
went to the rooms above stairs, which, as the reader is already aware,
contained much valuable property, and brought down troops of things,
which with complacent looks he carefully placed in the chest. Ever and
anon, as he went through this process, he kept muttering to himself his
hopes and fears. "What is to hinder me, in some principality of Germany,
from purchasing a title which shall smother all remembrance of what I
now am, and as the Baron Something, I shall commence a new life, for I
am not old; no--no, I am not old--far from old, although late anxieties
have made me look so. I am not so nervous and fearful of slight things
as I was, although my imagination has played me some tricks of late."
Some slight noise, that sounded as if in the house, although it was in
all probability in the next one, came upon his ears, and with a howl of
terror he shrunk down by the side of the box he had been packing.

[Illustration: Todd Alarmed At Strange Sounds Whilst Packing His
Plunder.]

"Help! mercy! What is that?"

The noise was not repeated, but for the space of about ten minutes or
so, Todd was perfectly incapable of moving except a violent attack of
trembling, which kept every limb in motion, and terribly distorted his
countenance, if it might be called so.

"What--what was it?" he at length gasped. "I thought I heard something,
nay, I am sure I heard something--a slight noise, but yet slight noises
are to me awfully suggestive of something that may follow. Am I really
getting superstitious now?"

He slowly rose and looked fearfully round him. All was still. True, he
had heard a voice, but that was all. No consequences had resulted from
it, and the fit of trembling that had seized him was passing away. He
went to the cupboard where he kept that strong stimulant that had so
much excited the admiration of Peter. He did not go through the ceremony
of procuring a glass, but placing the neck of the bottle to his throat,
he took a draught of the contents which would have been amply sufficient
to confound the faculties of any ordinary person. Upon Todd, however, it
had only a sort of sedative effect, and he gradually recovered his
former diabolical coolness.

"It was nothing," he said. "It was nothing. My fears and my imaginations
are beginning now to play the fool with me. If there were none others,
such would be sufficient warnings to me to be off and away."

He continued the packing of the box which had been temporarily
suspended, but ever and anon he would pause, and lifting up one of his
huge hands, placed it at his ear to listen more acutely, and when
nothing in the shape of alarm reached him he would say with a tone of
greater calmness and contentment--

"All is still--all is still. I shall be off and away soon--off and
away!"

The dusky twilight had crept on while Todd was thus engaged, and he was
thinking of going out, when he heard the creaking noise of his shop door
opening. As he was but in the parlour, he made his way to the shop at
once, and saw a young man, who spoke with an affected lisp, as he said--

"Mr. Todd, can you give my locks a little twirl? I'm going to a party
to-night, and want to look fascinating."

"Allow me," said Todd, as he rapidly passed him and bolted the door. "I
am annoyed by a drunken man, so, while I am dressing your hair, I wish
to shut him out, or else I might scorch you with the tongs."

"Oh, certainly. If there's anything, do you know, Mr. Todd, that I
really dislike more than another, it's a drunken man."

"There's only one thing in society," said Todd, "can come near it.--Sit
here, sir."

"What's that?"

"Why, a drunken woman, sir."

"Werry good--Werry good."

Some one made an effort to enter the shop, but the bolt which Todd had
shot into its place effectually resisted anything short of violence
sufficient to break the door completely down.

"Mr. Todd--Mr. Todd," cried a voice.

"In a moment, sir," said Todd. "In a moment."

He darted into the parlour. There was a loud bang in the shop as though
something had fallen, and then a half-stifled shriek. Todd reappeared.
The shaving chair in which the young man had been sitting was empty.
Todd took up his hat, and threw it into the parlour. He then unbolted
the door, and admitted a man who glanced around him, and then, without a
word, backed out again, looking rather pale. Todd did not hear him
mutter to himself, as he reached the street--

"Sir Richard will be frantic at this. I must post off to him at once,
and let him know that it was none of our faults. What an awkward affair
to be sure."




                              CHAPTER LXV.
               A MOONLIGHT VISIT TO ST. DUNSTAN'S VAULTS.


For the remainder of that day Todd was scarcely visible, so we will
leave him to his occupation, which was that of packing up valuables,
while we take a peep at a very solemn hour indeed at old St. Dunstan's
Church. The two figures on the outside of the ancient edifice had struck
with their clubs the sonorous metal, and the hour of two had been
proclaimed to such of the inhabitants of the vicinity who had the
misfortune to be awake to hear it. The watchman at the gate of the
Temple woke up and said "past six," while another watchman, who was
snugly ensconced in a box at the corner of Chancery Lane, answered that
it was "four o'clock and a rainy morning." Now it was neither four
o'clock nor a rainy morning--for the sky, although by no means entirely
destitute of clouds, was of that speckled clearness which allows the
little stars to pass out at all sorts of odd crevices, like young
beauties through the jalousies of some Spanish Castle. The moon, too,
had, considering all things, a pretty good time of it, for the clouds
were not dense enough to hide her face, and when behind them, she only
looked like some young bride, with the faint covering of bashful blonde
before her radiant countenance. And at times, too, she would peep out at
some break in that veil with such a blaze of silvery beauty as was
dazzling to behold, and quite stopped the few passengers who were in the
streets at that lone hour.

"Look," said one of four gentlemen, who were walking towards Temple Bar
from the Strand. "Look! Is not that lovely?"

"Yes," said another. "A million fires are out in London now, and one can
see the blue sky as it was seen when--"

"Wild in the woods the painted savage ran."

"But, after all," said another, "I prefer good broad cloth to red ochre.
What say you, Sir Richard?"

"I am of your lordship's opinion," said Sir Richard Blunt, who was one
of the party of four: "I certainly think we have gained something by not
being Ancient Britons any longer than was absolutely necessary. This is,
in truth, a most splendid night."

"It is--it is," they all said.

By this time, strolling along in an independent sort of fashion, they
had reached Temple Bar, and then Sir Richard, bowing to the one who had
not yet made any sort of remark, said--

"Mr. Villimay, you have not forgotten the keys?"

"Oh no, Sir Richard; oh no."

"Then, gentlemen, we are very near our place of destination. It will be
advisable that we look about us, and use the utmost precaution, to be
sure that we are not watched by any one."

"Yes--yes," said the other. "You will be the best judge of that Sir
Richard; with your tact, you will be able to come to a conclusion upon
that subject much better than we can."

Sir Richard Blunt made a slight kind of bow in acknowledgment of the
compliment to his tact, and then, while what we may call the main body
waited under the arch of Temple Bar, he advanced alone into Fleet
Street. After advancing for a short distance, he took from his pocket a
small silver whistle, and produced upon it a peculiar thrilling note. In
a moment a tall man, with a great coat on him, merged from behind a
column that lent its support to a door-way.

"Here you is," said the man.

"Is all right, Crotchet?" said Sir Richard.

"Yes; everything is quiet enough. Not a blessed mouse hasn't wagged his
tail or smoothened his whiskers for the last half hour or so."

"Very good, Crotchet. I'm afraid, though, I cannot dismiss you just yet,
as the business is very important."

"What's the odds," said Crotchet, "as long as you are happy?"

Sir Richard Blunt smiled, as he added--

"Well, Crotchet, you deserve, and you shall have an ample reward for the
services you are doing and have done, in this affair. I and some
gentlemen will go into the church, and I wish you to remain at the
porch, and if you find occasion to give any warning, I think your
whistle will be quite shrill enough to reach my ears."

"Not a doubt on it, Sir Richard. If what they calls the last trumpet is
only half as loud as my last whistle, it will wake up the coves, and no
mistake."

"Very good, Crotchet. Only don't make any profane allusions in the
hearing of the gentlemen with me, for one of them is the Under Secretary
of State, and the other two are men of account. We have to meet some one
else in the church."

"Then he hasn't come."

"That's awkward. The Lord Mayor was to meet us. Ah! who is this?"

A private carriage stopped on the other side of the way, and some one
alighted, and a voice cried--

"Go home now, Samuel, and put up the horses. I shall not want you any
more to-night. Go home."

"Shan't we call anywhere for you, my lord?" said Samuel, the coachman.

"No--no, I say. Go away at once."

"That's the Lord Mayor," said Sir Richard. "He is pretty true to his
time."

As he spoke, Sir Richard crossed the road, and addressed the chief
magistrate of the city, saying--

"A fine night, my lord."

"Oh, Sir Richard, is that you? Well, I am very glad to meet with you so
soon. If I were to tell you the difficulty I have had to get here, you
would not believe me. Indeed you could not."

"Really, my lord."

"Yes. You must know, Sir Richard, between you and I, and--and"--Here the
Lord Mayor, who did not like to say post, looked about him, and his eyes
falling upon Temple Bar, added--"Bar, I say; between you and me and the
Bar, the Lady Mayoress, although a most excellent woman--indeed I may
say an admirable woman--has at times her little faults of temper. You
understand?"

"Who is without?" said Sir Richard.

"Ah, who indeed--who indeed, Sir Richard. That is a very sensible remark
of yours. Who is without? as you justly enough say."

"The Lord Mayor!" said Sir Richard, who had been gradually leading his
lordship to Temple Bar, and now announced his arrival to the three
gentlemen who were there in waiting.

The three gentlemen professed themselves to be quite delighted to see
the Lord Mayor, and the Lord Mayor professed to be quite in raptures to
see the three gentlemen, so that a pleasanter party than they all made,
could not have been imagined.

"Now," said Sir Richard Blunt, "I think, with all deference, gentlemen,
that the sooner we proceed to business the better."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Villimay, who was the senior churchwarden. "Oh,
yes--certainly."

"And yet," said the Lord Mayor, "we must be very cautious."

"Oh, very--very cautious," cried Villimay.

"But a bold front is the best," remarked Sir Richard.

"Yes. As you say, sir, there's nothing like a bold front," cried
Villimay.

Sir Richard, with a quiet smile, said to the under secretary--

"A very obliging person, you perceive, Mr. Villimay is."

"Oh, very," laughed the secretary.

Preceded now by the churchwarden, they all made their way towards the
church, but the watchman at the corner of Chancery Lane must have had
something upon his mind, he was so very wakeful, for after they had all
passed but Crotchet, he looked out of his box, and said--"Thieves!"

"What's that to you?" said Crotchet, facing him with a look of defiance,
"eh? Can't you be quiet when you is told?"

"Murder!" said the watchman, as he began to fumble for his rattle.

"Hark ye, old pump," said Crotchet. "I've settled eight watchmen atween
this here and Charing Cross, and you'll make nine, if you opens your
mouth again."

The appalled watchman shrank back into his box.

"Eight, did you say?"

"Yes."

Crotchet took the lantern off its hook in front of the box, and smashed
it upon the head of the guardian of the night, whereupon the aforesaid
guardian shrank completely down to the bottom of the box, with the
fragments of the lantern hanging about him, and said not another word.

"I rather think," said Mr. Crotchet to himself, "as I've settled that
old fellow comfortable."

With this conviction upon his mind--the amiability or the non-amiability
of which we shall not stop to discuss--Mr. Crotchet ran hastily after
the rest of the party, and stationed himself by the church porch,
according to orders. By this time, Mr. Villimay, the churchwarden, had
produced a little gothic-looking key, and proceeding to a small side
door, he, after some rattling, partly consequent upon the lock being in
a state of desuetude, and partly from personal nervousness, he did
succeed in turning the rusty wards, and then, with an ominous groan, the
door yielded. Sir Richard Blunt had quite satisfied himself that there
were no eaves-droppers at hand, so he was anxious to get the party
housed--perhaps in this instance churched would be a more appropriate
expression.

"Gentlemen," he said, "the night is stealing past, and we have much to
do."

"That is true, Sir Richard," said the secretary. "Come on, Donkin, and
let us get through it."

The Lord Mayor shook a little as he passed through the little door,
last, having, although king of the city, given the _pas_ to every one of
his companions, upon that most mysterious mission to old St. Dunstan's
church at such an hour. Perhaps he had a faint hope that they might
leave him entirely behind, and shut the door precipitately, so that he
could not get in. If he had any such hope, however, it was doomed, like
too many human hopes, to bitter disappointment, for Sir Richard Blunt
held the door open for him, saying blandly--

"Now, my lord. We could not get on without you."

"Oh, thank you--thank you. You are very good."

The Lord Mayor crossed the threshold, and then Mr. Villimay, who had
occupied a remote and mysterious position at the back of the door,
closed it, and locked it on the inside.

"If--if you were to lose the key, Mr. Villimay?" said the Lord Mayor.

"Why, then," interposed Sir Richard Blunt, "I'm afraid we should have to
stay there until Sunday, unless some couple kindly got married in the
meantime."

The Lord Mayor gave a very odd kind of cough, as he said--

"What would the Lady Mayoress say?"

The air without had been cold, but what was that compared with the
coldness within? At least, the street breeze had been dry, but in the
church there was such a fearful dampness pervading the narrow passage in
which the party found itself, that every one felt as though his very
marrow was cold.

"This passage," said Mr. Villimay, "hasn't been opened for many a long
day."

"Indeed!" said the secretary.

"No, my lord, it has not: and it's only a wonder that, after a good hunt
in the vestry cupboard, I at all found the key of it."

"Fortunate that you did," said Sir Richard Blunt, who was all this time
making exertions to procure a light, which were as often defeated by the
dampness of the air. At length he was successful in igniting a piece of
wax candle, and he said--

"Gentlemen, this will show us our way through the church to the vestry,
where we can get lanthorns."

"Yes," said the Lord Mayor, who was getting so nervous that he thought
himself called upon to make some reply to anything and anybody. "Yes,
lanthorns in the vestry."

"Well," said the secretary, "my Lord Mayor, your mayoralty will be
distinguished by this dreadful affair for all time to come."

"Many thanks to your lordship, it will."

The secretary smiled as he whispered to his friend Donkin--

"The city magistrate don't seem happy, Donkin."

"Far from it."

At the end of the little narrow, damp, gloomy, cobwebby passage in which
they were, was another little door, the upper half of which was of
highly ornamented iron fret work, the side of which next to the church
interior being gilt. This door likewise yielded to a key which Mr.
Villimay produced, and then they found themselves at once in the western
aisle of the church.

"The stench don't seem so bad," said Sir Richard.

"No, sir," said Villimay. "We have got all the windows open far up above
there, and there's quite a current of air, too, right up the belfry."




                             CHAPTER LXVI.
                          THE COOK'S VISITORS.


Sir Richard shaded with his hand the little light that he carried as he
walked solemnly across the nave towards the chancel, where the vestry
room was situated. He was followed closely by the whole party, and the
audible breathing of the Lord Mayor sufficiently proclaimed the uneasy
state of his lordship's nerves.

"How strange it is," said the secretary, "that men will pile up stones
and timber until they make something to enter, which then terrifies
their weak natures, and they become the slaves of the very materials
that they have made to enclose and roof in a certain space upon which
otherwise they would stand unmoved."

"It is so," said Donkin.

"Why the fact is, I suppose," said Sir Richard Blunt, "that it is what
is called original sin that sticks to us, and so--

    'Conscience doth make cowards of us all!'

whether we are personally or not obnoxious to the pangs of the still
small voice."

"Upon my word, Sir Richard," said the secretary, "you are quite a
free-thinker--indeed you are."

Suddenly the whole party paused, for something resembling a moan was
heard from among the pews in the centre of the church, and every one was
anxious to listen for a repetition of the sound.

"Did you hear it?" whispered the secretary.

"In faith, I did," said Mr. Donkin.

"And I," said Sir Richard Blunt.

"And we," said the Lord Mayor, in defiance of grammar. "I--I--feel
rather unwell, gentlemen, do you know."

"Hush! let us listen," said the secretary.

They all stood profoundly still for a few minutes, and then, just as
they were one and all beginning to think that after all it must be a
mere thing of fancy, the same mournful moan came once more upon their
ears.

"There can be no mistake," said Sir Richard. "We all hear that; is it
not so, gentlemen?"

"Yes--yes!" said everybody.

"I'm getting worser," said the Lord Mayor.

"This mystery must be cleared up," said the secretary. "Is it a trick
upon us, do you think, Sir Richard?"

"No, my lord, certainly not."

"Then we cannot go on until this is cleared up. You are armed, of
course, Sir Richard?"

"Yes, my lord."

Sir Richard Blunt took from his pocket a double-barrelled pistol. There
was now a sort of pause, as though each of those present expected the
others to say or to do something which should have the effect of
discovering what the singular noise portended. Of course, Sir Richard
Blunt felt that in such an emergency he would be the man naturally
looked to.

"It is absolutely necessary," he said, "that we should find out what
this means before proceeding farther."

"Yes, yes," said the Lord Mayor, "no doubt of it; and in the meantime
I'll run to the Mansion House and get some assistance, gentlemen."

"Oh, no, my lord--oh, no," said the secretary to the chief magistrate of
the city. "We cannot think of sparing you."

"But--but--"

"Certainly not," said Sir Richard Blunt, who was keenly alive to the
tone of irony in which the secretary spoke. "Certainly not; and as I
fancy the sound which has excited our curiosity comes from about the
centre of the pews, you and I, my lord, will go and find out who it is.
Come, if you please, at once."

"I--I--" stammered the Lord Mayor, "I really--humph! If I felt quite
well, do you know, Sir Richard, I should not hesitate a moment."

"Pho! pho!" said Sir Richard, taking his arm, and leading him
unwillingly forward. "Remember that the eyes of those are upon you whose
opinions are to you of importance."

With a groan the unfortunate Lord Mayor, who from the first had shrunk
from the enterprise altogether, being fearful that it might possibly
involve dangerous consequences, allowed himself to be dragged by Sir
Richard Blunt in the direction of the pews.

"If you have a pistol," said the magistrate, "you had better keep it in
your hand ready for service."

"Lord bless you," said the Lord Mayor, in a nervous whisper, "I never
fired off a pistol in all my life."

"Is that possible?"

"I don't know about being possible, but it's true."

"Well, you do surprise me."

"So--so you see, Sir Richard," added his temporary lordship, suddenly
popping into the churchwarden's pew, which they had just reached--"so
I'll stay here and keep an eye upon you."

Sir Richard Blunt was not at all sorry to get rid of such a companion as
the Lord Mayor, so with a cough, he left him in the pew, and went
forward alone, determined to find out what it was that made the
extraordinary noise. As he went forward, towards the spot from whence it
had come, he heard it once again, and in such close proximity to him,
that albeit, unaccustomed to allow anything to affect his nerves, he
started back a pace. Shading, then, the little bit of wax candle that he
had in his hand, he looked steadily in the direction of the low moaning
sound. In an instant he found a solution of the mystery. A couple of
pigeons stood upon the hand rail of one of the pews, and it was the
peculiar sound made by these birds, that, by the aid of echo in the
silent empty church, had seemed to be of a very different character from
its ordinary one.

"And from such simple causes," said Sir Richard, "arise all the
well-authenticated stories of superstition which fancy and cowardice
give credence to."

He looked up, and saw that in the wish to ventilate the church, the
windows had been liberally opened, which had afforded the means of
ingress to the pigeons, who, no doubt, would have slumbered soundly
enough until morning, if not disturbed by the arrival of the party at
the church. As Sir Richard Blunt retraced his steps, he passed the pew
where the Lord Mayor was; and willing to punish that functionary for his
cowardice, he said, in a well-affected voice of alarm--

"Gracious Heaven! what will become of us?"

With a groan, the Lord Mayor flopped down to the floor of the pew, and
there he lay, crouching under one of the seats in such an agony of
terror, that Sir Richard felt certain he and the others would be able to
transact all the business they came about, before he would venture to
move from that place of concealment. The magistrate speedily informed
the rest of the party what was the cause of the alarm, and likewise
hinted the position of the Lord Mayor, upon which the secretary said--

"Let him be. Of course, as a matter of courtesy, I was obliged to write
to him upon the subject; but we are as well, and perhaps better without
him."

"I am of the same opinion," said Sir Richard.

They now went at once to the vestry, and two good lanterns were then
procured, and lit. The magistrate at once led the way to the stone that
had been raised by the workmen, in the floor of the church, and which
had never been effectually fastened down again. In a corner, where no
one was likely to look, Sir Richard placed his hand for a crow-bar which
he knew to be there, and, having found it, he quickly raised the stone
on one side. The other gentlemen lent their assistance, and it was
turned fairly over, having exposed the steps that led down to the vaults
of old St. Dunstan's church.

"Let us descend at once," said the secretary, who, to tell the truth, in
the whole affair, showed no lack of personal courage.

"Allow me to precede you, gentlemen," said Sir Richard Blunt; "and you,
Mr. Villimay, will, perhaps, bring up the rear."

"Yes, oh, yes," said the churchwarden, with some degree of nervousness,
but he was quite a hero compared to the Lord Mayor.

Sir Richard handed one of the lanterns, then, to Mr. Villimay, and took
the other himself. Without another moment's delay, then, he began the
descent. They could all, as they went, feel conscious that there was
certainly a most unearthly smell in the vaults--a smell which,
considering the number of years that had elapsed since any interments
had taken place in them, was perfectly unaccountable. As they proceeded,
this stench became more and more sickening, and the secretary said, as
he held a handkerchief to his mouth and nose--

"The Bishop of London spoke to me of this, but I really thought he was
exaggerating."

"It would be difficult to do that," said Sir Richard. "It is as bad
almost as it can very well be, and the measures taken for the purpose of
ventilation, have not as yet had a very great effect upon it."

"I should say not."

With tolerable speed the magistrate led the party on through a vast
number of vaults, and through several narrow and rather tortuous
passages, after which he came to an iron door. It was locked, but
placing the lantern for a few moments upon the floor, he soon succeeded
in opening it with a skeleton key. The moment he had done so, the
secretary exclaimed--

"Hey day! This is something different."

"In what respect, my lord?"

"Why, if my senses don't deceive me, the horrible charnel-house smell,
which we have been enduring for some time past, has given way to one
much more grateful."

"What is it like, my lord?"

"Well, I should say some delicious cooking was going on."

"You are right. There is cooking going on. We are not very far from Mrs.
Lovett's pie manufactory."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; and the smell, or rather I ought to say the odour of which the air
is full, comes from the bakehouse."

The secretary gave a perceptible shudder, and Mr. Villimay uttered a
groan. The gentleman who was with the secretary was about to say
something, but the magistrate, in a low voice, interrupted him, saying--

"Pardon me, but now we are in close proximity to the place of our
destination, I would recommend the profoundest caution and silence."

"Certainly--certainly. We will only be silent spectators."

"It is better, I think," added Sir Richard Blunt, "to allow me to carry
on the whole of the conversation that is to ensue; and at the same time,
any of you gentlemen can suggest to me a question to ask, and I will at
once put it to the man we come to speak to."

"That will do, Sir Richard, that will do."

The magistrate now hurried on as though those savoury steams that
scented the air from the bakehouse of Mrs. Lovett's pies were to him
more disagreeable than the horrible smell in the vaults that made
everybody shake again. In a few minutes he arrived at a room, for it
could not be called a vault. It had a floor of rough stone flags, which
seemed as though they had originally belonged to some of the vaults, and
had been pulled up and carried to this place to make a rude flooring.
There was nothing very remarkable about the walls of this place, save at
one part, and there there was evidently a door, across which was placed
a heavy iron bar.

"It is through there," said Sir Richard.

"But--but you do not intend to open it?"

"Certainly not. There is a small crevice through which there will be no
difficulty in maintaining a conversation with the imprisoned cook, if I
can only make him hear me from this spot."




                             CHAPTER LXVII.
                     THE REVELATIONS IN THE VAULTS.


The object of Sir Richard Blunt was, of course, to make the cook hear
him, but no one else. With this aim he took a crown-piece from his
pocket and tapped with the edge of it upon the stone-work which at that
place protruded from the wall to the extent of nearly a foot. The stone
shelves upon the other side were let into the wall in that fashion. The
monotonous ringing sound of the coin against the stone was likely enough
to reverberate through the wall, and that the cook was rather a light
sleeper, or did not sleep at all, was soon sufficiently manifest, for a
voice, which the magistrate recognised as his, cried from the other
side--

"Who is there? If a friend, speak quickly, for God knows I have need of
such. If an enemy, your utmost malice cannot make my situation worse
than it is."

Sir Richard placed his mouth close to a crevice, and said--

"A friend, and the same who has spoken to you before."

"Ah! I know that voice. Do you bring me freedom?"

"Soon. But I have much to ask of you."

"Let me look at the daylight, and then ask what you will, I shall not
tire of answering."

"Nay, the principal thing I have to ask of you is yet a little more
patience."

"Patience! patience! It seems that I have been years in this place, and
yet you ask me to have more patience. Oh, blessed liberty, am I not to
hail you yet?"

"Can you forget that you have another object--namely, to bring to the
just punishment of the law those who have placed you and others in this
awful position?"

"Yes--yes. But--"

"But you would forego all that to be free, a few short hours before you
would be free with the accomplishment of all that justice and society
required?"

"No--no. God help me! I will have patience. What is it that you demand
of me now? Speak."

"Your name?"

"Alas!--alas!"

"Surely you cannot hesitate to tell one, who has run some risks to
befriend you, who you are?"

"If, by my telling that, I saw that those risks were made less, I would
not hesitate; but, as it is, London, and all that it contains now, is so
hateful to me, that I shall leave it the instant I can. Falsehood, where
I most expected truth, has sunk deeply, like a barbed arrow, into my
heart."

"Well, I certainly had hoped you would have placed in me that amount of
confidence."

"No. I dare not."

"Dare not?"

"Yes, that is the word. The knowledge of my name spread abroad--that is
to say, my real name, would inflict much misery for all, I can just now
say to the contrary, upon one whom I yet wish all the happiness that God
can give his creatures in this world. Let it be thought that I and the
world have parted company."

"You are a strange man."

"I am. But the story I have to tell of the doings in this den of infamy,
will come as well from a Mr. Smith as from any one else."

"I wish you now, in a few words, to relate to me what you know, fully
and freely."

"Anticipating that a statement would be wanted, I have, with no small
amount of trouble, manufactured for myself pens and ink, and have
written all that I have to say. How can I give you the document?"

"There is a chink here in the wall, through which I am addressing you.
Can you pass it through?"

"I will try. I see the chink now for the first time since my long and
painful residence here. Your light upon the other side has made it quite
apparent to me. I think, by folding my paper close, I can pass it
through to you."

"Try it."

In about half a minute Sir Richard Blunt got hold of a piece of folded
paper, which was pushed partly through the chink. He pulled it quite
through, and handed it to the secretary, who, with a nod, at once put it
in his pocket.

"And now for how long," said the cook, "am I to pine for freedom from
this dreadful place? Recollect that each hour here has upon its passing
wings a load of anxieties and miseries, such as I only can appreciate."

"I have brought a letter for you," said Sir Richard, "which will contain
all the intelligence you wish, and give you such instructions as shall
not only ensure your safety, but enable you to aid materially in
bringing your persecutors to justice. Place your hand to the crevice and
take it."

"I have it."

"Well, read it at your leisure. Have you any means of knowing the time
of day in your prison?"

"Oh yes. There is a clock in the bakehouse, by which I am forced to
regulate the different batches of pies."

"That will do. Have you had any more threats from Mrs. Lovett?"

"None. As long as I perform my loathsome duty here, I see no one and
hear of no one."

"Be of good cheer, your desolate condition will not last long. It is not
easy under present circumstances to enter at large into matters which
might induce you to declare who you really are, but when you and I meet
in the bright sunshine from which you have been debarred for so long,
you will think very differently from what you do now upon many things."

"Well, sir, perhaps I shall."

"Good night to you. Take what rest and refreshment you can, my good
friend, and believe that there are better days in store for you."

"I will strive to think so.--Good night."

There was such a mournful cadence in the voice of the imprisoned young
man, as he said "Good night," that the secretary remarked in a low voice
to Sir Richard--

"Would it not be a mercy now to let him free, and take him away with
us?"

"I don't like his concealing his name, my lord."

"Well, it is not the thing exactly."

"His imprisonment now will be of very short duration indeed, and his
liberation is certain, unless by some glaring act of imprudence he mars
his own fortune. But now, gentlemen, I have a sight to show you in these
vaults that you have come to see, and yet, that I think it would have
been wise if you had left unseen."

"Indeed!"

"Yes. You will soon agree with me in opinion."

Sir Richard, bearing the lantern in his hand, led the way for a
considerable distance back again, until they were fairly under the
church, and then he said--

"A large vault belonging to a family named Weston, which is extinct I
fancy, for we can find no one to claim it, has been opened near this
spot."

"By whom?"

"That you will have no difficulty in guessing. It is that vault that I
wish to show you. There are others in the same condition, but one will
be enough to satiate your appetites for such sights. This way,
gentlemen, if you please."

As the light from the two lanterns fell upon the faces of Sir Richard
Blunt's companions, curiosity and excitement could be seen paramount
upon their features. They followed him as their guide without a word,
but they could not but see that he trod slowly, and that now and then a
shudder crossed his frame.

"Even you are affected," said the secretary, when the silence had lasted
some minutes.

"I were something more or less than human," replied Sir Richard Blunt
"if I could go unmoved into the presence of that sight, that I feel it
to be my duty to show to you."

"It must be horrible indeed."

"It is more horrible than all the horrors your imagination can suggest.
Let us go quicker."

Apparently with a desperate feeling of resolution, such as might actuate
a man who had some great danger to encounter, and who after shrinking
from it for a time, should cry "Well, the sooner it is over the better,"
did the magistrate now quicken his steps, nor paused he until he arrived
at the door of the vault of which he had spoken.

"Now, Mr. Villimay," he said. "Be so good as to hold up your lantern as
high as you can, at the same time not to get it above the doorway, and I
will do the same by mine. All that we want is a brief but clear view."

"Yes, yes. Quite brief," said the secretary.

Sir Richard Blunt laid his hand upon the door of the vault, which was
unfastened, and flung it open.

"Behold!" he said, "one of the vaults of old St. Dunstan's."

For the space of about a minute and a half no one uttered a word, so it
behoves us to state what that vault contained, to strike such horror
into the hearts of bold educated men. Piled one upon each other on the
floor, and reaching half way up to the ceiling lay, a decomposing mass
of human remains. Heaped up one upon another, heedlessly tossed into the
disgusting heap any way, lay the gaunt skeletons with pieces of flesh
here and there only adhering to the bones. A steam--a foetid steam rose
up from the dead, and upon the floor was a pool of corruption, creeping
along as the declivities warranted. Eyes, teeth, hands half denuded of
flesh--glistening vermin, shiny and sleek with the luxurious feeding
they there got, slipped glibly in and out of the heaped-up horror.

[Illustration: Todd's Victims In The Vaults Of Old St. Dunstan's
Church.]

"No more--no more!" cried the secretary.

"I sicken," said his friend, "I am faint."

Sir Richard Blunt let go the door, and it slammed shut with a hollow
sound.

"Thank God!" he said.

"For--for what?" gasped Mr. Villimay.

"That you and I, my friend, need not look upon this sight again. We are
all sufficient evidence upon our oaths that it is here to see."

"Yes--yes."

"Come away," said the secretary. "You told me something of what was to
see, Sir Richard Blunt, but my imagination did not picture it to be what
it is."

"I told you that likewise, my lord."

"You did--you did."

With hurried steps they now followed the magistrate; and it was with a
feeling of exquisite relief that they all found themselves, after a few
minutes, fairly in the body of the church, and some distance from that
frightful spectacle they had each thought it to be their duty to look
upon.

"Let us go to the vestry," said the secretary, "and take something. I am
sick at heart and stomach both."

"And I am everything, and hungry too," cried a voice, and the Lord Mayor
popped his head up from the churchwardens' pew.

No one could help laughing at this, although, to tell the truth, those
men, after what they had seen, were in no laughing mood, as the reader
may well imagine.

"Is that our friend, the King of the City?" said the secretary.

"It is," said Sir Richard.

"Well, I must say that he has set a good example of bravery in his
dominions."

"He has indeed."

"Gentlemen--gentlemen," added the Lord Mayor, as he rolled out of the
churchwardens' pew, "don't think of going into the vestry without me,
for it was I who gave a hint to have refreshments put there, and I have
been dying for some of them for this last half-hour, I assure you."




                            CHAPTER LXVIII.
                          RETURNS TO JOHANNA.


We return to Johanna Oakley.

"What is the meaning of all this?" said Sweeney Todd, as he sat in his
shop about the hour of twelve on the morning following that upon which
Johanna Oakley and her friend Arabella had concerted so romantic a plan
of operations regarding him. "What is the meaning of all this? Am I
going mad?"

Now Todd's question was no doubt a result of some peculiar sensations
that had come over him; but, propounded as it was to silence and to
vacancy, it of course got no answer. A cold perspiration had suddenly
broke out upon his brow, and, for the space of about ten minutes, he was
subject to one of those strange foreshadowings of coming ills to him,
which of late had begun to make his waking hours anything but joyous,
and his dreams hideous.

"What can it mean?" he said. "What can it mean?"

He wiped his face with a miserable looking handkerchief, and then, with
a deep sigh, he said--

"It is that fiend in the shape of a woman!"

No doubt he meant his dear friend, Mrs. Lovett. Alas! what a thorn she
was in the side of Sweeney Todd. How poor a thing, by way of recompense
for the dark and terrible suspicions he had of her, was his heaped up
wealth? Todd--yes, Sweeney Todd, who had waded knee-deep--knee-deep do
we say?--lip-deep in blood for gold, had begun to find that there was
something more precious still which he had bartered for it--peace! That
peace of mind--that sweet serenity of soul, which, like the love of God,
is beautiful, and yet passeth understanding. Yes, Todd was beginning to
find out that he had bartered the jewel for the setting! What a common
mistake. Does not all the world do it? They do; but the difference
between Todd and common people merely was that he played the game with
high stakes.

"Yes," added Todd, after a pause, "curses on her, it is that fiend in
the shape of a woman, who

    'Cows my better part of man,'

and she or I must fall. That is settled; yes--she or I. There was a time
when I used to say she and I could not live in the same country; but now
I feel that we cannot both live in the same world. She must go--she must
lapse into the sleep of death."

Todd rose, and stalked to and fro in his shop. He felt as if something
was going to happen: that undefinable fidgetty feeling which will attack
all persons at times, came over him, and yet it was not a feeling of
deep apprehension that was at his heart.

"Oh," he muttered, "it is the recollection of that dreadful woman--that
fiend, who, with a seeming prescience, knows when there is poison in her
glass, and baffles me. It is the dim and shadowy thought of what I must
do with her that shatters me. If poison will not do the deed, steel or a
bullet must. Ah!"

Some one was trying the handle of the shop door, and so timidly was it
tried, that Todd stood still to listen, without saying "Come in," or
otherwise encouraging the visitor.

"Who is it?" he gasped.

Still the handle of the door-lock only shook. To be sure, it was a
difficult door to open to all who did not know it well. Todd had taken
care of that, for if there was anything more than another which such a
man as he might be fairly enough presumed to dislike, it would be to be
glided in upon by the sudden opening of an easy-going door.

"Come in," he now cried.

The person without was evidently anxious to obey the invitation, and a
more strenuous effort was made to unfasten the door. It yielded at
length. A young and pretty looking lad, apparently of about thirteen or
fourteen years of age, stood upon the threshold. He and Sweeney Todd
looked at each other in silence for a few moments. If a painter or a
sculptor could have caught them as they stood, and transferred them to
canvas or to marble, he might have called them an idea of Guilt and
Innocence. There was Todd, with evil passions and wickedness written
upon every feature of his face. There was the boy, with the rosy
gentleness and innocence of Heaven upon his brow. God made both these
creatures! It was Todd who broke the silence. A gathering flush was upon
the face of the boy, and he could not speak.

"What do you want?" said Todd.

He rattled his chair as he spoke, as though he would have said, "It is
not to be shaved." The boy was too much engaged with his own thoughts to
pay much attention to Todd's pantomime. He evidently, though, wished to
say something, which he could not command breath to give utterance to.
Like the "Amen" of Macbeth, something he would fain have uttered, seemed
to stick in his throat.

"What is it?" again demanded Todd, eagerly.

This roused the boy. The boy, do we say. Ah, our readers have already
recognised in that boy the beautiful and enthusiastic Johanna Oakley.

"There is a bill in your window--"

[Illustration: Johanna Applies To Todd To Become His Errand Boy.]

"A what?"

Todd had forgotten the announcement regarding the youth he wanted, with
a taste for piety.

"A bill. You want a boy, sir."

"Oh," said Todd, as the object of the visit at once thus became clear
and apparent to him. "Oh, that's it."

"Yes, sir."

Todd held up his hand to his eyes, as though he were shading them from
sunlight, as he gazed upon Johanna, and then, in an abrupt tone of
voice, he said--

"You won't do."

"Thank you, sir."

She moved towards the door. Her hand touched the handle. It was not
fast. The door opened. Another moment, and she would have been gone.

"Stop!" cried Todd.

She returned at once.

"You don't look like a lad in want of a situation. Your clothes are
good--your whole appearance is that of a young gentleman. What do you
mean by coming here to ask to be an errand boy in a barber's shop? I
don't understand it. You had different expectations."

"Yes, sir. But Mrs. Green--"

"Mrs. who?"

"Green, sir, my mother-in-law, don't use me well, and I would rather go
to sea, or seek my living in any way, than go back again to her; and if
I were to come into your service, all I would ask would be, that you did
not let her know where I was."

"Humph! Your mother-in-law, you say?"

"Yes, sir. I have been far happier since I ran away from her, than I
have been for a long time past."

"Ah, you ran away? Where lives she?"

"At Oxford. I came to London in the waggon, and at every step the lazy
horses took, I felt a degree of pleasure that I was placing a greater
distance between me and oppression."

"Your own name?"

"Charley Green. It was all very well as long as my father lived; but
when he was no more, my mother-in-law began her ill-usage of me. I bore
it as long as I could, and then I ran away. If you can take me, sir, I
hope you will."

"Go along with you. You won't suit me at all. I wonder at your impudence
in coming."

"No harm done, sir. I will try my fortune elsewhere."

Todd began sharpening a razor, as the boy went to the door again.

"Shall I take him?" he said to himself. "I do want some one for the
short time I shall be here. Humph! An orphan--strange in London. No one
to care for him. The very thing for me. No prying friends--nowhere to
run, the moment he is sent of an errand, with open mouth, proclaiming
this and that has happened in the shop. I will have him."

He darted to the door.

"Hoi!--hoi!"

Johanna turned round, and came back in a minute. Todd had caught at the
bait at last. She got close to the door.

"Upon consideration," said Todd, "I will speak to you again. But just
run and see what the time is by St. Dunstan's Church."

"St.--St. who?" said Johanna, looking around her with a bewildered,
confused sort of air. "St. who?"

"St. Dunstan's, in Fleet Street."

"Fleet Street? If you will direct me, sir, I dare say I shall find
it--oh, yes. I am good at finding places."

"He _is_ strange in London," muttered Todd. "I am satisfied of that. He
is strange. Come in--come in, and shut the door after you."

With a heart beating with violence, that was positively fearful, Johanna
followed Todd into the shop, carefully closing the door behind her, as
she had been ordered to do.

"Now," said Todd, "nothing in the world but my consideration for your
orphan and desolate condition, could possibly induce me to think of
taking you in; but the fact is, being an orphan myself--(here Todd made
a hideous grimace)--I say, being an orphan myself, with little to
distress me amid the oceans and quicksands of this wicked world, some
very strong sense of religion--(another hideous grimace)--I naturally
feel for you."

"Thank you, sir."

"Are you decidedly pious?"

"I hope so, sir."

"Humph! Well, we will say more upon that all-important subject another
time, and if I consent to be your master, a--a--a--"

"Charley Green, sir."

"Ay, Charley Green. If I consent to take you for a week upon trial, you
must wholly attribute it to my feelings."

"Certainly, sir."

"Have you any idea yourself as to terms?"

"None in the least, sir."

"Very good. Then you will not be disappointed. I shall give you sixpence
a week, and your board wages of threepence a day, besides perquisites.
The threepence I advise you to spend in three penny pies, at Mrs.
Lovett's, in Bell Yard. They are the most nutritious and appetizing
things you can buy; and in the Temple you will find an excellent pump,
so that the half hour you will be allowed for dinner will be admirably
consumed in your walk to the pie shop, and from thence to the pump, and
then home here again."

"Yes, sir."

"You will sleep under the counter, here, of a night, and the perquisites
I mention will consist of the use of the pewter wash-hand basin, the
soap, and the end of a towel."

"Yes, sir."

"You will hear and see much in this place. Perhaps now and then you will
be surprised at something; but--but, master Charley, if you go and
gossip about me or my affairs, or what you see, or what you hear, or
what you think you would like to see or hear, I'll cut your throat!"

"Charley" started.

"Oh! sir," he said, "you may rely upon me. I will be quite discreet. I
am a fortunate lad to get so soon into the employment of such an
exemplary master."

"Ha!"

Todd, for a space of two minutes made the most hideous and extraordinary
grimaces.

"Fortunate lad," he said. "Exemplary master! How true. Ha!"--Poor
Johanna shuddered at that dreadful charnel-house sort of laugh.

"My God," she thought, "was that the last sound that rung in the ears of
my poor Mark, ere he bade adieu to this world for ever?" Then she could
not but utter a sort of groan.

"What's that?" said Todd.

"What, sir?"

"I--I thought some one groaned, or--or sighed. Was it you? No.--Well, it
was nothing. See if that water on the fire is hot. Do you hear me?
Well--well don't be alarmed. Is it hot?"

"I think."

"Think! Put your hand in it."

"Quite hot, sir."

"Well, then, master Charley--Ah! A customer! Come in, sir; come in, if
you please, sir. A remarkably fine day, sir. Cloudy, though. Pray be
seated, sir. A-hem! Now, Charley, bustle--bustle. Shaved, sir, I
presume? D--n the door!"

Todd was making exertions to shut the door after the entrance of a
stout-built man, in an ample white coat and a broad brimmed farmer
looking hat; but he could not get it close, and then the stout-built man
cried out--

"Why don't you come in, Bob--leave off your tricks. Why you is old
enough to know better."

"It's only me," said another stout-built man, in another white coat, as
he came in with a broad grin upon his face. "It's only me, Mr.
Barber--ha! ha! ha!"

Todd looked quite bland, as he said--

"Well, it was a good joke. I could not for the moment think what it was
kept the door from shutting, and I always close it, because there's a
mad dog in the neighbourhood, you see, gentlemen."

Crack went something to the floor.

"It's this mug, sir," said Charley. "I dropped it."

"Well--well, my dear, don't mind that. Accidents, you know, will happen;
bless you."

Todd, as he said this, caught up a small piece of Charley's hair in his
finger and thumb, and gave it a terrific pinch. Poor Johanna with
difficulty controlled her tears.

"Now, sir, be seated if you please. From the country, I suppose, sir?"

"Yes. A clean shave, if you please. We comed up from Barkshire, both on
us, with beasts."

"You and your brother, sir?"

"My cousin, t'other'un is; ain't you Bill?"

"Yes, to be sure."

"Now, Charley, the soap dish. Look alive--look alive, my little man,
will you?"

"Yes, sir."

"You must excuse him being rather slow, gentlemen, but he's not used to
the business yet, poor boy--no father, no mother, no friend in all the
world but me, sir."

"Really!"

"Yes, poor lad, but thank God I have a heart--Leave the whiskers as they
are, sir?--Yes, and I can feel for the distresses of a fellow creature.
Many's the--Your brother--I beg pardon, cousin, will be shaved likewise,
sir?--pound I have given away in the name of the Lord. Charley, will you
look alive with that soap dish. A pretty boy, sir; is he not?"

"Very. His complexion is like--like a pearl."

Johanna dropped the soap dish, and clasped her hands over her eyes. That
word "pearl" had for the moment got the better of her.




                             CHAPTER LXIX.
                       TAKES A PEEP AT ARABELLA.


We regret to leave Johanna in such a predicament, but the progress and
due understanding of our tale compel us briefly to revert to some
proceedings of Arabella Wilmot, a short detail of which can nowhere come
in so well as at this juncture. Up to the moment of parting with
Johanna, when the latter went upon her perilous interprise, Arabella had
kept up pretty well, but from that moment her spirits began to fail. All
the romantic feelings which had at first prompted the advice that
concentrated Johanna's expedition to Todd's, evaporated before the hard
truthful fact that she, Arabella, had led her young friend into a
situation of the greatest peril. Each moment added to the mental agony
of the young girl; and at length her sufferings became too acute for
further dallying with, and wringing her hands, all she could ask herself
was--

"What shall I do to save her?--What shall I do to save her?"

Arabella felt that it would kill her to endure the suspense of one hour
instead of four-and-twenty; but to whom was she to turn in this sad
condition of her feelings? If she went to old Mr. Oakley, what could she
expect but the greatest reproaches for leading one so dear to him into
such a path of danger; and those reproaches would not be the less
stinging on account, probably, of their being only implied, and not
spoken. If she appealed to her own friends, it would only be a kind of
second-hand mode of appealing to Mr. Oakley, for they, of courses, would
go to him.

"Oh, wretched girl that I am," she cried, as she wrung her hands. "What
shall I do?--What ought I to do?"

It was very improbable that, in the midst of such a state of feeling as
this, Arabella Wilmot should think of the wisest and best thing to do;
and yet strange to say, she did. By mere accident the name of Sir
Richard Blunt came to her mind. She had heard Colonel Jeffery speak of
him; and from common report, too, she knew he was a man who, of all
others, was likely, from inclination as well as power and duty, to aid
her. The idea of going to him gained strength and consistency each
moment in her mind, as good ideas will.

"Yes--yes!" she exclaimed, as with frantic eagerness she arrayed herself
for the event, for she had gone home after seeing Johanna on her way;
"yes--yes! I will go to him--I will tell him all. He shall know what a
silly, foolish, wicked girl I have been, and how by my mad--mad council,
I have perhaps destroyed Johanna. But he will save her--oh, yes, he will
save her from the consequences of the visit to Todd, and save me from
madness."

Now, a more decidedly prudent resolve than this could not possibly have
been aimed at by Arabella, had she been as cool and collected; as, on
the contrary, she was nervous and excited, and it had all the effect
upon her mind; for it was astonishing how the mere feeling that she was
about to take a good course calmed her down. She had the prudence to
interpose no delays by speaking to any one of her intention; but hastily
getting into the street, she ran on for some time without reflecting
that she had but a very vague idea of where Sir Richard Blunt was to be
found. It is astonishing how, under the passions of extraordinary
circumstances, people will boldly do things which ordinarily they would
shrink from. It was so with Arabella Wilmot. She walked into a shop, and
at once asked if they could tell her the exact address of Sir Richard
Blunt, the magistrate.

"Yes, it is at No. 6, Essex Street, Strand."

Off she went again. Fleet Street was passed. True, she lingered a little
opposite to Todd's shop, and the idea came across her of rushing in, and
saying, "Johanna, come away." But she controlled that feeling, from a
conviction that she was doing better by going to the magistrate, who, if
it were necessary to take that course, could take it much more
effectually than she could. Essex Street was gained, and Arabella's
trembling hand sounded an alarm upon the knocker.

"Is Sir Richard within?"

"No. But if you particularly want him, he is at his private office in
Craven Street."

To Craven Street then she sped. The number she had been told was 10, and
upon the door of that house being opened, she asked a man who was big
enough to block up all the passage, and who did so, for the magistrate.

"Yes, but you can't see him. He's busy."

"I must."

"But you can't, my dear."

"I will."

The man whistled.

"Will is a short word, my dear, for you to use. How do you mean to do
it, eh?"

A door opened, and with his hat on, ready to go out, Sir Richard Blunt
himself appeared. Another minute and Arabella would have missed him, and
then God knows where, for the next twelve hours, he would be.

"What is this, Davis?" he said.

"Here's a little 'un, says she will see you, Sir Richard."

"Ah, thank God!" cried Arabella, rushing forward and catching a tight
hold of the magistrate by the arm. "Yes, I will see you, sir; I have a
matter of life and death to speak to you of."

"Walk in," said Sir Richard. "Don't hurry yourself in the least, Miss.
Pray be composed; I am quite at your disposal."

Arabella followed him into a small room. She still kept close to him,
and in her eagerness she placed her hand upon her breast, as she said--

"Sir--sir. You--and you only. Todd, Todd--oh, God! he will kill her, and
I am more her murderer than he. Johanna--Johanna, my poor Johanna!"

Sir Richard slightly changed colour at the sound of those names; and
then he said, calmly and slowly--

"I don't think, unless you can assume a greater command of your
feelings, that you will ever be able to tell me what you came about."

"Oh, yes--yes."

"Be seated, I pray you."

"Yes--yes. In a moment. Oh, how calm and unimpassioned you are, sir."

"It would not do for us both to lose our judgment."

Arabella began to feel a little piqued, and that feeling restored her
powers to her, probably quicker than any other could have possibly done.
She spoke rapidly, but distinctly.

"Sir, Miss Johanna Oakley has gone to Sweeney Todd's to find out what
has become of Mr. Mark Ingestrie, and I advised her to do so; but now
the knowledge that I did so advise her has driven me nearly mad. It will
drive me quite mad!"

Sir Richard rose from the arm chair into which he had thrown himself,
and said--

"'Miss Oakley?' said you? Why--why--what folly. But she has gone home
again."

"No, she is disguised as a boy, and has taken the situation that Todd
put a placard in his window about, and she will be found out of course,
and murdered."

"No doubt of it."

"Oh, God! Oh, God! Is there no lightning to strike me dead?"

"I hope not," said Sir Richard Blunt; "I don't want a thunder storm in
my parlour."

"But, sir--"

"But, Miss Wilmot. Is she there now?"

"She is--she is."

"When did she go?"

"About two hours since. Oh, sir--you must do something--you shall do
something to save her, or I will run into the streets, and call upon any
passenger I meet, that has the form of a man, to aid me; I will raise
the town, sir, but I will save her."

"That course would be about as wise as the original advice to Miss
Oakley to go upon the expedition at all. Now answer me calmly what I
shall ask of you."

"I will--I will."

"What is the prime cause of action that Miss Oakley projects as the
result of this disguised entrance into Todd's shop, provided he be
deceived by it?"

"To search the place upon the first opportunity for some relic of Mark
Ingestrie, and so put an end to the torturing suspense regarding his
fate."

Sir Richard Blunt shook his head.

"Do you think that Sweeney Todd would leave such relics within such easy
acquisition and inspection? Is he the sort of man, think you, to expose
himself to such danger? Oh, Miss Wilmot, this is indeed a hair-brained
scheme."

"It is--it is, and I have come to you for aid, and--"

"Hush! Is the secret of this expedition entirely confined to you and to
Miss Oakley?"

"It is--it is."

"Will her friends not miss her?"

"No--no. All has been arranged with what now I cannot help calling a
horrible ingenuity. She is like one led to slaughter, and she will pass
away from the world, leaving the secret of her disappearance to you and
to me only. Sir, I am young, and there are those in this great city who
love me, but if Johanna be not saved, I will no longer live to be the
most wretched of beings. If there can be found a poison that will let me
leave the world, to cast myself at the feet of God, and of Johanna in
another, I will take it."

Sir Richard looked at his watch.

"An hour and a half, you say?"

"More than that. Let me think. It was twelve--yes, it was twelve. More
you see, sir, than that. Tell me, sir. Tell me at once what can be done.
Speak--oh speak to me. What will you do?"

"I don't know, Miss Wilmot."

With a deep sigh Arabella fainted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was seldom indeed that, even amid his adventurous life, the
magistrate found a circumstance that affected him so strongly as that
which Arabella Wilmot had related to him. For a short time, even he,
with all his powers of rapid thought, and with all the means and
appliances which natural skill and practice had given him to meet any
emergency, could not think of any mode of escape from the peculiarly
awkward position into which this frightfully imprudent step of Johanna
had plunged him.

"My good girl," he said. "Oh, she has fainted."

He rung a hand-bell, and, when a man appeared in answer to the summons,
he said--

"Is Mrs. Long within?"

"Yes, Sir Richard."

"Then bring her here, and tell her to pay every attention to this young
lady, who is a friend of mine; and when she recovers, say to her that I
shall return in an hour."

"Certainly, Sir Richard."

In a few moments a matronly-looking woman, who acted in that house as a
sort of general manager, made her appearance, and had Arabella removed
to a chamber. Before that, the magistrate had hastily put on his hat,
and at a quick pace was walking towards Fleet Street. What he intended
to do in the emergency--for emergency he evidently thought it was--we
shall see quickly. Certain it is that, even by that time, he had made up
his mind to some plan of proceeding, and our readers have sufficient
knowledge of him to feel that it is likely to be the very best that
could be adopted under the circumstances. Certainly Johanna had, by the
bold step she had taken, brought affairs to something like a crisis,
much earlier than he, Sir Richard Blunt, expected. What the result will
be remains to be seen.




                              CHAPTER LXX.
                          RETURNS TO JOHANNA.


We left Johanna in rather an awkward situation. The two graziers were in
Todd's shop, and she--at the pronunciation of the word "pearl," which
had too forcibly at the moment reminded her of the String of Pearls,
which no doubt had been fatal to Mark Ingestrie--had dropped the
soap-dish, and covered her face with her hands.

"What is this?" cried Todd.

"What, sir?"

"What is that, I say? What do you mean by that, you stupid hound? If I
only--"

He advanced in a threatening attitude with a razor in his hand; but
Johanna quickly saw what a fault she had committed, and felt that, if
she were to hope to do any good by her visit to Todd's shop, she must
leave all such manifestations of feelings outside the threshold.

"I have broken it," she said.

"To be sure you have; but--"

"And then, you see, sir, I was overcome at the moment by the thought
that as this was my first day here, how stupid you would think me."

"Stupid, indeed."

"Poor little chap," said one of the graziers. "Let him off this once,
Mr. Barber--he seems a delicate little lad."

Todd smiled. Yes, Todd admirably got up a smile, or a something that
looked like a smile. It was a contortion of feature which did duty for a
piece of amiability upon his face; and, in a voice that he no doubt
fully intended should be dulcet and delightful, he spoke--

"I'm quite a fool to my feelings and to my good nature," he said. "Lord
bless you, gentlemen, I could not hurt a fly--not I. I used at school to
be called Affectionate Todd."

"In joke?" said one of the graziers.

"No, gentlemen, no; in earnest."

"You don't say so! Well, my boy, you see no harm will come to you, as
your master forgives you about the soap-dish, and we are in no sort of
hurry."

"Well," said Todd, as he bustled about for another article in which to
mix the lather. "Well, do you know, sir, I'm so glad to hear that you
are in no hurry."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, sir; because, if you are strangers in London both of you, it will
give you an opportunity of seeing some of the curiosities, which will do
for you to talk of when you get home, you know."

"Why, that would take too much time."

"Not at all, sir. Now, for example--Charley, my dear, whip up that
lather--there's the church of St. Dunstan's, which, although I say
it--Now, Charley, look sharp--is one of the greatest of London
curiosities. The figures at the clock I allude to more particularly. I
think you said the whiskers were to be left just as they are, sir?"

"Yes."

"Well then, gentlemen, if you have never seen the figures in the front
of old St. Dunstan's strike the chimes, it's one of those things that
it's quite a pity to leave London without watching narrowly. They may
talk of the Tower, sir, or of the wild beasts at Exeter Change; but give
me for a sight where there is real ingenuity, the figures striking the
chimes at old St. Dunstan's."

"Indeed?"

"Yes. Let me see. Ah, it's just a half hour nearly now, and your friend
can go, although you are being shaved, and then by the time you are
comfortably finished off, the next quarter will be getting on. Charley?"

"Yes, sir."

"Put on your cap, and go with that gentleman to St. Dunstan's. You must
cross over the way, and then you will soon see the old church and the
two figures, as large as life, and five times as natural."

Johanna took up the cap she had worn in her disguise, and stood by the
door.

"Why don't you go, Bill?" said the grazier who was being shaved.

"Why, the fact is," said the other, "I would not give a pin's head to
see it without you. Do you know, Mr. Barber, he makes such comical
remarks at anything, that it's worth one half the fun to hear him? Oh,
no, I can't go without him."

"Very good," said Todd, "then I'll finish him off, and you shall both go
together in a few moments, though I am afraid you will miss this time of
the chimes striking."

There was now a silence of a few moments' duration in the shop; but
nothing in the shape of rage or disappointment was visible in the manner
of Todd, although both of those passions were struggling at his heart.

"Now, sir," he said at length, and with a whisk he took the cloth from
under the grazier's chair. "That will do; I thank you, sir. Towel and
plenty of water in that corner, sir."

"Thank you."

"No, I shall do," said the other grazier, in reply to a mute imitation
from Todd to sit down in the shaving chair, "I shall do pretty well, I
thank you, till to-morrow."

"Very good, sir. Hope I shall have the pleasure of your patronage
another time, as well as your recommendation, gentlemen."

"You may depend," said the grazier, who had been shaved, "that we shall
do all we can for you, and shall not lose sight of you."

Todd bowed like a Frenchman, and the graziers left the shop. No sooner
was the door closed upon them, than his countenance altered, as if by
magic, and the most wofully diabolical expression came over it, as with
eyes flashing with rage, he cried--

"Curses on you both! But I will have one of you, yet. May the bitterest
curse of--but, no matter, I--"

"What, sir?" said Johanna. "What do you say, sir?"

"Hell's fury! what is that to you? Do dare you, you devil's cub, to ask
me what I said? By all that's furious, I'll tear out your teeth with
red-hot pincers, and scoop your eyes from their gory sockets with an old
oyster knife. D--n you, I'll--I'll flay you!"

Johanna shrank back aghast. The pure spirit of the young girl, that had
been used to little else but words of love and kindness, started at the
furious and brutal abuse that was launched at it by Todd.

"Did I not tell you," he continued, "that I would have no prying--no
peeping--no remarking about this or the other? I'll crush the life out
of you, as I would that from a mad dog!"

A strange howling cry at the door at this moment came upon the ears of
Todd. His countenance changed, and his lips moved as though he was still
saying something, but he had not power to give it audibly. At length,
somewhat mastering his emotion, he said--

"What--what's that?"

"A dog, sir."

"A dog! Confound all dogs."

Another howl, and a violent scratching at the door, was farther and most
conclusive evidence of the canine character of the visitor.

"Charley," said Todd, in quite a soft tone--"Charley."

"Yes, sir."

"Take the poor dog something to eat--or--or to drink, rather I should
say. You will find a saucer in yon cupboard, with some milk in it.
If--if he only, bless him, takes one lick at it, I shall be satisfied.
You know, Charley, God made all things, and we should be good to his
creatures."

"Yes, sir," said Johanna, with a shudder.

She went to the cupboard, and found the saucer, in which there seemed to
be a drop of fresh milk. She walked to the door, while Todd, as though
he did not feel by any means sure of the pacific intentions of the dog,
at once rushed into his back parlour, and locked himself in. Todd had a
peep-hole from the back parlour into the shop, but he could not see
further than the shop door. Moreover, Johanna's back was towards him, so
he could only guess at what was going on if the dog did not actually
come across the threshold. That the milk which Todd was so solicitous
should be given to the dog was poisoned, occurred to Johanna in a
moment; and just before opening the door, she threw it into a corner,
upon some loose shavings, and odds and ends of waste paper, that were
there. Johanna then opened the door. In an instant Hector, the large dog
of the unfortunate Thornhill, whose identity with Mark Ingestrie
appeared to be so established in the mind of Johanna, sprang upon her
with an angry growl. It was only for one brief moment, however, that
Hector made any such mistake as fancying Johanna to be Sweeney Todd; and
then he, with an affectionate whine, licked the hands of the young girl.

"Pison! Pison!" cried a loud voice, and in another moment, the ostler,
from the coach-office opposite, rushed to the door, and caught the dog
around the neck.

"Ah, there ye is agin. Why, what a goose of a feller you is, to be sure,
Pison. Don't you know, now, as well as I do, that that barber will do
you a mischief yet, you great blockhead you? Come home, will yer? Come
home, now. Come along wi' yer!"

"Yes--yes," said Johanna. "Take him away--take him away."

"Won't I, that's all. I suppose you are a young shaver? Only let me
catch you a-interfering with Pison, that's all, and won't I let you know
what's what, young feller."

The ostler having uttered this most uncalled-for threat to poor Johanna,
took Pison in triumph over the way. Johanna closed the door.

"Is he gone?" said Todd.

"Yes, sir."

"And the milk? Is that gone, likewise?"

"Every drop of it."

"Ha! ha! ha! Well--well. Only to think, now. Ha! ha! I hope that milk
won't disagree with the noble animal. How fond I am of him! How often he
has been over here, in his little pretty playful way, to try and bite
pieces out of my legs. Bless him. If now that milk should give him a
stomach ache, what a pity it would be. Did I hear a man's voice?"

"Yes, sir; some man came and called the dog away."

"How good of him, and what a pity it would have been if he had called
the noble animal away before the milk was all consumed. Dear me, some
people would grudge a creature a drop of milk. A-hem--Charley?"

"Yes, sir."

"I am going out."

Johanna's heart beat rapidly.

"If any one should come, you can say it is of no use their waiting, for
I am gone to shave and dress a whole family, at some distance off, and
may not be back for some hours; but, Charley, for your own private
information, let me tell you that I may look in at any moment, and that,
although I shall be busy, I shall be able to come in for a minute or so,
when I am least expected."

Todd gave an awful leer at Johanna as he spoke.

"Yes, sir," she said.

Todd carefully locked the parlour door.

"Charley. How do you like your place?"

"Very well, sir; and I think in a little time I shall like it better."

"Good lad! Good lad! Well, well. Perhaps I ought not to say too much so
soon, but if you merit my esteem, Charley, I shall do as much for you as
I did for the last lad I had. After some term of service with me, I
provided him with an independant home. A large house, and a garden. Ha!"

"How very kind."

"Yes. Very."

"And is he happy?"

"Quite, in a manner of speaking, notwithstanding human nature is prone
to be discontented, and there are persons, who would sigh, if in
Paradise, for some change, even if it were to a region supposed to be
its opposite zone. Charley, however, I think will be of a different
mind; and when your time comes--which it certainly will--Ha!--to reap
the fruits of your service with me, I am sure that no one will hear you
complain."

"I will not be ungrateful sir."

"Well, well, we shall see; and now while I am gone let there be no
peeping or prying about. No attempts to open doors or force locks. No
scrambling to look upon shelves or raking in odd corners. If you
do--I--Ha! ha! I will cut your throat, Charley, with the bluntest razor
I have. Ha!"

Todd had got on his gloves by this time, and then he left the shop.
Johanna was alone! Yes, there she was, at last, alone in that dreadful
place, which now for days upon days had been food for her young
imagination. There she was in that place, which her waking thoughts and
her dreams had alike peopled with horrors. There she was between those
walls, which had perchance echoed to the last despairing death cry of
him whom she had loved better than life itself. There she was in the
very atmosphere of murders. His blood might form part of the stains that
were upon the dingy walls and the begrimed floor. Oh, it was horrible!

"God help me now! God help me now!" said Johanna, as she covered her
face with her hands and wept convulsively.

She heard a faint sound. It was the chiming of St. Dunstan's clock, and
she started. It put her in mind that time, her great ally, now was
fleeting.

"Away tears!" she cried as she dashed the heavy moisture from her long
eye-lashes. "Away tears! I have been strong in purpose. I have already
waded through a sea of horrors, and I must be firm now. The time has
come. The time that I looked forward to when I thus attired myself, and
thought it possible to deceive this dreadful man. Courage! Courage! I
have now much to do."

First she crept to the door and looked out into the street. A vague
suspicion that Todd, after all, might only be watching near at hand,
somewhere, took possession of her. She looked long and anxiously to the
right and to the left, but she saw nothing of him. Then she fastened the
door upon the inside.

"If he should return very suddenly," she said, "I shall have notice of
it by his efforts to open the door. That will give me a moment for
preparation possibly."

Then with such an anxious look as no language could do justice to in its
delineation, Johanna looked round the shop. Where was she to begin her
investigation? There were drawers, cupboards, chests, shelves. What was
she to look at first? or was she in dread of some contrivances of Todd's
to find out that she had looked at all, yet at this the last moment,
forego the risk and rush into the street and so home?

"No, no! I am in God's hands," she said, "and I will not flinch."

And yet, although she felt that she was quite alone in that place, how
cautiously she trod. How gently she touched one thing and then another,
and with what a shudder she laid her hand for a moment to steady
herself, upon the arm of the shaving chair. By so leaning upon it she
found that it was a fixture; and upon a further examination of it, she
found that it was nailed or screwed to the floor firmly. It was an old
fashioned massive chair, with a wide deep reclining seat. A strange
feeling of horror came over her as she regarded it.




                             CHAPTER LXXI.
                         THE MYSTERIOUS LETTER.


What was there in the chair that Johanna should for some few moments,
now that she had begun to look at it, not be able to take her eyes off
it? She tried to shake it, but it was as fast as a rock, and for all she
knew it was quite usual to have a shaving chair fixed to the floor. In
all likelihood it was in the best position for light which the dingy
shop afforded. She left the chair at last, and then a large cupboard in
one corner of the room attracted her attention. It was locked. In vain
did she try to force it open. It would not yield. She tried, too, the
parlour door without effect. That was quite fast; but as she turned the
handle of the lock, she fancied she heard, or she really did hear
something move in the room. A faint feeling came over her for a moment,
and she was glad to hold by the wall, close at hand, to support herself.

"It must have been fancy," she said faintly. "I am learning nothing, and
the time is flying fast."

A kind of counter ran parallel to the window, and beneath it was a space
covered in by doors. Todd surely had forgotten that, for one of the
doors was open. Johanna looked in and beheld quite a collection of
sticks and umbrellas. Some clothing too lay upon the lowest shelf. With
trembling hands, Johanna pulled at the sleeve of some article and found
it to be a jacket, such as a sailor of the better sort might wear, for
it was exquisitively fine, and had no end of silver buttons upon it. Her
sight was dimmed by tears, as she said to herself--

"Oh, God! was this his?"

She held the jacket up to the light, and she found the breast portion of
it stained, and all the buttons there tarnished. What was it but blood?
The blood of the hapless wearer of that article of dress, that produced
such an effect; but yet how was she to prove to herself that it had been
Mark Ingestrie? Then it was that the thought struck her of how ill
conceived had been that undertaking, which might, in the midst of all
its frightful dangers, only end in furnishing her with more food for the
most horrible surmises, without banishing one sad image of her
imagination, or confirming one dreadful dream of the fate of her lover.

"'Tis all in vain!" she gasped. "All in vain! I shall know nothing, and
only feel more desolate. It would be a mercy if that were to kill me!
Ah! no. Not yet--not yet!"

Some one was trying the handle of the shop door. With frightful energy
Johanna hid the jacket, but not in its proper place, for she only thrust
it beneath the cushion of a chair close at hand, and then shutting the
door of the receptacle beneath the counter, she rose to her feet, and
with a face pale as monumental marble, and her hands clasped rigidly,
she said--

"Who--who is there?"

"Hilloa! Open the door!" said a voice.

Some one again tried the handle, and then kicked vigorously at the lower
panel.

"Patience," said Johanna, "patience."

She opened the door.

"Is Mr. Todd at hand?" said a lad.

"No--no."

"You are his boy, are you not?"

"I am."

"Then take this."

The lad handed a sealed letter to Johanna, and in a moment left the
door. She held the letter in her hand scarcely looking at it. Of course
she thought it was for Todd, but after a few moments her eyes fell upon
the superscription, and there, to her surprise, she read as follows--

    "To Miss Oakley, who is requested to read the enclosed quickly, and
    secretly, and then to destroy it."

[Illustration: Johanna Receives A Mysterious Letter In Todd's Shop.]

To tear open the letter was the work of a moment. The sheet of paper
tumbled in Johanna's hands as she read as follows--

    "From Sir Richard Blunt to Miss Oakley.

    "Miss Oakley, the expedition upon which you are at present says much
    more for your courage and chivalrous spirit than it can ever say for
    your discretion or the discretion of her who permitted you so far to
    commit your life to such chances. You should, considering your youth
    and sex, have left it to others to carry out such schemes; and it is
    well that those others are aware of your position, and so, in a
    great measure, enabled to shield you from, perhaps, the worst
    consequences of your great indiscretion, for it cannot be called
    anything else.

    "Your young friend, Miss Wilmot, herself awakened, when, thank God,
    it was not too late, to the utter romantic character of the office,
    and communicated all to me. I blame both you and her very much
    indeed, and cannot speak in too strong language of the reprehensible
    character of your expedition; and now, my dear girl, do not be under
    any kind of apprehension, for you are well looked after, and Sweeney
    Todd shall not hurt a hair of your head.

    "If you should find yourself in any danger, seize the first small
    heavy article at hand and throw it, with all the strength you can,
    through the shop window. Assistance will immediately come to you.

    "And now, as you are where you are, I pray you to have confidence in
    me, and to remain until some one shall come to you and say 'St.
    Dunstan,' upon which you will know that he is a friend, and you will
    follow his directions.

    "God bless you.--

    "RICHARD BLUNT."

Every word of this letter fell like sunshine upon the heart of Johanna,
and she could not help mentally ejaculating--

"I am saved--I am saved! Yes--yes? I am not deserted. Strong, bold, good
men will look to me. Oh! what kindness breathes in every sentence of
this letter! Yes--yes; I am not forsaken--not forsaken!"

Tears came into the eyes of the young girl, and she wept abundantly. Her
overcharged heart was relieving itself. After a few moments she began to
be more composed, and had just crumpled up the letter and cast it into
the fire for fear of accidents, when a shadow darkened the door-way, she
saw Todd looking in above the curtain that was over the upper half of
the door, and partially concealed some panes of glass that were let into
it. As soon as Todd saw Johanna's eyes upon him, he entered the shop.

"What's that?" he said, pointing to the burning letter.

"Paper, sir."

"What paper?"

"A bill that a boy left. Something about Churchwardens, sir, and the
parish of St. Brides, Fleet Street, and how things mean to--"

"Bah! any one else been?"

"No, sir."

Todd stood in the middle of the shop, and cast his eyes slowly round
him, to see that all was as he had left. Then in a low growling tone, he
added--

"No peeping and prying, eh? No rummaging in odd corners, and looking at
things that don't concern you, eh?"

"Certainly not, sir."

Johanna crept close to the counter upon which lay a tolerably large
piece of stone used for grinding razors upon. She thought that would do
very well to throw through the window, and she kept an eye upon it with
that intent, if such an act should by a trick of Todd's appear to be
necessary. Todd took the key of the parlour-door from his pocket, and
placed it in the lock. Before he opened the door, though, he turned the
handle, and as he did so Johanna thought that he inclined his head and
listened attentively. She threw down a chair, which made a lumbering
noise.

"Confound you," roared Todd.

He passed into the parlour; but in a moment, with a glance of fury, he
looked out, saying--

"You tried this door?"

"I, sir?" said Johanna, creeping closer still to the sharpening stone.

"Yes, villain, you. At least, I think so--I am pretty sure; but mark me,
if I were quite sure, you should suffer for it."

He closed the door again; and then when he was alone, he placed his two
hands upon his head for a few moments, and said--

"What does it mean? A boy brought him a letter; I saw him come and go.
At least it looked like a letter. Could it be the bill he spoke of, and
then the sudden upset of that chair, which prevented me from hearing if
the piece of cat-gut I had fastened to the handle of the door had been
moved, before I touched it or not. I will kill him. That is safe. It is
the only plan; I will kill all who is now in my way. All--all. Yes, I
will, if needs be, wade up to my neck in blood to the accomplishment of
my wishes."

Todd went to a cupboard and got out a large knife, such as is used by
slaughtermen in the shambles, and hid it under the table cover, but in
such a place that he could lay hold of it and draw it out in a moment.

"Charley," he cried, "Charley."

"Yes, sir."

"Step in here a moment; I want you, my boy."

"Shall I or shall I not," thought Johanna. "Is this danger, or only the
appearance of it? Heaven direct me now! Oh, what shall I do? What shall
I do?"

"Charley? Are you coming, my boy?"

"Yes, sir, I--I am coming. God protect me!"

"The barber at home?" cried a voice at the door; and in another moment a
man with a ruddy, jolly-looking countenance, made his appearance in the
shop. "Barber at home, eh? my little lad?"

"Yes--yes."

Johanna heard a bitter execration come from the lips of Todd; and then
with quite a serene smile upon his face, as though he were in the most
unruffled mood possible, he made his appearance.

"Could you make me a wig?" said the man, taking off his hat, and showing
that his hair was closely cropped.

"Certainly, sir. If you will sit down and allow me to measure your head,
I shall have great pleasure--Charley!"

"Yes, Sir."

"You can go to Lovett's, in Bell-yard, and get your dinner now. There's
two-pence for you, my lad, and if you have not yet tasted Mrs. Lovett's
pies, you will say when you do, that they are the most delicious things
in the whole world of cookery."

"Shaved, if you please," said another man, walking into the shop, and
pouncing down upon a chair as though it were his own property. "Ah dear
me, I'm tired rather. Don't hurry yourself, Mr. Todd, I can wait while
you are doing what you have to do for that gentleman."

"Charley," said Todd, with quite a sweet expression of face. "You need
not go just yet; I want the hot water. See to it."

"Yes, sir."

Todd then, in the most careful and business-like manner, proceeded to
take the measure of the gentleman's head for a "real head of hair," and
when he had finished, he said--

"Now, sir, if you will leave it all to me, I will match your hair to a
shade."

"Match it?"

"Yes, sir."

"But that's just what I don't want. I have had my hair all cut off, and
am going to wear a wig, for the sole reason that I have got tired of the
old colour."

"Well then, sir, what colour do you propose now?"

"A few shades lighter than my own. But pray shave this gentleman, and I
will tell you how I wish it to look at my leisure."

The man took a seat and crossed one leg over the other with the most
home sort of look in the world; and the one who had come in to be shaved
plumped into the shaving chair, and gave his chin a rub as though he
would say "I don't care how soon you begin."

Todd smiled.

"Charley, the lather."

"Yes, sir. Here it is."

"Here, my little man," said the gentleman in want of a wig. "If you can
tie a bow, just make one in front of my cravat.--A small one."

The gentleman slipped a small piece of paper into Johanna's jacket
pocket.




                             CHAPTER LXXII.
                            ANOTHER VICTIM.


Johanna started.

"St. Dunstan's," said the stranger.

"What?" said Todd.

"St. Dunstan's last Sunday, I don't think was so highly-scented with the
flavour of the grave as usual."

"Oh," said Todd.

Johanna trembled, for certainly Todd looked suspicious, and yet what
could he have seen? Literally nothing, for he was so situated that the
slight action of the stranger, in putting the slip of paper into her
jacket-pocket, must have escaped him with all his watchfulness. She
gathered courage. Todd glanced at her, saying--

"What is the matter, Charley? you don't look well at all, my lad."

"I am not very well, sir."

"How sorry I am; I think, do you know, Charley,"--Todd was lathering the
man's face as he spoke--"that one of Mrs. Lovett's hot pies would be the
thing for you."

"Very likely, sir."

"Then, I think I can manage now to spare you."

As he said this, Todd bent an eagle glance upon the gentleman who had
ordered the wig, and it seemed as if he doled out his words to Johanna
with a kind of reference to the movements of that personage. The
gentleman had found a hat-brush, and was carefully rubbing up his hat.

"I do hope," he said, "that the wig will be as natural as possible."

"Depend upon it, sir," said Todd. "I'll warrant if you look in here, and
try it on some day when there's no one here but you and I to set you
against it, you will never complain of it."

"No doubt. Good morning."

Todd made his best bow, accompanied by the flourish of his razor, that
made the man who was being shaved shrink again, as the reflected light
from its highly-polished blade flashed again in his eyes.

"Now, Charley, I think you may go for your pie," added Todd, "and don't
hurry, for if anything is wrong with your stomach, that will only make
it worse, you know."

"You are a good master to the lad," said the man who was lathered ready
for shaving.

"I hope so, sir," said Todd. "With the help of Providence we all ought
to do our best in this world, and yet what a deal of wickedness and
suffering there is in it too."

"Ah, there is."

"I am sure, sir, it makes my heart bleed sometimes to think of the
amount of suffering that only twenty-four hours of this sad work-a-day
world sees. But I was always of a tender and sympathetic turn from my
cradle--yes from my cradle."

Todd made here one of his specially horrible grimaces, which the man
happened to see in a glass opposite to him, the reflective focus of
which Todd had not calculated upon; and then as the sympathetic barber
stropped his razor, the man looked at him as though he would have
speculated upon how could such an article looked in a cradle.

"Now, sir, a little to this side. Are you going, Charley?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will do, sir. I'll polish you off very shortly, indeed, sir. Are
you going, Charley?"

Johanna darted from the shop, and the moment she got clear of it, she by
natural impulse drew the little slip of paper from her pocket, and read
upon it--

"Miss O. do not if you can help it leave any one alone in Todd's shop,
as circumstances may prevent us from always following his customers in;
but if you should be forced to leave while any one is there, knock at
No. 133 Fleet Street. This is from your friend R. B."

"133?" said Johanna, as she glanced around her, "133? Ah, it is close at
hand. Here--here."

The number was only a short distance from Todd's, and Johanna was making
her way to it, when some one stopped her.

"From Todd's," said a voice.

"Yes--yes. A man is there."

"Alone?"

"Yes, and--"

Before she could say another word the stranger darted from her, and made
his way into Todd's shop. Johanna paused, and shrinking into a doorway,
stood trembling like an aspen leaf.

"Oh, Heaven!" she ejaculated, "into what a sea of troubles have I
plunged. Murder and I will become familiar, and I shall learn to breathe
an atmosphere of blood. Oh, horror! horror! horror!"

The crowd in that dense thoroughfare passed on, and no one took heed of
the seeming boy, as he wept and sobbed in that doorway. Some had no time
to waste upon the sorrows of other people;--some buttoned up their
pockets as though they feared that the tears that stood upon that pale
face were but the preludes to some pecuniary demand;--others again
passed on rapidly, for they were so comfortable and cosy that they
really could not have their feelings lacerated by any tale of misery,
not they. And so Johanna wept alone.

Ding dong! ding dong!

What is that? Oh, St. Dunstan's chimes. How long has she been from the
shop? Shall she return to it, or fly at once and seek for refuge from
all the sorrows and from all the horrors that surround her, in the arms
of her father?

"Direct me, oh God!" she cried.

Some one suddenly clasps her arm.

"Johanna! Johanna!"

It was Arabella Wilmot.

[Illustration: Johanna Disguised As A Boy, Is Found Weeping By Arabella,
Near St. Dunstan's.]

"Johanna--dear, dear Johanna, you are safe--quite safe. Come home
now--oh, come--oh, come--come."

"You here, Arabella?"

"Yes, I am mad--mad!--at least, I was going mad, Johanna; in my agony to
know what had become of you, and notwithstanding I have told Sir Richard
Blunt, I had no faith in the love and the courage of any one but myself.
I was coming to Todd's."

"To Todd's?"

"Yes, dear, to Todd's. I could no longer exist unless I saw with my own
eyes that you were safe."

"What a fatal step that might have been."

"It might. Perhaps it would; but God, in his goodness, has again, my
dear Johanna, averted it by enabling me to meet you here. Come home
now--come at once."

"Yes, I--I think--"

"Come--come;--you have done already much. Let, for the future, your
feelings be, that for Mark Ingestrie you have adventured what not one
girl in a million would adventure."

At this mention of the name of Mark Ingestrie, a sharp cry of mental
agony burst from the lips of Johanna.

"Oh, I thank you, Arabella."

"Thank me?"

"Yes, you have recalled me to myself. You have, by the mention of that
name, recalled me to my duty, from which I was shrinking and falling
away. You have told me in the most eloquent language that could be used
that as yet I have done nothing for him who is, dead or alive, my
heart's best treasure."

"Oh, Johanna, you will kill me."

"No, Arabella--no. Good bye. Go home, love--go home, and--and pray for
me--pray for me!"

"Johanna, for mercy's sake! what are you about to do? Speak to me. Do
not look upon me in that way. What are you about to to do, Johanna?"

"Go to the shop."

"To Todds?"

"Yes. It is my place--I am in search of Mark Ingestrie. If he be living,
it is I who must clear that man who is suspected of his murder. If he be
no more, it is I, who weak and fragile as I am, must drag him to
justice."

"No--no--no."

"I say yes. Do not stay me if you love me."

Arabella clasped the arm of Johanna, but with a strength that only the
immense amount of mental excitement she was suffering from could have
given her. Johanna freed herself from the hold of her friend, and
dashing from the doorway, was in another moment lost to the sight of
Arabella in the barber's shop.

"What now?" cried Todd, fiercely, as Johanna bounded into the shop so
hurriedly.

"Nothing, sir--only the dog."

"Bolt the door--bolt the door."

"Yes, sir."

Todd wiped his brow.

"That infernal dog," he muttered, "will be the death of me yet; and so,
Charley, the malignant beast flew at you, did he? the savage will attack
you, will he?"

"Yes, sir, so it seems."

"We will kill it. I should like to cut its throat. It would be a
pleasure, Charley. How strange that strong poisons have no effect upon
that dog. Curses on it!"

"Indeed, sir."

"None whatever. It is very odd."

Todd remained in a musing attitude for some time, and then suddenly
starting, he said--

"Charley, if that man come again after his wig, get him into talk, will
you, and learn all you can about him. I have to go a little way into the
city just now, and shall speedily return. I hoped you liked the pie?"

"Pie, sir?"

"Yes, Lovett's pie."

"Oh, yes--delicious."

"Ha! ha! he! he! ho!"

Drawing on a pair of huge worsted gloves, Todd walked out of the shop
without saying another word. The moment he was gone, Johanna passed both
her hands upon her breast, as if to stay the wild beating of her heart,
as she whispered to herself--

"Alone--alone once more."

It was well that she had only whispered that much, for in the next
moment Todd gently put his head into the shop. She started.

"Oh, sir--oh, sir, you frightened me."

"Beware!" was all he said. "Beware!"

The frightful head, more terrifying to Johanna than would have been the
fabled Medusa's, was withdrawn again, and this time Johanna resolved to
be certain that he was gone before she gave the smallest outbreak to her
feelings, or permitted herself to glance around her in any way that
could be construed into prying curiosity. She made a feint of clearing
up the place a little, and, with a broom that had about six hairs only
left in it, she swept the hobs of the little miserable grate in which a
fire was kept for the shaving-water. This occupied some little time; but
still not feeling sure that Todd was really gone, she then went to the
door, and looked right and left. He was not to be seen; and so, when she
went back, she bolted the shop-door upon the inside again, and really
felt that she was alone once more in that dreadful place. That poor
Johanna was now in a great state of mental excitement is not a matter of
surprise, for the events that had recently taken place were decidedly of
a character to produce such a mental condition. The interview with
Arabella had, no doubt, materially aided in such an effect. With
trembling eagerness she now began again to look about her, and her great
aim was by some means to get into the parlour, for if anywhere, she
thought that surely there she should find some traces of that lost one
who occupied, since the suspicions of the foul usage he had met with, a
larger place in her affections than before. Feeling how surrounded she
was by friends, probably Johanna was a little more reckless as regarded
the means she adopted of carrying out her intention. The parlour-door
was quite fast; but surely in the shop she thought she might find some
weapon, by the aid of which it could be burst open; and even if Todd
should suddenly return, it was but a rush, and she would reach the
street; and if he intercepted her in that, as God knew he might, she
could take the means of summoning assistance pointed out to her by Sir
Richard Blunt, and cast something through the window into the street.
Full of these thoughts and feelings, then, and only alive to the mad
wish she had of discovering some traces of her lover, Johanna hunted the
shop over for some weapon with which to attack the parlour-door. She
opened a cupboard. A hat fell from within at her feet! One glance at
that hat was sufficient; it was of a peculiar colour--she remembered it.
It was the hat of the man whom she had left being shaved when she was
sent ostensibly to purchase a pie at Mrs. Lovett's, in Bell-yard.
Johanna's hurry was over. A sickening feeling came over her as she asked
herself what was the probable fate of the owner of the hat.

"Another victim!--another victim!" she gasped.

She tottered back overpowered by the thought that there had been a time
when, opening that cupboard door, the carelessly cast-in hat of Mark
Ingestrie would have fallen to her feet, even as did that of the
stranger, who, no doubt, now was numbered with the dead. She sank almost
in a state of fainting into the shaving-chair.

"Oh, yes, yes," she said. "This is horribly, frightfully condusive. My
poor Mark. You have gone before me to that home where alone we may hope
to meet again. Alas! alas! that I should live to feel such a truth."

She burst into tears, and sobbed so bitterly, that any one who had seen
her would have truly thought her heart was breaking in that wild
paroxysm of grief. What a mercy it was that Todd did not come in at such
a moment as that, was it not? The sobs subsided into sighs. The tears no
longer flowed in abundance; and after about five minutes Johanna arose,
tottering and pale. She drenched her eyes and face with cold water,
until the traces of the storm of emotion were no longer visible upon her
face; and then she knelt by the shaving chair, and clasping her hands,
she said--

"Great God, I ask for justice upon the murderer!"

She rose, and felt calmer than before; and then, sitting down by the
little miserable fire, she buried her face in her hands, and tried to
think--to think how she should bring to justice the man who had been the
blight of her young existence--the canker in the rose-bud of her youth.
You would have been shocked if you could just for a moment have looked
into Sweeney Todd's shop, and seen that girl in such an attitude,
without a sigh and without a tear, while all her dearest hopes lay about
her heart in the very chaos of a frightful wreck.




                            CHAPTER LXXIII.
                           STARTLING EVENTS.


Business at Mrs. Lovett's was brisk. During the whole of that day--that
most eventful day upon which the fair Johanna Oakley had gone upon her
desperate errand to Sweeney Todd's--the shop in Bell Yard had been
besieged by customers. Truly it was a pity to give up such an excellent
business. The tills groaned with money, and Mrs. Lovett's smiles and
pies never appeared so perfect as upon that day. At about half-past
twelve o'clock, when the Lord Chancellor suddenly got up from his chair,
in the great hall of Lincoln's Inn, and put on his furry-looking hat,
and when the curtain which shuts in his lordship from invidious blasts
was withdrawn with a screaming jerk, and a gentleman was stopped in the
middle of an argument, what a rush of lawyer's clerks there was to the
pie-shop in Bell Yard. Then was it that the anxious solicitor's fag, who
must know something, and have some brains, smiled at the prospect of the
luxurious repast he was about to have, and jingled the twopence he had
kept in a side pocket for only one pie, and grudged it not out of his
hard-earned pittance. Then was it that the bloated barrister's clerk,
who had grown shining and obese upon fares, and who is not required to
know anything but the complete art of insolence to his brothers, nor to
have any more brains than will suffice him to make up his book in the
long vacation, smacks his lips at the thought of Lovett's pies, and
sends the expectant boy of the chamber--the snob of a snob--for three
twopennies. Lean and hungry-looking young men start into Bell Yard from
the Strand, producing crumbled pieces of paper, bag their twopenny, and
retire to eat it in some corner of the old Temple. All is bustle--all is
animation, and the side counter--that one, you know, which ran parallel
to the window--was lined by clerks, who sat eating and driving their
heels against the boarding, and joking, and laughing "Ha! ha!" how they
did laugh! And then what stories they told of their "Governors;" and how
such an one was going out of practice; and how such another one was a
screw, and so on, to the great delight of the mere boys, who hoped one
day to wear their hair long and grey, and to dress in an outrageous
caricature of the mode! As the machine that let down at the back of the
counter, to bring up the pies, went down for the one o'clock batch, it
was noticed that Mrs. Lovett looked a little anxious. The fact was, that
the cook had been so prompt upon that day in his movements, that she
began to think there must be, as folks say, "Something in it," and she
was beginning to terrify herself with the idea that he had some scheme
of redemption for himself in view, that might most unseasonably develope
itself before the customers.

"Ah, Mrs. Lovett," said one young gent, while the gravy ran down the
sides of his mouth from the pie he was consuming. "You don't seem at all
yourself to-day. Indeed you don't."

"Who do I seem, then?"

"Ha! ha! Upon my life that's good!" roared another.

A small amount of wit did for Lovett's pie shop. It was like the House
of Commons in that particular, and "loud laughter" was sure to welcome
the smallest joke. Mrs. Lovett's eyes were bent upon the abyss, down
which the trap had descended but a moment before.

"Ain't they a-coming, mum?" said one.

"Oh, don't I sniff 'em," said another, working his nose like an
ex-chancellor. "Don't I sniff 'em."

"De--licious!" cried another.

A feeling of relief was visible upon the face of Mrs. Lovett as the trap
slowly ascended, bringing with it the one o'clock batch, in all their
steaming glory. The whole shop was in a moment filled with the fresh
appetite-giving aroma of those bubbling hot pies; and as the French
newspapers say, when a member of the extreme right, or half way to the
left, or two degrees from the centre, swerves, there was "a sensation."
Five minutes--only five minutes--and the whole batch was cleared off,
not one was left!

"Another batch of one hundred, gentlemen, at two," said Mrs. Lovett,
with a bland look.

"At two, mum?" cried a customer. "Why, what's to become of the half-past
one batch?"

"We are rather short of--of meat," said Mrs. Lovett, with one of her
strange metallic smiles.

"The devil you are! Ain't there butchers enough?"

"Oh, dear, yes; but we could not get such meat as we put in our pies, at
the butcher's."

"You kill your own, mum, then, I suppose?"

"We do," replied Mrs. Lovett, with another smile, more metallic than the
former.

"And where is your farm, mum?"

"Really, sir, you want to know too much. I appeal to those gentlemen if
any of them know where my farm is."

"No--no. D--n it, no, nor don't care," said all the lawyer's clerks.
"Don't know anything about it."

"And don't care," said another. "Sufficient for the day is the pie
thereof."

"Very good--Ha! ha!--Very good."

The crowd gradually dispersed. Mrs. Lovett put a placard in the window,
announcing--

"A hot batch at two o'clock."

She then closed the shop door, and retired to the parlour. She cast
herself upon a sofa, and hiding the light from her eyes with one of her
arms, she gave herself up to thought. Yes, that bold bad woman was
beginning to have her moments of thought, during which it appeared to be
as though a thousand mocking fiends were thronging around her. No holy
thoughts or impulses crossed her mind. Solitude, that best of company to
the good and just, was to her peopled with countless horrors; and yet
there must have been a time when that woman was pure, and her soul
spotless--a time when it was free from

    "The black engraved spots"

which now deformed it. And yet who, to look upon her now, could fancy
that she was ever other than what she seemed? Who could bring themselves
to think that she had not been placed at once by the arch-fiend as she
was upon the beautiful world, to make in the small circle around her a
pestilence, a blight, and a desolation? There are persons in the world
that it would be the greatest violence to our feelings ever to attempt
to picture to our imaginations as children; and as such, surely were
Sweeney Todd and Mrs. Lovett. Was she ever some gentle little girl,
fondly clinging to a mother's arms? Was he ever a smiling infant, with
pretty dimples? Was there at his or her birth much joy? Did a mother's
tears ever fall upon his or her cheek, in sweet gratitude to God for
such a glorious gift? No--no. We cannot--we will not believe that such
persons as Sweeney Todd and Mrs. Lovett ever came into this world
otherwise than ready-made man and woman! Any other belief, concerning
such fiends in human shape is too repugnant. But we are forgetting that
Mrs. Lovett is upon the sofa all this while, and that her metallic smile
has quite vanished, giving way to such a look of utter abandonment of
spirit, that you would have shuddered to have cast but one glance upon
her. She could bear the quietude of the attitude she had assumed but for
a very short time, and then she sprang to her feet.

"Yes," she said, "it must, and it shall come to an end!"

She stood for some few moments trembling, as though the dim echo of that
word end, as she had jerked it forth, had awakened in her mind a world
of horrifying thoughts. Again she sank upon the couch, and speaking in a
low, plaintive voice, she said--

"Yes. I have need of the waters of oblivion, one draught of which shuts
out for ever all memory of the past. Oh, that I had but a cup of such
nectar at my lips!"

Not a doubt of it, Mrs. Lovett. It is the memory of the wicked that
constitutes that retribution, which is assuredly to be found in this
world as day follows night.

"I--I must have this," she muttered. "Let Todd be dead or alive, I must
have it. I am going mad--I feel certain. That I am going mad, and the
only way to save myself, is to flee. I must collect as much money as I
can and then flee far away. If I cannot quite obliterate the past from
my memory, I can at least leave it as it is, and add nothing to it. Yes,
that man may live. He seems to bear a charmed life. But I must flee."

She rested her head upon her hands, and in a softer voice, said--

"Let me think--let me think of the means, now that I have yet a little
time. What do I dread most? The man below? Yes. He is at work for his
deliverance. I feel that he is, and if he succeed before I flee from
here, all is lost--all is lost! I must speak to him."

Filled with this idea, and with an unknown dread of what the
discontented cook might do, Mrs. Lovett stepped into the shop first, and
made the door fast by slipping a bolt at the back of it. It was not very
often that immediately after the disposal of a batch of pies any
customers came in, and if they should attempt to do so for the purpose
of purchasing any stale pies, she was by far too intent upon what she
was come about, and considered it by far too important to heed what they
might think or say upon finding the door fast. She then opened the
seeming cupboard in the parlour, which conducted to the strong iron
door, with the small grating at the top of it. She reached that point of
observation with great rapidity, and peered into the cavernous
dungeon-like bakehouse. At first she could see nothing by the uncertain
light that was there, but as her eyes got accustomed to the absence of
daylight, she could just see the figure of the cook sitting upon a
stool, and apparently watching one of the fires.

"It is a long--long time."

"What is a long time?" cried Mrs. Lovett.

The captive cook sprang to his feet in a moment, and in a voice of
alarm, he said--

"Who spoke? Who is that?"

"I," replied Mrs. Lovett. "Do you not know me?"

"Ah," said the cook, directing his eyes to the grating above the door,
"I know you too well. What do you want with me? Have I failed in doing
your bidding here? Have I disappointed you of a single batch of those
execrable pies?"

"Certainly not, but I have come to see--if--if you are quite
comfortable."

"Comfortable! What an insult!"

"Nay, you wrong me."

"That is impossible. This is the commencement only of some new misery.
Speak on, madam. Speak on. I am helpless here, and condemned to suffer."

Notwithstanding these words of the cook there was a certain tone of
hilarity about him, that Mrs. Lovett might well be surprised at, and she
asked herself what does he hope. The fact is that much as he wished
still to enact the character of a man full of despair, the cook could
not get out of his head and heart the promises of Sir Richard
Blunt--promises which still rung in his ears, like a peal of joy bells.

"Come, come," said Mrs. Lovett, "you are getting reconciled to your
fate. Confess as much."

"I reconciled? Never."

"But you are not so unhappy?"

"Worse--worse. This apathetic condition that I am now in, and which to
you may look like the composure of resignation, will end, in all
likelihood, in raging madness."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, madam, I feel already the fire in my brain."

"Be calm."

"Calm--calm! Ha!--ha! Calm. It is all very well for you upon that side
of the iron door to talk of calmness, madam, but upon this side the
words sound strange."

"It will not sound so strange when I tell you that I have absolute
compassion upon you, and that the cause of my present visit was to talk
to you of some means by which the worst portion of your fate here might
be in some measure ameliorated, and your existence rendered tolerable."




                             CHAPTER LXXIV.
                      BIG BEN CREATES A SENSATION.


The cook was so surprised at these words from Mrs. Lovett that for some
moments he made no answer to them.

"Pray, speak again," he said at length, when he could find words in
which to express himself.

"I repeat," she said, "that I am desirous, as far as lies in my power,
to ameliorate your condition, of which you so much complain."

"Indeed!"

"Ah, you are too suspicious."

"Humph! I think, madam, when you come to consider all things, you will
hardly think it possible for me to be too suspicious."

"You are wrong again. I dare say now, in your mind, you attribute most
of your evils to me."

"Well, madam, candidly speaking, should I be far wrong by so doing?"

"You would be quite wrong. Alas! alas! I--"

"You what, madam? Pray, speak up."

"I am the victim of another. You cannot suppose that, of my own free
will, I should shut up in these gloomy places a person of your age, and
by no means ill-looking." "I have him there," thought Mrs. Lovett; "what
human heart is proof against the seductions of flattery? Oh, I have him
there."

The cook was silent for some few moments, and then he said, quite
calmly, as though the tribute to his personal appearance had not had the
smallest effect--

"Pray go on, madam, I am quite anxious to hear all that you may have to
say to me."

This composed manner of meeting her compliments rather discomposed Mrs.
Lovett; but after all, she thought--"He is only acting an indifference
he is far from feeling." With this impression she resolved to persevere,
and she added, in a kind and conciliating tone of voice--

"I grant that circumstances are such that you may well be excused for
any amount of doubt that you may feel regarding the honesty of my words
and intentions towards you."

"I quite agree with you there, madam," said the cook.

"Then all I have to do is, by deeds, to convince you that I am sincere
in my feelings towards you. As I have before said, I am in the power of
another, and therefore is it that, contrary to my nature, I may seem to
do cruel things at which my heart revolts."

"I cannot conceive anything so distressing," said the cook, "except
being the unfortunate victim as I am of such a train of circumstances."

"That is what I am coming to."

"Are you? I wish you were."

There was a tone of irony about the enforced cook which Mrs. Lovett did
not at all like; but she had an object to gain, and that was to fully
persuade him that the shortest way to his freedom would be to remain
profoundly quiet for a day or two, and then she would be able to make
her own arrangements and be off without troubling either him or Todd
with any news of her departure or her whereabouts.

"You still doubt me," she said. "But listen, and I think you will soon
be of opinion that although I have wronged you as yet, I can do
something to repair that wrong."

"I am all attention, madam."

"Then, in the first place, you are quite tired of eating pies, and must
have some other kind of food."

"You never said a truer thing in all your life, madam."

"That other food, then, I will provide for you. You shall, within an
hour from now, have anything to eat or to drink that you may please to
name. Speak, what is it to be?"

"Well," he said, "that is kind indeed. But I can do without food further
than I have here, for I have hit upon a mode of making cakes that please
me. Nevertheless, if you can bring me a bottle of brandy, in order that
I may slightly qualify the water that I drink, I shall be obliged to
you."

"You shall have it; and now I hope you will be convinced of the
sincerity of my desire to be of service to you."

"But my liberty, madam, my liberty. That is the grand thing after all
that I must ever pant for."

"True, and that is what you shall have at my hands. In the course of
two, or it may be three days, I shall have perfected some arrangements
which will enable me to throw open your prison for you, and then--"

"Then what?"

"May I hope that you will not think so harshly of me as you have done?"

"Certainly not."

"Then I shall be repaid for all I do. You must believe me to be the
victim of the most cruel circumstances, of which some day you may be
informed. At present, to do so, would only be to involve both you and
myself in one common destruction."

"Then don't mention it."

"I will not. But beware of one thing."

"What is that?"

"Simply this, that any attempts upon your own part to escape from here
previous to the time when I shall have completed my arrangements to set
you free, will not only derange all that I am planning for you, but end
in your utter destruction; for he who has forced me into my present
cruel situation will not for one moment hesitate at the murder of us
both; so if you wish to be free in a few days you will try nothing, but
if on the contrary you wish to destroy both yourself and me, you will
make some attempts to rescue yourself from here."

Mrs. Lovett waited rather anxiously for his answer to this speech.

"I dare say you are right," he said at length.

"You may be assured I am."

"Then I consent."

Mrs. Lovett drew a long breath of relief, as she muttered to herself--

"It will do--I have him in the toils; and come what may, I am free from
the torturing thought that he may achieve something that may have the
effect of delivering me up to the hands of justice. When I am gone, he
may remain where he is, and rot for all I care."--"You have done
wisely," she said aloud, "and if anything could more powerfully than
another incite me to the greatest exertions to liberate you, it would be
the handsome manner in which you have placed confidence in me."

"Oh, don't mention it."

Again there was that tone of sarcasm about the cook's voice, which
created a doubt in the mind of Mrs. Lovett if, after all, he was not
merely playing with her, and in his heart utterly disregarding all that
she said to him. It is quite questionable if this doubt was not in its
bitterness worse than the former anxieties that had preyed upon the mind
of the lady; but she found she could do nothing to put an end to it, so
she merely said--

"Well, I feel much happier now; so I will go at once and get you the
brandy that you ask for." "I hope he will drink it freely--it will aid
him in drowning reflection."

"Thank you," said the cook, "I shall expect it with impatience."
"Confound her, she can't very well put anything queer in the brandy. I
will take care to taste a very small portion of it first; for Sir
Richard Blunt has cautioned me particularly to be careful of poison."

"I am going," said Mrs. Lovett.

"Good-bye, madam; I only hope you will be able to carry your benevolent
intentions into effect--and," added the cook to himself, "that I may
some fine morning have the pleasure of seeing you hanged."

"Farewell," said Mrs. Lovett; and she, too, had her _aside_ as she
ascended the stairs, for she muttered--"If I were only a little better
assured than I am that you meditated something dangerous, I would steal
upon you while you slept, and with a knife soon put an end to all
trouble regarding you."

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett Alarmed At The Strange Faces At Her Window In
The Pie-Shop.]

Now, it happened that when Mrs. Lovett reached her shop, she saw three
people outside the window. The actions of these people attracted her
observation. One was a big stout man, of such a size as was rarely seen
in the streets of London. The other was a young girl, nicely attired,
but with a look of great grief and agitation upon her countenance. The
third person of the group was a gentlemanly-looking man, attired in a
great coat which was buttoned up to his chin. The big stout man was
making a kind of movement towards the door of the pie-shop, and the
gentleman with the great-coat was holding up his hand and shaking his
head, as though forbidding him. The big stout man then looked angry; and
then Mrs. Lovett saw the young girl cling to him, and heard her say--

"Oh, no--no; I said I wanted nothing.--Come away."

Then the gentleman with the great-coat pulled his collar down a little;
upon which the young girl sprang towards him, and, clasping his arm,
cried in tones of intense interest--

"Ah, sir, is it indeed you? Tell me is she saved--oh, is she saved?"

"She will be," was the reply of the gentleman in the great-coat. "Come
away."

The big stout man appeared to be getting rather furious at the idea of
the gentleman with the great-coat dictating what he and the young girl
should do; but she by a few words pacified him; and then, as if they
were the best friends in the world, they all walked away towards the
Strand, conversing very seriously and rapidly.

"What does this mean?" said Mrs. Lovett.

Terror overspread her countenance. Oh, conscience! conscience! how truly
dost thou make

    "Cowards of us all!"

What could compensate Mrs. Lovett for the abject terrors that came over
her now? What could recompense her for the pang that shot across her
heart, at the thought that something was amiss in the fine-drawn web of
subtlety that she and Sweeney Todd had drawn? Alas! was the money in the
Bank of England, upon which she expected to enjoy herself in a foreign
land, now any set-off against that shuddering agony of soul with which
she said to herself--

"Is all discovered?"

Her strength forsook her. She quite forgot all about the cook, and the
brandy she had promised him--she forgot even how necessary it was, in
case any one should come, for her to keep up the appearance of
composure; and tottering into the back-parlour, she sunk upon her knees
on the floor, and shook as though the spirit of twenty agues possessed
her. So it will be seen that Todd was not quite alone in his sufferings
from those compunctious visitations, which we have seen at times come
over him in his shop. But we will leave Mrs. Lovett to her reflections,
hoping that even she may be made a little wiser and a little better by
those soft

    "Whisperings of awakened sense;"

and that she may find some one among the invisible hosts of spirits of
another world who may whisper to her--

"Repent! repent!--it is not yet too late."

Let us look at those three persons whose mysterious conduct at the shop
windows had, like a match applied to gunpowder, at once awakened a fever
in the breast of Mrs. Lovett, which she was scarcely aware slumbered
there. These folks made their way, then, into Fleet Street; and as the
reader has probably guessed already who they are, we may as well make a
merit of saying that the big one was our old friend Ben, the
beef-eater--the gentlemanly-looking man was Sir Richard Blunt, and the
young lady was no other than Arabella Wilmot. Poor Arabella! Of all the
personages concerned in our _dramatis personæ_, we have no hesitation in
saying that your sufferings are the greatest. From the moment that
Johanna had started upon that desperate expedition to Sweeney Todd's,
peace left the bosom of her young friend. We have already traced the
progress of Arabella to Sir Richard Blunt's office, and we have seen
what was the result of that decidedly judicious movement; but
notwithstanding she was assured over and over again subsequently by Sir
Richard that Johanna was now well protected, she could not bring herself
to think so, or to leave the street. It was by her lingering about in
this way that she became in the company of our friend Ben. The fact was,
that the kind of statement or confession that Johanna had made to Ben on
that occasion of his visit to her father's house, when she found herself
alone with him in the parlour, had made such an impression upon the poor
fellow, that he described it himself in the most forcible possible
language, by saying--

"It interferes with my meals."

Now, everything that had such an effect as that, must to Ben be a matter
for the most serious consideration indeed. He accordingly, finding that

    "The peace of the Tower was fled,"

so far as he was concerned, had come into the City upon a sort of voyage
of discovery, to see how matters were going on. As he was proceeding
along Fleet Street, he chanced to cast his eyes into the entrance of a
court, nearly opposite Sweeney Todd's, and there he saw a female form
crouching. There was something about this female form which Ben thought
was familiar to him, and upon a close look, he felt certain it was
Johanna's friend, Arabella Wilmot. Full of surprise at finding her
there, Ben paused, and stared at her so long, that she at last looked at
him, and recognising him, immediately flew to his side, and grasping his
arm, cried--

"Oh, pity me, Mr. Ben. Pity me!"

"Hold!" said Ben, who was not, as the reader is aware, the fastest
thinker in the world. "Hold. Easy does it."

Ben tried to look very wise then.

"Oh, you will hate me, Ben."

"Eh?"

"I say you will hate me, Ben, when you know all."

Ben shook his head.

"Shan't do any such thing," he said. "Lord bless your pretty eyes, I
hate you? I couldn't."

"But--but--"

"Come, come," added Ben, "just take your little bit of an arm under
mine. Easy does it, you know. Always think of that, if anything goes
amiss. Easy does it; and then you will find things come right in the
long run. You may take my word for it."




                             CHAPTER LXXV.
                    COLONEL JEFFERY OPENS HIS EYES.


Arabella was weeping, so that for some little time she could say nothing
more to Ben; and he did not, in the profundity of his imagination, very
well know what to say to her, except now and then muttering the maxim of
"Easy does it," which Ben thought singularly applicable to all human
affairs. But this was a state of things which could not last; and
Arabella Wilmot, nerving herself sufficiently to speak in a few minutes,
said to Ben in a low self-deprecatory tone--

"Oh, sir, I--I--have done something very wrong."

"Eh?" said Ben, opening his eyes to their utmost.

"Yes," added Arabella, "very wrong, indeed."

"Humph!"

"You would not probably have expected it of me, Mr. Ben, would you now?"

"Well, a-hem!" said Ben. "Easy does it."

"I am a wicked--wicked girl."

"Oh, dear--oh, dear!" said Ben.

"You cannot guess, Mr. Ben, what I have done; but I feel I ought to tell
you, and it will be quite a relief to me to do so."

Ben shook his head.

"I tell you what it is, my dear," he said. "Your best plan is to go and
tell your mother, my dear. That's the proper person to tell. She is sure
to find it out somehow or another; and you had better tell her at once,
and then--Easy does it."

"My mother? Tell my mother? Oh, no--no--no!"

"Well, if you have got any respectable old aunt now, who is a good, kind
old soul, and would not make too much fuss, you had better tell her; but
goodness gracious, my dear, what puts it into your head to tell me?"

"Because I think you are kind-hearted."

"Well, but--well, but--"

"And, then, of course, as you are mixed up, you know, Mr. Ben, in the
whole transaction, it is only proper that you should know what has
happened at last."

Ben turned fairly round, and looked down into the face of Arabella
Wilmot with such a coarse expression of alarm upon his face, that at any
other than so serious a time she must have laughed.

"Me?" he cried. "Me?"

"Yes, Mr. Ben."

"Me mixed up in the--the--Oh dear!"

"Ah, Mr. Ben, you know you are by far too kind not to be; and so I feel
as though it would be quite a relief to me to tell you everything."

"Everything?"

"Yes, all--all."

"Not all the particulars, surely. Come--come. I ain't an old woman, you
know, my dear."

"An old woman, Ben?"

"No, my dear, I say I ain't an elderly female, so I don't think I ought
to listen to all the particulars, do you know. Come--come, you go home
now, and say no more about it to me. Easy does it, you know; and keep
your own counsel. I won't say a word; but don't you, because you are in
such a state of mind as you hardly know what you are about, go on
blubbering to me about all the particulars, when perhaps to-morrow
you'll give one of your pretty little ears that you had not said a word
to me about it."

"Alas!--Alas!"

"Pho! Pho! Easy does it."

"Who am I to cling to but you?"

"Cling to me? Perhaps you'll say it's me?"

"What's you, Mr. Ben? Explain yourself. How strange you talk. What do
you mean, Mr. Ben?"

"Well, that's cool," said Ben.

"What's cool?"

"I tell you what it is, Miss Arabella W., I'm disappointed in you; ain't
you ashamed to look me in the face?"

"Ashamed?"

"Yes, positively ashamed?"

"No, Mr. Ben. I may regret the indiscretion that is past; but I cannot
see in it anything to be ashamed of."

"You don't?"

"Indeed, Mr. Ben, I do not."

"Then, Miss A. W., you are about the coolest little piece of goods I
have met with for some time. Come--come, easy does it; but haven't you
been telling me all this time about something you have been about,
that--that--was rather improper, in a manner of speaking?"

It might have been the tone in which Ben pronounced the word improper,
or it might have been the sagacious shake of the head which Ben
accompanied his words with, or it might have been that Arabella was
drawing a conclusion from the whole transaction; but certain it is, that
she began to have a glimmering perception that Mr. Ben was making a
great mistake.

"Oh, heaven!" she said. "What are you saying Mr. Ben? I am speaking of
the advice I was foolish enough to give Johanna."

"Advice?"

"Yes, that is all. Into what mischief could you have tortured my
meaning? I am much mistaken in you, sir."

"What? Then, it isn't--a-hem! That is to say, you haven't--dear me, I
shall put my foot in it directly. What a fool I am."

"You are, indeed," said the now indignant Arabella, and a slight flush
upon her cheeks showed how deeply wronged she was by the unworthy
construction Ben had put upon her innocent words.

"Good-bye, Miss A. W.," added Ben. "Good-bye; I see I am out of your
books; but if you fancy I meant any harm, you don't know me. God bless
you. Take care of yourself my dear, and go home. I won't stay to plague
you any longer. Good-bye."

"Stop! Stop!"

Ben paused.

"I am sure, Mr. Ben, you did not mean to say a single word that could be
offensive to a friendless girl in the street."

"Then, then?--Easy does it."

"Let us be friends again then, Mr. Ben, and I will tell you all, and you
will then blame me for being so romantic as to give Johanna advice which
has induced her to take a step which, although my reason tells me she is
now well protected in, my imagination still peoples with horror."

Ben's eyes opened to an alarming width.

"You recollect meeting us in this street, Ben?"

"Oh, yes."

"When Johanna was disguised?"

"Yes, Miss A. When she had on them, a-hem! You may depend upon it, my
dear, there's no good comes of young girls putting on pairs of
thingamys. Don't you ever do it."

"But, Mr. Ben, hear me."

"Well--well. I was only saying. You stick to the petticoats, my dear.
They become you, and you become them, and don't you be trusting your
nice little legs into what-do-you-call-'ems."

"Mr. Ben?"

"I've done. Easy does it. Now go on and tell us what happened, my dear.
Don't mind me. Go on."

"Then Johanna, in boy's cloathes, is now--"

"Now? Oh, the little vixen. Didn't I tell her not."

"Is now filling the situation of errand boy at Sweeney Todd's, opposite.
Can I be otherwise than wretched, most wretched!"

"Arrant boy?"

"No, not arrant boy. Errand boy."

"At Todd's--opposite--in--boys--clothes? Oh--oh--just you wait here, and
I'll soon put that to rights. I'll--I'll. Only you wait in this
door-way, Miss A. W., just a moment or two, and I'll teach her to go and
do such things. I'll--I'll--"

"No--no Ben. You will ruin all, you will, indeed. I implore you to stay
with me. Let me tell you all that has happened, and how Johanna is
protected. In the first place, Ben, you must know that Sir Richard Blunt
the Magistrate has her under his special protection now, and he says
that he has made such arrangements that it is quite impossible she can
come to any harm."

"But--"

"Nay, listen me out. He says that nothing can now expose her to any
danger, but some injudicious interference. I ought not, you see, to have
told you, Mr. Ben; but since I have, I only ask of you, for Johanna's
sake, for her life's sake, to do nothing."

Ben looked aghast.

"And--and how long is the little lamb to be left there?" he asked.

"Only a few hours I think now, Ben--only a few hours. Where are we now,
Mr. Ben?"

"Why, this, my dear, is Bell-yard we have strolled into; and that is the
famous pie-shop of which they talk so much. They say the woman has made
an immense fortune by selling them."

As Ben made a kind of movement towards Mrs. Lovett's window, it was then
that Sir Richard Blunt, who had followed him and Arabella Wilmot from
Fleet-street, and who had, in fact, overheard some portion of their
conversation, stepped up in the manner that Mrs. Lovett had remarked
from within the shop.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We have before stated that the three personages, consisting of the
magistrate, big Ben the beef-eater, and Arabella Wilmot, walked to
Fleet-street together from Bell-yard. Sir Richard Blunt shook his head
at Arabella Wilmot, as he said--

"Miss Wilmot, I cannot help saying that it would have been better in
every respect, and possibly much more conducive to the safety of Miss
Oakley, if you had gone home quietly, and not lingered about
Fleet-street."

"I could not go, sir."

"But yet a consideration for Miss Oakley's safety should have induced
you to put that violence upon your own feelings."

"I felt that when once you, sir, had pledged yourself for her safety,
that safe she was; and that my weeping perchance in a doorway in
Fleet-street could not be so important as to compromise her."

"I am fairly enough answered," said Sir Richard Blunt, with a slight
smile. "But what say you to coming with me to the Temple?"

"The Temple?"

Arabella cast a lingering look towards Todd's shop, which Sir Richard at
once translated, and replied to it by saying--

"Fear nothing for your young friend. She knows she is protected; but
even she does not know the extent to which she is so protected. I tell
you, Miss Wilmot, that I pledge my own life for her safety--and that,
although to all seeming she is in the power of Todd, such is not the
case."

"Indeed?"

"I have a force of no less than twenty-five men in Fleet-street now--one
half of whom have their eyes upon Todd's shop. By Heaven! I would not
have a hair of that young and noble girl's head injured for the worth of
this great kingdom!"

"Bravo!" cried Ben, as he seized Sir Richard by the hand, and gave it a
squeeze that nearly brought the tears into the eyes of the magistrate;
"bravo! that's what I like to hear. All's right. Bless you, sir, easy
does it. You are the man for my money!"

"Will you both come with me, then?"

"To be sure," said Ben; "to be sure; and as we go along, I'll tell you
what a sad mistake I made about Miss Arabella here. You must know that I
met her crying in Fleet-street, and she--"

Arabella shook her head, and frowned.

"And--and--and--she--nothing."

"Well," said Sir Richard, "I must confess I have heard anecdotes with a
little more point to them."

"You don't say so!" said Ben.

"I think I will go home," said Arabella, gently.

"If you will," replied the magistrate, "of course, I cannot say anything
to stay you; but I think it will be a great disappointment to Colonel
Jeffery not to meet with you to-day."

"Colonel Jeffery!" exclaimed Arabella, while her face became of the
colour of a rose-bud; "Colonel Jeffery?"

There was just the ghost of a smile upon the face of Sir Richard Blunt,
as he calmly replied--

"Yes; I am on my way to meet that gentleman in the garden of the Temple;
and I am sure he would be glad to see you."

"Glad to see me?"

"Yes, as so true a friend of Johanna's, he will be more than glad; he
will be delighted."

"Delighted?"

"Do you doubt the Colonel's friendly feeling towards you?"

"Oh no--no. I--no--certainly not."

"Then let me beg of you to come."

"No. Not now; I will go home. It will look particular for me to go to
the garden to meet him."

"It will look much more particular to refuse, I think, Miss Wilmot. You
are with me, and with your old friend, and Johanna's relative, Mr.
a--a--"

"They calls me Ben."

"Mr. Ben; and so you cannot refuse," he said, "to go to meet Colonel
Jeffery, you know. Come, come, I pray you come. Indeed, I know the
Colonel wishes to speak to you; and as it would be obviously out of
order for him to call upon you, I think you ought, seeing that you're
not alone, to give him, as a gentleman of wealth and honour, this
opportunity of doing so."

"You say, he wishes to speak to me?"

"He does, indeed. What do you say, Mr. Ben? Don't you think Miss Wilmot
might as well come with us?"

"Easy does it," said Ben, "and that's my opinion all the world over."

"Then allow me to look upon it that we have prevailed with you, Miss
Wilmot. Pray do me the favour to take my arm."

Arabella trembled, but she did take the arm of Sir Richard Blunt, and
made no further opposition to proceeding to that Temple Gardens, where
already such affecting interviews had taken place between the Colonel
and poor Johanna. The gardens appeared to be empty when they reached it,
but from behind some shrubs Colonel Jeffery in a moment made his
appearance, for Sir Richard, in consequence of his meeting with Ben and
Arabella, was considerably behind his time.




                             CHAPTER LXXVI.
                       ARABELLA AND THE COLONEL.


If any one had been looking at the face of Arabella Wilmot at this
particular juncture, and if the party so looking had chanced to be
learned in reading the various emotions of the heart from the expression
of the features, they might have chanced upon some curious revelations.
It was only one glance that Arabella gave to the Colonel, but that was
sufficient. A word slightly spoken, and in due season, may say more than
a volume of preaching; and so one transient glance, fleeting as a
sun-beam in an English April, may, with most eloquent meaning, preach a
sermon that would puzzle many a divine. But we have become so familiar
with the reader, and put ourselves upon such a cordial shake-hands sort
of feeling, in particular with you, Miss, who are now reading this
passage, that we will whisper a secret in your ear, and the more
readily, too, as to whisper we must come particularly close to that soft
downy cheek, and almost be able to look askance into those eyes in which
the light of Heaven seems dancing,--Arabella Wilmot is in love!

Yes, Arabella Wilmot is in love with Colonel Jeffery; and small blame to
her, as they say in Ireland, for is he not a gentleman in the true
acceptation of the term? Not a manufactured gentleman, but one of
nature's gentlemen.

You will have promised, my dear what's-your-name, that Arabella, to
herself even, has hardly confessed her feelings; but still they are
creeping upon her most insidiously as such feelings somehow or other
will and do creep.

To be sure, if any one were to stop her in the street or any where else
to say, "Arabella, you are in love with Colonel Jeffery," she would
say--"No, no, no!" many times over.

But yet it is true.

    "You read it in her glistening eyes,
      And thus alone should love be read:
    She says it in her gentle sighs,
      And thus alone should love be said."

After this, who will be hardy enough, my dear, to dispute the fact with
you and I?

And now we will watch her, ay, that we will, and see how she will behave
herself under such trying circumstances.

Colonel Jeffery advanced, and as in duty and gallantry called upon, he,
after slightly bowing to the gentlemen, spoke to Arabella.

"This is an unexpected pleasure, Miss Wilmot," he said. "I hope I see
you well. Here is a seat close at hand. May I have the pleasure of
conducting you to it?"

"Johanna is--is--is--" stammered Arabella.

"Well, I hope," interposed the colonel.

"Oh, no--no--that is, yes."

The colonel looked puzzled. He was not a conjurer, and so might look
puzzled, if he looked like any ordinary man, who hears any one say no,
and yes in the same breath, without any injury to his reputation.

"Mr. Ben," said Sir Richard Blunt, "I have something for your private
ear, if you will just step on with me."

"My private ear?" said Ben with a confused look, as if he would have
liked to add, "which is that?"

"Yes. This way if you please."

Ben walked on with the magistrate, and Colonel Jeffery was alone with
Arabella Wilmot. Yes, alone with the one person who insensibly had crept
into her affections. Alas! Is the pure love of that young creature
scattered to the winds? Is she one of those who drag about them in this
world the heavy chain of unrequited affection? We shall see. Arabella
had permitted the colonel to hand her to one of the garden-seats near at
hand. How could she prevent him? If he had chosen instead to hand her
into the river it would have been just the same, and she would have
gone. He led her by that wreath of flowers which in old Arcadia was
first linked by Cupid, and which, in all time since, has wound itself
around the hearts of all the boy-god's victims.

"Miss Wilmot," said the colonel, and now his voice faltered a little, "I
have much wished to see you."

"Very fine, indeed," said Arabella. "You said something about the
weather, did you not?"

"Not exactly," he said; "I had much wished to see you."

"Me?"

"Yes, and to begin at the beginning, you know I--I--loved Johanna
Oakley. Yes, I loved her."

"Yes--yes."

"I loved her for her beauty, and for the gentle and the chivalrous
devotion of her character, you understand. I loved her for the very
tears she shed for another, and for the very constancy with which she
clung to the memory of his affection for her. I saw in her such
child-like purity of mind, such generosity of disposition, such
enchanting humanity of soul, that I could not but love her."

"Yes, yes," gasped Arabella. "Yes."

"Will you pardon me for saying all this to you?"

"Oh yes. Go on--go on, unless you have said all?"

"I have not."

"Then, then you have only to add that you love her still?"

"Yes, but--"

Arabella's heart beat painfully.

"Ah," she said, "has true love any reservations? You love her, and yet
you have something else to say."

"I have. I love her still. But it is not as I loved her. She has
convinced me of her constancy to her first affection, that--that--"

"Yes, yes."

"That being so convinced, I now love her, but with that love a brother
might feel for a dear sister, and I almost think it was a kind of
preparation to try to awaken in the smouldering fires of her lost love a
new passion. She has made me feel that the love of woman once truly
awakened is an undying passion and can know no change--no extinction."

"True. Oh, how true!"

"I have learnt from her that when once the heart of a young and gentle
girl--one in whom there are no evil passions, no world-wise failings nor
earthly varieties--is touched by the holy flame of affection, it may
consume her being, but it never can be extinguished."

Arabella burst into tears.

"Love," added the colonel, "may be trodden down, but like truth it can
never be trodden out!"

"Never! never!" sobbed Arabella. "Let me go now! Oh, sir, let me go home
now?"

"One moment!"

She trembled, but she sat still.

"Only a moment, Arabella, while I tell you that man's love is different
from this. That man can reason upon his affections, and that when the
first beauty and excellence upon which he may cast his eyes is denied to
his arms, he can look for equal beauty--equal excellence--equal charms
of mind and person in another, and--"

Arabella tried to go, but somehow she felt spell-bound and could not
rise from that garden seat.

"And," added the colonel, "with as pure a passion, man can make an idol
of her who can be his, as he approached her who could not.--Miss Wilmot,
I love you!"

"Oh, no, no--Johanna."

[Illustration: Colonel Jeffery Declares His Love For Arabella.]

"I do not shrink from the pronunciation of that name; I have said that I
loved Johanna. If she had been fancy-free and would have looked upon me
with eyes of favour, I would have made her my wife; but such was not to
be, and for the same qualities that I loved her I love you. I am afraid
I have not explained my feelings well."

"Oh, yes. That is, I don't know."

"And now, Miss Wilmot, will you allow me to hope that what I have said
to you may not be all in vain? That--"

"No, no."

"No?"

"Allow me to go, now. My mind is too full of the fate of Johanna even to
permit me to reject in the language taught--"

"Reject?"

"Yes," she said, "reject. I wish you all the happiness this world can
afford to you, Colonel Jeffery."

"Then you will be mine?"

"No, no, no. Farewell."

She rose, and this time the colonel did not attempt to detain her. He
stepped back a pace or two, and bowed, and then rose and walked a pace
or two away. Then she turned, and holding out her hand, she cried--

"We may--may be friends."

The colonel took the little hand in silence, but the expression of his
face was one of deep chagrin.

"Good-bye," said Arabella.

How courageous she had become all of a sudden, as it were.

"And is this all?" said Jeffery.

"Yes, all. When I see Johanna I will remember you to her."

The colonel bowed again, as he replied--

"I shall be much beholden to you, Miss Wilmot, for that kindness."

"And--and I hope you will find--find--that is, meet with some one,
who--who don't chance to know that your love is a kind of
second-hand--that is, I don't mean that, but a--a--Yes, that is all."

Arabella was saying too much. The colonel replied gently--

"I am truly obliged for the highly explanatory speech just uttered by
Arabella Wilmot, whom I have the honour to wish a very good-day."

Arabella trembled.

"No, no. Not thus, Colonel Jeffery. We are friends, indeed."

"Remarkable good acquaintances," said the colonel, as he walked away
towards Sir Richard Blunt and Ben. Arabella walked hastily on, having
but one idea at the moment, and that was to leave the garden, but she
could not find the gate, and Ben ran after her as well as he could,
calling--

"Miss A. W.--Miss A. W., where are you a-going? Don't you go yet. I'll
take care of you and see you all right, you know, or perhaps you'd like
to take a wherry here at the Temple stairs, and go to the Tower, and see
the animals fed?"

"Yes, no--that is, anything," replied Arabella. "I will go home now, I
am so very--very wretched!"

"What, wretched? Here, Colonel thingumy, she says she--"

"If you dare!" said Arabella, as she placed her hand upon the arm of
Ben. "If you dare!"

"Lor!" said Ben, as he looked down from his altitude upon the frail and
beautiful young creature. "Lor! easy does it!"

The voice of Ben, however, had brought both the colonel and Sir Richard
Blunt to the spot. During that brief time that had elapsed since the
colonel had last spoken to Arabella, Sir Richard had told him of the
perilous position of Johanna, and the look of anxiety upon his face was
most marked. Arabella heard him say--

"Make use of me in any way you please, Sir Richard. Regard my safety or
even my life as nothing compared to her preservation."

Arabella knew what he meant.

"Ben," she said, "will you come with me, and see me a part of my way
home?"

"Yes, my dear, to be sure. Then you won't come and see the criturs fed
to-day, I supposes?"

"No, no."

"Very well. Easy does it. Come along, my dear--come along. Lord love
you! I'll take care of you. I should only like to see anybody look at
you while you are with me, my duck. Bless your little bits of twinkling
eyes!"

"Thank you--thank you."

"Lor! it's enough to make a fellow go mad in love, to see such criturs
as you, my dear; but whenever I thinks of such things, I says to
myself--'I'll just pop in and see Mother Oakley,' and that soon puts it
all out of my head, I can tell you."

"Indeed?"

"Yes. You should go in at feeding time some day, and see her a-coming it
strong with fried ingins."

"Fried what?"

"Ingins--ingins; round things. Ingions--ah! that's it."

"Onions?"

"Very like--very like. But come on, my dear--come on. Easy does it!
Always remember that whenever you gets into any fix. Easy does it!"

Did Arabella think the colonel would run after her and say something?
Yes she did; but he came not. Did she think he would be loath to part
with her upon such terms as they had seemed to part? Yes, yes. Surely he
could not let her go without some kinder, softer, word that he had last
spoken to her? But he did. He only watched her with his eyes; and when
Sir Richard Blunt, who, it would appear, knew something of the colonel's
feelings, said to him--

"All right, I suppose, Colonel Jeffery?"

He only shook his head.

"What, anything amiss?"

"She has rejected me!"

"Oh, is that all?"

"All? And enough too."

"Phoo! She was sure to do that. Don't you know the old adage, that--

    "Woman's nay still stands for nought."

"Why, man, No comes as naturally to the tip of a young girl's tongue
when she means Yes, as Don't when she expects to be kissed. I tell you,
she loves you. She adores the very ground you walk on."

"And yet she taunted me with my passion for Johanna, and called me a
second-hand lover."

"Did she, though? Ha! ha! ha! ha! Upon my life that was good--was it
not?"




                            CHAPTER LXXVII.
                      MRS. LOVETT VISITS THE BANK.


Mrs. Lovett, Mrs. Lovett, we are neglecting you! Excuse us, fascinating
piece of wickedness. We are now in Bell-yard again. It will be
recollected what a mental ferment the appearance of Ben, and Arabella,
and Sir Richard Blunt, at the window of her shop had put her in. Not
that she knew any of those parties--nor that she connected any of them
in any way with her feelings, except so far as their attitudes might at
that moment lead her to suppose. The attitudes certainly were such as to
create suspicion. All this, joined to the previous state of mind of Mrs.
Lovett, did not tend to produce that heavenly calm, which philosophers
tell us is such a remarkably nice thing. On the contrary, the mind of
Mrs. Lovett rather resembled a raging torrent, boiling and bubbling to
some destruction which was afar off, and which could only be reached
through the perils and dangers of some stormy passage. She was sighing
for peace. She had begun to sicken for the results of her life of
iniquity--not those results which an indignant and outraged public would
have visited her with, but those results which she and all persons, who
deliberately and systematically commence a career of guilt, picture to
themselves. Criminality is never engaged in for its own sake. There is
always some ultimate object in view, which makes the retrospect less
horrible, and the prospect dim and dubious, though it may be yet a thing
of pleasurable anticipation. Of course, we are only reasoning upon those
minds that reflect. There are many who lead a life of criminality, who
do so as the manifestation of an intellect that can picture nothing
else. But the reader knows that Mrs. Lovett was not of such an order.
She was to some extent an educated, and to a considerable extent a
clever woman. Hence, then, she had always pictured to herself wealth and
retirement, respect and power, as the ends for which she was striving
with such unscrupulous means. But of late, with a shuddering horror, she
had begun to dread that all she had hoped for was getting only more
distant. She had contracted a strong notion of the bad faith of Todd,
and if such were really the case, all was indeed lost. If he allowed his
cupidity just to induce him to commit the crime that would be one too
many, destruction must fall upon them both. If likewise he instantly
made an effort to take to himself all the profits of the unholy traffic
that they were mutually engaged in, all would be lost to both; for was
she a likely woman to crouch down in silence under such a blow? No! the
scaffold prepared by her instrumentality for Todd, would be scarcely
less a triumph to her that she herself would share it with him. He ought
to have known better than he did. How clear and long-sighted we find
people upon subjects that from this distance may be supposed to present
difficulties, and yet how shallow they are upon what is close to them.
One would have thought that such a man as Todd could easily have said to
himself, with regard to Mrs. Lovett, "I dare not tamper with the objects
of that woman," and he would have said it with truth; but on the
contrary, he only looked upon her as a convenient tool, which was to be
thrown aside when it had served all the purposes for which he intended
it. There could not have been a more fatal mistake upon the part of Todd
as concerned his safety. But to return to Mrs. Lovett. The brandy she
had promised to the prisoner was quite forgotten. She sat revolving in
her mind, how she could put an end to the state of horrible doubt and
perplexity in which she was. There were some little difficulties in the
way of Mrs. Lovett emerging from her present condition. It has been
before hinted at, that Todd and the fair lady of the pie-shop had
between them accumulated a large sum of money, and that the money was
duly deposited in the hands of a stock-broker, who was by no means to
part with it to either of them, except upon an order signed by both. So
far all looked fair enough; and as they were likewise bound together by
such a bond of mutual guilt, it did not look likely that either would
make an endeavour to get the better of the other. Suppose there was
£40,000 in the hands of the stock-broker, it did not seem, we say, under
all the circumstances likely that Todd--being fairly entitled as between
them, to £20,000--would peril the safety of both their necks, by getting
up a quarrel about the division equitably of the spoil. The same
reasoning will apply to Mrs. Lovett. But these unlikely things are the
very things that do come to pass to upset the finest plans. Todd never
from the first--whenever that was--meant that Mrs. Lovett should share
with him; no, he thought that he, as the superior genius, the greater
villain, would manage to cheat her, and that she would, for her own
safety's sake, be obliged to put up with what he chose to give her. That
would have been only such a pittance, as to keep her constantly in a
state of dependance upon him. Now, to do Mrs. Lovett justice upon the
old equitable principle of giving the devil his due, she never had any
intention, until she saw symptoms of bad faith in Todd, of attempting to
act otherwise than fairly by him. She loathed him; and all she meant to
do, was when the division of the spoil should take place, to ascertain
where he was going, and then to get as far off him as possible. Of late,
however, finding that Todd was getting lucky, and feeling quite
convinced that he aimed at her life, other views had dawned upon her, as
we are already well aware. She did not so much care for all the money as
she would have liked in her retirement, wherever it was, to have felt
sure that Todd was not

    "An inhabitant of the earth;"

and hence she had taken the pains, all of which had been frustrated, to
put him into another world. But a feeling, superstitiously consequent
upon her failure, had started up in her mind that he bore a charmed
life; and hence she bethought herself of flying from England; but the
money--how was she to get the money to do so? How was she, without his
cognisance, to get her share of the funds which had been placed in the
hands of a stock-broker? Now, since she had begun to feel uncomfortable
regarding the faith of Todd, Mrs. Lovett had kept what cash she saved at
home; therefore some weeks had elapsed since she had paid a monetary
visit to the city. If she had gone as usual, she might have got some
news. To a woman of lively and discursive imagination like Mrs. Lovett,
a plan of operation was not long in suggesting itself. Why, she asked
herself, should she hesitate to put Todd's name to the document
necessary to get her half of the money from the stock-broker? What a
natural consequence from this question it was to ask herself another,
which was--If I am forging Todd's signature at all, might I not do it
for the whole amount as for half, and so take the only revenge upon him
which he would feel, or which I dare offer myself the gratification of
exacting from him? When such a question as this is asked, it is
practically answered in the affirmative. Mrs. Lovett felt quite decided
upon it. She was a woman of courage. No faint-hearted scruple interposed
between the thought and the execution of a project with her. The recent
scene that had taken place in front of her window decided her. Now or
never! she told herself. Now or never is the time to escape. I have
nothing to encumber myself with. Let Todd keep his jewels and trinkets.
All I want is the money which is in the hands of Mr. Anthony Brown, the
stock-broker, and that I will have forthwith. Mrs. Lovett did not know
the exact amount; but as it was a joint account, such an amount of
ignorance need not appear at all surprising to the stock-broker; so she
drew up an order for the money, and signed it with both Todd's name and
her own, leaving a blank for the amount. She then carefully locked up
all doors but that of the outer shop, and having procured the services
of a young girl from a greengrocer's shop in the vicinity, to mind the
place for an hour, as she said, she considered she was all right. The
girl had attended to the shop before for Mrs. Lovett at times when no
batches of pies were expected from the regions below, so she did not
feel at all surprised at the call upon her services.

"I shall be an hour," said Mrs. Lovett. "You can take a pie or two for
yourself if you feel at all hungry; and if Mr. Todd should come in, say
I'm gone to call upon a dress-maker in Bond-street."

"Yes, mum!"

Mrs. Lovett left the shop. At the corner of Bell-yard she turned and
cast a glance at it. She hoped it was a farewell one--She shuddered and
passed on; and then she muttered to herself--

"If I am--which assuredly I shall be--successful in the city, I will
take post-horses there at once for some sea-port, and from thence reach
the Continent, before Todd can dream of pursuit, or find out what I have
done, or where bestowed myself."

She was not so impudent as to pass Todd's shop, but she went down one of
the streets upon the opposite side of Fleet-street, and came up another,
which was considerably past the house which was so full of horrors. A
lumbering old hackney coach met her gaze. It was disengaged, and Mrs.
Lovett got into it.

"To Lothbury," she said; and after swaying to and fro for a few moments,
the machine was set in action, and duly steering up Ludgate Hill.

The impatience of Mrs. Lovett was so great, that she would gladly have
done anything to induce the horses to go at a faster rate than the safe
two miles and a half an hour to which they were accustomed, but she
dreaded that if she exhibited any signs of extreme impatience she might
excite suspicion. To the guilty, any observation of a more than ordinary
character is a thing to dread. They would fain glide through life
gently, and not at all do they sigh to be--

    "The observed of all observers."

But the longest journey even in the slowest hackney coach must come to
an end. As Ben the beef-eater would have said--"Easy does it;" and as
Mrs. Lovett's journey was anything but a long one, the gloomy precincts
of Lothbury soon loomed upon her gaze. After the customary oscillations,
and wheezing and creaking of all its joints and springs, the coach
stopped.

"Wait," said Mrs. Lovett with commendable brevity; and alighting, she
entered a dark door-way upon the side of which was painted, in letters
that had contracted so much the colour of the wood-work that they were
nearly illegible, "Mr. Anthony Brown."

This was the stock-broker, who held charge of the ill-gotten gains of
that pair of un-worthies, Mrs. Lovett and Sweeney Todd. A small door,
covered with what had been green baize, but which was now of some
perfectly original brown, opened into the outer office of the man of
business, and there a spruce clerk held dominion. At the sound of the
rustling silks of Mrs. Lovett, he raised his head from poring over the
cumbrous ledger; and then seeing, to use his own vernacular, it was "a
monstrous fine woman," he condescended to alight from his high stool,
and he demanded the lady's pleasure.

"Mr. Brown."

"Yes, madam. Certainly. Mr. B. is in his private room. What name shall I
have the pleasure of saying?"

"Lovett."

"Lovett? Yes, madam. Certainly--a-hem! Pray be seated, madam, if you
please."

Mrs. Lovett made a gesture of dissent, and the clerk went upon his
errand. He was scarcely absent a moment, and then holding open a door,
he said, with quite a chivalric air--

"This way, if you please, madam.--A monstrous fine woman," he added to
himself.

The door closed after Mrs. Lovett, and she was in the private room of
Mr. Anthony Brown.

"Ah, Mrs. Lovett. Pray be seated, madam. I am truly glad to see you
well. Well, to be sure, you do look younger, and younger, and younger,
every time I have the pleasure of a visit from you."

"Thank you, Mr. Brown, for the compliment. My visits have not been so
numerous as usual of late."

"Why, no ma'am, they have not; but I hope we are going to resume
business again in the old way?"

"Not exactly."

"Well, my dear madam, whatever it is that has procured me the honour and
the pleasure of this visit, I am sure I am very glad of it, and shall
not quarrel with it. He! he! Nice weather, Mrs. Lovett."

"Very."

"Ah, madam--ah, it was a world of pities to disturb the investments. It
was indeed. But ladies will be ladies."

"Sir?"

"I--I merely said ladies will be ladies you know. And indeed--he! he!--I
fully expected the interesting ceremony had come off before now, I did
indeed; and I should have wagered a new hat."

"Mr. Brown, what are you talking about?"

"About?"

"Yes, what do you mean?"

"Why, a--a--that is--the--a--a--about--concerning--the--my dear madam,
if I have inadvertently trodden upon your sensibilities, I--I really--"

"You really what?"

Mr. Brown looked perplexed. Mrs. Lovett looked a little furious.

"Sir," she said. "Before I explain the cause of my visit to you, I
insist upon knowing to what all your mysterious hints and remarks
allude. Speak freely and plainly, sir."

"Well then, madam, when Mr. Todd was last here, he said that you had at
last consented to reward years of devotion to you by becoming his, and
that the ceremony which was to make him a happy man by uniting him to so
much excellence and beauty, was to come off almost immediately, and that
that was the reason you had both agreed to withdraw all the money I had
in such snug and comfortable safe investments for you both. He! he! he!"




                            CHAPTER LXXVIII.
                            MUTUAL DEFIANCE.


Be so good, reader, as to picture to yourself the look of Mrs. Lovett.
We feel that one brief moment of imagination will do more to enable you
to feel and to see with

    "Your mind's eye"

her aspect, than as if we were to try a paragraph upon the subject. How
that he! he! he! of Mr. Brown's rung in her ears. It was at any time
almost enough to provoke a saint, and we need not say that this time of
all others was not one at which Mrs. Lovett's feelings were attuned to
gentleness and patience. Besides, she certainly was no saint. A rather
heavy inkstand stood upon the table between Mrs. Lovett and the
stock-broker. The next moment it narrowly escaped his head, leaving in
its progress over his frontispiece a long streak of ink down his visage.

"Wretch!" said Mrs. Lovett. "It is not true."

"Murder!" cried Mr. Brown.

Mrs. Lovett covered her face with both her hands for a moment, as
though, to enable her to think clearly, it were necessary to shut out
the external world; and then starting up, she advanced to the door of
the room.

"Murder!" said the stock-broker again.

"Silence!"

"A constable."

"If you dare to say one word of this interview, I will return, and tear
you limb from limb."

Mrs. Lovett opened the door of the private room with such a vengeance
that the nose of the clerk, who had been listening upon the other side,
was seriously damaged thereby. He started back with a howl of pain.

"Fool!" said Mrs. Lovett, as she passed him, and that was all she
condescended to say to him;--not by any means an agreeable reminiscence
of his last words with a lady to a gentleman who prided himself upon his
looks--rather!

Mrs. Lovett reached the street, and walked for some distance as though
street it was not. She was only roused to a sense of the world in which
she was, by hearing the sound of a voice calling--

"Mum--mum! Here yer is--mum--mum! woo!"

She turned and saw the coach in which she had come to the stock-broker.

"Going back, mum?" said the man.

"Yes, yes."

She stepped into the vehicle, looking more like an animated statue than
aught human. The man stood touching what was once the brim of a hat, as
he said--

"Where to, mum?"

Mrs. Lovett looked at him with an air of such abstraction that it was
quite clear she did not see him, but she heard the question, that came
to her like an echo in the air.

"Where to, mum?"

"To Fleet-street!"

Wheeze--creak--wheeze--creak--sway--sway, and the coach moved on again.
Mrs. Lovett sunk down among the straw with which the lower part of the
vehicle was plentifully strewed; and then, with her head resting upon
the seat, her throbbing temples clasped in her hands, she tried to
think. Yes--she called upon all that calmness--that decision--that
talent or tact, call it which you will that had saved her for so long,
not to desert her now in this hour of her dire extremity. She called
upon everything for aid but upon Heaven! and then, to ease her mind, she
cursed a little. Somebody says--

    "Swearing when the passions are at war,
    And light the chambers of the brain with angers flash.
    Has an effect quite moral--a kind of safety valve,
    Sparing what might be a tremendous crash!"

and so Mrs. Lovett got cooler, but not a whit the less determined, as
the crazy vehicle conveyed her to Fleet-street. She fully intended now
to measure conclusions with Todd. The distance was so short that even a
hackney-coach performed it with tolerable promptitude. Mrs. Lovett did
not wish to alight exactly at the door of Todd's shop; so she was rather
glad upon finding the coach stop at the corner of Fleet-street by the
old Market, and the driver demanded what number?

"This will do."

She was in the street in another minute. It took a minute to get out of
a hackney-coach. It was like watching the moment to spring from a boat
to the shore in a heavy surf. And yet, oh much vilified old
hackney-coach! how much superior wert thou to thy bastard son, the
present odious rattling, bumping, angular, bone-dislocating, horrid cab!
The driver received about double his fare, and a cab-man of the present
day would have gathered a mob by his vociferations, and blackguarded you
into a shop, if you had treated him in such a way. Nothing less than
three times what he's entitled to ever lights up the smallest spark of
civility in the soul of a modern cab-driver, but the old
hackney-coach-man was always content with double; so upon this occasion
Mrs. Lovett got a "thank ye, mum;" and a long straw that had taken an
affection for the skirt of her dress was arrested by jarvey and restored
to the coach again.

Mrs. Lovett walked to all appearance composedly up Fleet-street. Alas!
in this world who can trust to appearances? She had time, before
reaching the shop of Sweeney Todd, to arrange slightly what she should
say to that worthy. Of course, he could know nothing of her visit to the
City--of her interview with Mr. Brown, and she need not blurt that out
too soon. She would argue with him a little, and then she would be down
upon him with the knowledge of his knavery and treachery. She reached
the shop. No wonder she paused there a moment or two to draw breath. You
would have done the same; and after all, Mrs. Lovett was mortal. But she
did not hesitate for long. The threshold was crossed--the handle of the
door was in her hand--it was turned, and she stood in Todd's shop. Todd
was looking at something in a bottle, which he was holding up to the
light; and Mrs. Lovett saw, too, that a pretty genteel-looking lad was
poking about the fire, as if to rouse it.

"Ah, Mrs. Lovett!" said Todd, "how do you do? Some more of that fine
grease for the hair, I suppose, madam?" Todd winked towards the lad (our
dear friend Johanna), as though he would have said--"Don't appear to
know me too well before this boy. Be careful, if you please."

"I have something to say to you, Mr. Todd."

"Oh, certainly, madam. Pray walk in--this way, if you please, madam--to
my humble bachelor-parlour, madam. It is not fit exactly to ask a lady
into; but we poor miserable single men, you know, madam, can only do the
best we can. Ha! ha! This way."

"No."

"Eh? Not come in?"

"No. I have something to say to you, Mr. Todd; but I will say it here."

And now Mrs. Lovett gave a sidelong glance at the seeming boy, as much
as to say--

"You can easily send him away if you don't want him to listen to our
discourse."

Todd saw the glance; and the diabolical look that he sent to Mrs. Lovett
in return would indeed have appalled any one of less nerve than she was
possessed of. But she had come to that place wound up firmly to a
resolution, and she would not shrink. Todd had no resource.

"Charley," he said, "you can go and take a little turn--here is a penny
to spend; get yourself something in the market. But be sure you are back
within half an hour, for we shall have some customers, no doubt."

"Yes, sir."

Johanna did not exactly know whether to think that Mrs. Lovett came in
anger or friendship; but, at all events, she felt that it would be
hazardous to remain after so marked a dismissal from Todd, although she
would gladly have heard what the subject of the conversation between
those two was to be. Neither Mrs. Lovett nor Todd now spoke until
Johanna had fairly gone and closed the door after her. Then Todd, as he
folded his arms, and looked Mrs. Lovett fully in the face, said--

"Well?"

"The time has come."

"What time?"

"For the end of our partnership--the dissolution of our agreement. I
will go on no further. You can do as you please; but I am content."

"Humph!" said Todd.

"After much thought, I have come to this conclusion, Todd. Of course,
let me be where I may, the secret of our road to fortune remains hidden
here (she struck her breast as she spoke). All I want is my half of the
proceeds, and then we part, I hope, for ever."

"Humph!" said Todd.

"And--and the sooner we can forget, if that be possible, the past, the
better it will be for us both--only tell me where you purpose going, and
I will take care to avoid you."

"Humph!"

Passion was boiling in the heart of Mrs. Lovett; and that was just what
Todd wanted; for well he knew that something had gone amiss, and that as
long as Mrs. Lovett could keep herself calm and reasonable, he should
stand but a poor chance of finding out what it was, unless she chose, as
part of her arrangement, to tell it; but if he could but rouse her
passion, he should know all. Therefore was it that he kept on replying
to what she said with that cold insulting sort of "humph!"

"Man, do you hear me?"

"Humph!"

"You villain!"

"Humph!"

Mrs. Lovett took from a side-table an iron, which, in the mystery of
hair-dressing, was used for some purpose, and in a cool, calm voice, she
said--

"If you do not answer me as you ought, I will throw this through your
window, into the street; and the first person who comes in, in
consequence, I will ask to seize Todd, the murderer! and offer myself as
evidence of his numerous atrocities--contrite evidence--myself repenting
of my share in them, and relying upon the mercy of the crown, which, in
recompense for my denouncing you may graciously pardon me."

"And so it has come to this?" said Todd.

"You see and hear that it has."

It was rather a curious coincidence, that Mrs. Lovett had threatened
Todd that she would awaken public attention to his shop by the same
means that Sir Richard Blunt had recommended to Johanna to use in case
of any emergency--namely, throwing something through the window into the
street. If Mrs. Lovett had been goaded by Todd to throw the iron through
a pane of his glass, the officers of Sir Richard would quickly have made
their appearance to hear her denunciation of the barber. Unhappy woman!
If she had but known what the future had in store for her, that act
which she threatened Todd with, and which to her imagination seemed such
a piece of pure desperation, would have been the most prudent thing she
could have done. But it was not to be! There was a few moments silence
now between them. It was broken by Todd.

"Are you mad?" he said.

"No."

"Then, what, in the name of all that is devilish, has got possession of
you?"

"I have told you my determination. Give me twenty thousand pounds--you
may profit by the odd sum--give me that amount, and I will go in peace.
You know I am entitled to more; but there is no occasion for us to
reckon closely. Give me the sum I seek, and you will see me no more.

"You take me by surprise. Just step into the parlour, and--"

"No--no."

"Why not? Do you suspect--"

"I suspect nothing; but I am sure of much. Now, for me to set foot
within your parlour would be tantamount to the commission of suicide,
and I am not yet come to that--you understand me?"

Todd understood her. His hand strayed to a razor that lay partially open
close to him. Mrs. Lovett raised the iron.

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett And Todd Quarrel.]

"Beware!" she said.

Todd shrunk back.

"Pho! pho! this is child's play," he said. "You and I, Mrs. Lovett,
ought to be above all this--far above it. You want your half of the
proceeds of our joint business, and I must confess, at the moment, that
the demand rather staggered and distressed me; but the more I think of
it, the more reasonable it appears."

"Very well. Give it to me, then."

"Why, really now, my dear Mrs. Lovett, you quite forget that all our
joint savings are in the hands of Mr. Brown."

Todd glared at her as though he would read her very soul. She felt that
he more than suspected she knew all, and she adopted at once the bold
policy of avowing it.

"I do not forget anything that it is essential should be remembered,"
she said; "and among other things, I know that, by forging my name, you
have withdrawn the whole of the money from the hands of Brown. It is not
worth our while to dispute concerning your motives for such an act. Let
it suffice that I know it, and that I am here to demand my due."

"Ha! ha!"

"You laugh?"

"I do, indeed. Why, really now--ha! ha!--this is good; and so it is this
withdrawal of the money from Brown that has made all this riot in your
brain? Why, I withdrew it from him simply because I had certain secret
information that his affairs were not in the best order; and from a
fear, grounded upon that information, that he might be tempted to put
his hand into our purse, if he found nothing in his own."

"Well, well; it matters not what were your reasons. Give me my half. It
will be then out of your custody, and you will have no anxiety
concerning it, while I can have no suspicions."

"In a moment--"

"You will?"

"If I had it here; but I have re-invested the whole, you see, and cannot
get it at a moment's notice. I have moved it from the hands of Brown to
those of Black."




                             CHAPTER LXXIX.
       MRS. LOVETT FINDS THAT IN THIS WORLD THERE IS RETRIBUTION.


"Black?" said Mrs. Lovett.

"Yes, Black."

"Do you think me so--" green, she was going to say, but the accidental
conjunction of the colours--brown, black, and green--suddenly struck her
as ludicrous, and she altered it to foolish. "Do you think me so foolish
as for one moment to credit you?"

"Hark you, Mrs. Lovett," pursued Todd, suddenly assuming quite a
different tone. "You have come here full of passion, because you thought
I was deceiving you."

"You are."

"Allow me to proceed. It is, I believe, one of the penalties of all
associations for--for--why do I hesitate about a word?--guilty purposes
that there should be mutual distrust. I tell you again, that if I had
not moved the money from Brown, we should have lost it all."

"But why not come to me and get my signature?"

"There--really--was--not--time," said Todd, dropping his words out one
by one, with a _staccato_ expression.

"That is too absurd."

Todd shrugged his shoulders, as though he would have said--"Well, if you
will have it so, I cannot help it;" and then he said--

"I was in the City. I heard the rumour of the instability of Brown. I
flew into a shop. I wrote the order like a flash of lightning. I went to
Brown's like an avalanche, and I brought away the money, as if Heaven
and earth were coming together."

There was not the ghost of a smile upon Todd's face as he made use of
these superlatives. Mrs. Lovett began to be staggered.

"Then you have it here?"

"No, no!"

"You have. Tell me that you have, and that this Mr. Black you mentioned
is a mere delusion."

"Black may be no colour, but it is not a delusion."

"You trifle with me. Beware!"

"In a word then, my charming Mrs. Lovett, I dreaded to bring the money
here. I thought my house the most unsafe place in the world for it. I
and you stand upon the brink of a precipice--a slumbering volcano is
beneath our feet. Pshaw! Where is your old acuteness, that you do not
see at once how truly foolish it would have been to bring the money
here?"

"Juggler! Fiend!"

"Hard words, Mrs. Lovett."

She dashed her hand across her brow, as though by that physical effort
she could brush from her intellect the sophistical cobwebs that Todd had
endeavoured to move before it, and then she said--

"I know not. I care not. All I ask--all I demand--is my share of the
money. Give it to me, and let me go."

"I will."

"When?"

"This day. Stay, the day is fast going, but I will say this night, if
you really, in your cool judgment, insist upon it."

"I do. I do!"

"Well, you shall have. This night after business was over and the shop
was closed, I intended to have come to you, and fully planned all this
that you have unfortunately tortured yourself by finding out. I regret
that you think of so quickly leaving the profits of a partnership which,
in a short time longer, would have made us rich as monarchs. Of course,
if you leave, I am compelled."

"You compelled?"

"Yes. How can I carry on business without you? How could I, without your
aid, dispose of the--"

"Hush, hush!"

Mrs. Lovett shuddered.

"As you please," said Todd. "I only say, I regret that a co-partnership
that promised such happy results should now be broken up. However, that
is a matter for your personal consideration merely. If I had thought of
leaving, and being content with what I had already got, of course it
would have compelled you to do so. Therefore I cannot complain, although
I may regret your excuse of a right of action that equally belonged to
me."

"If I only thought you sincere--"

"And why not?"

"If I could only bring myself to believe that the money was once more
rightly invested--"

"You shall come with me yourself, if you like, in the morning to Mr.
Black the broker in Abchurch Lane, No. 3, and ascertain that all is
right. You shall there sign your name in his book, so that he may know
it, and then you will be satisfied, I presume?"

"Yes, I should then."

"And this dream of leaving off business would vanish?"

"Perhaps it would. But--but--"

"But what?"

"Why did you say to Brown that our union was to take place?"

"Because it was necessary to say something, to account for the sudden
withdrawal of the money; and surely I may be pardoned, charming Mrs.
Lovett, for even in imagination dreaming, that so much beauty was mine."

The horrible leer with which Todd looked upon her at this moment made
her shudder again; and the expression of palpable hatred and disgust
that her countenance wore, added yet another, and not the least
considerable, link to the chain of revenge which Todd cherished against
her in his cruel and most secret heart. While he was philosophising
about guilty associations producing a feeling of mutual distrust, he
should have likewise added that they soon produce mutual hatred. For a
few moments they looked at each other--that guilty pair--with
expressions that sought to read each other's souls; but they were both
tolerable adepts in the art of dissimulation. The silence was the most
awkward for Todd, so he broke it first by saying--

"You are satisfied, let me hope?"

"I will be."

"You shall be."

"Yes, when I have my money. Henceforward, Todd, we will have much
shorter reckonings, so shall we keep much longer friends. If you keep,
in some secret place, your half of the proceeds of our--our--"

"Business," said Todd.

Mrs. Lovett made a sort of gulph of the word, but she adopted it.

"If you, I say, keep your half of the proceeds of our business, and I
keep mine, I don't see how it is possible for us to quarrel."

"Quite impossible."

He began to strop a razor diligently, and to try its edge across his
thumb nail. Mrs. Lovett's passion--that overwhelming passion which had
induced her to enter Todd's shop, and defy him to a species of single
combat of wits--had in a great measure subsided, giving place to a
calmer and more reflective feeling. One of the results of that feeling
was a self-question to the effect of, "What will be the result of an
open quarrel with Todd?" Mrs. Lovett shook a little at the answer she
felt forced to give herself to this question. That answer was continued
in two words--mutual destruction! Yes, that would be the consequence.

"Todd," she said in a softened tone, "if I had forged your name, and
gone to the city and possessed myself of all the money, what would you
have thought? Tell me that."

"Just what you thought--that it was the most scandalous breach of faith
that could possibly be; but an explanation ought to put that right."

"It has."

"Then you are satisfied?"

"I am. At what time shall we go together, to-morrow morning, to Mr.
Black's in Abchurch Lane?"

"Name your own time," said Todd with the most assumed air in the world.
"Black lives at Ballam Hill, and don't get to business until ten; but
any time after that will do."

"I will come here at ten, then."

"So be it. Ah, Mrs. Lovett, how charming it is to be able to explain
away these little difficulties of sentiment. Never trust to appearances.
How very deceitful they are apt to be."

There was an air of candour about Todd, that might have deceived the
devil himself. Notwithstanding all his hideous ugliness--notwithstanding
his voice was of the lowest order, and notwithstanding that frightful
laugh, and that obliquity of vision that seemed peculiar to himself in
its terrible malignancy, there was a plausibility about his manner, when
he pleased, that was truly astonishing. Even Mrs. Lovett, with all her
knowledge of the man, felt that it was a hard struggle to disbelieve his
representations. What must it have been to those who knew him not?

"No," said Mrs. Lovett, "it don't do to trust to appearances."

She still held the iron in her hand.

"Nor," added Todd, giving the razor he had been putting an edge to, a
flourish, "nor will it do to listen always to the dictates of
compassion; for if we did, what miseries might we inflict upon
ourselves. Now, here is a cure in point."

"Where?"

"I allude to this little affair between us. If you had flown to
Bow-street, and there, to spite me, made a full disclosure of certain
little facts, why, the result would have been that we might both have
slept in Newgate to-night."

"Yes, yes."

"And then there would have been no recal. You could not have freed us by
telling the police that you had made a mistake. Then the gallows would
have risen up in our dreams."

"Horrible!"

"And it being easily discovered that it was no love of public justice or
feeling of remorse, that induced you to the betrayal, they would have
shown you no mercy, but you would have swung from the halter amid the
shouts and execrations of--"

"No, no!"

"I say yes."

"No more of this--no more of this. Can you bear to paint such a
picture--does it not seem to you as though you stood upon that scaffold,
and heard those shouts? Oh, horror, horror!"

"You don't like the picture?"

"No, no!"

"Ha! ha! Well, Mrs. Lovett, you and I had far better be friends than
foes; and above all, you ought by this time to feel that you could trust
me. The very fact that to all the world else I am false, ought to prove
to you that to you I am true. No human being can exist purely isolated,
and I am not an exception."

"Say no more--say no more. We will meet to-morrow."

"To-morrow be it, then."

"At ten."

"At ten be it, and then we will go to Black. Come now, since all this is
settled, take a glass of wine to our--"

"No, no. Not that. I--I am not very well, A throbbing head-ache--a--a.
That is, no!"

"As you please--as you please. By-the-by, did Black give me a receipt,
or did he say it was not usual? Stay a moment, I will look in my
secretaire. Sit down a moment in the shaving chair; I will be with you
again directly."

"We will settle that to-morrow," said Mrs. Lovett; "I feel convinced
that Black did not give you a receipt. Good-day."

She left the shop, unceremoniously carrying the iron with her. Todd
breathed more freely when Mrs. Lovett was gone. He gave one of his
horrible laughs as he watched her through the opening in his window.

"Ha! ha! Curses on her; but I will have her life first, ere she sees one
guinea of my hoard!"

He saw Charley Green crossing the road.

"Ah, the boy comes back. 'Tis well. I don't know how or why it is, but
the sight of that boy makes me uneasy. I think it will be better to cut
his throat and have done with him. I--"

Todd was suddenly silent. He saw two women pass, and as they did so, one
pointed to his shop and said something to the other, who lifted up her
hands as though in pious horror. One of these women was Mrs. Ragg, poor
Tobias's mother. The other was a stranger to Todd, but she looked like
what Mrs. Ragg had been, namely, a laundress in the temple.

"Curses," he muttered.

Johanna entered the shop. Todd caught up his hat.

"Charley?"

"Yes, sir."

"I shall be gone five minutes. Be vigilant. If any one should come, you
can say I have stepped a few doors off to trim Mr. Pentwheezle's
whiskers."

"Yes, sir."

Todd darted from the shop. Mrs. Ragg and her friend were in that deep
and earnest course that is a foe to rapid locomotion, so they had not
got many yards from Todd's door. He was rarely seen, however, for either
to--

    "Paint a moral or adorn a tale"

Mrs. Ragg turned suddenly and pointed to the shop, and then both the
ladies lifted up their hands as though in horror, after which they
resumed their deep and all-absorbing discourse as before. Todd followed
them closely, and yet with abundance of caution.




                             CHAPTER LXXX.
                  TODD TAKES A JOURNEY TO THE TEMPLE.


The two females took their way to the Temple. Todd had been quite right
in his conjectures. The friend of Mrs. Ragg was one of the old
compatriots of the laundress tribe; and that good lady herself,
although, while there was no temptation to do otherwise, she had kept
well the secret of her son's residence at Colonel Jeffery's, broke down
like a frail and weak vessel as she was with the weight of the secret
the moment she got into a gossip with an old friend. Now Mrs. Ragg had
only come into that neighbourhood upon some little errand of her own,
and with a positive promise of returning to the colonel's house as soon
as possible. She would have kept this promise, but that amid the
purlieus of Fetter-lane she encountered Martha Jones her old
acquaintance. One word begot another, and at last as they walked up
Fleet-street, Mrs. Ragg could not help, with many head-shakings and
muttered interjectional phrases, letting Martha Jones know that she had
a secret. Nay, as she passed Todd's shop, she could not help intimating
that she fully believed certain persons, not a hundred miles off, who
might be barbers or who might not, would some day come to a bad end in
front of Newgate, in the Old Bailey. It was at this insinuation that
Martha Jones lifted up her hands, and Mrs. Ragg lifted up hers in
sympathy. Todd had seen this action upon the part of the ladies. To
overhear what they were saying was to Todd a great object. That it in
some measure concerned him he could not for a moment doubt, since the
head-shaking and hand-uplifting reference that had been made to his shop
by them both as they passed, could not mean anything else. And so, as we
have said, he followed them cautiously, dodging behind bulky passengers,
so that they should not see him by any sudden glance backwards. One
corpulent old lady served him for a shield half up Fleet Street, until,
indeed, she turned into a religious bookseller's shop, and left him
nothing but thin passengers to interfere between him and the possibility
of observation. But Mrs. Ragg and her friend Martha Jones were much too
fully engaged to look behind them. In due course, they arrived opposite
to the Temple; and then, after much flurrying, in consequence of real
and supposed danger from the passing vehicles, they got across the way.
They at once dived into the recesses of the legally-learned Temple. Todd
dashed after them.

"Now, my dear Mrs. Ragg," said Martha Jones, "you must not say No. It's
got a beautiful head upon it, and will do you good."

"No--no. Really."

"Like cream."

"But, really, I--I--"

"Come, come, it ain't often you is in the Temple, and I knew very well
he don't miss a bottle now and then; and 'twix you and me and the pump,
I think we has as much a right to that beautiful bottled ale as Mr.
Juggas has, for I'd take my bible oath, he don't mean to pay for it,
Mrs. Ragg."

"You don't say so?"

"Yes, I does, Mrs. Ragg. Oh, he's a bad 'un, he is. Ah, Mrs. Ragg, you
don't know, nor nobody else, what takes place in his chambers of a
night."

"Is it possible?"

"Yes. I often say to myself what universal profundity he must be
possessed with, for he was once intended, he says, for the church, and I
heard him say he'd have stuck to it like bricks, if he could have heard
of any church that was intended for him."

"Shocking!"

"Yes, Mrs. Ragg. There's profundity for you."

Did Martha Jones mean profanity?

"Ah," interposed Mrs. Ragg, "we live in a world."

"Yes, Mrs. Ragg, we does; but as you was a saying?"

"Eh?"

"As you was a saying about somebody being hung, if rights was rights,
you know."

"Oh, dear, really you must not ask me. Indeed you must not."

"Well, I won't; but here we are, in Pump Court."

Todd darted into a door-way, and watched them up the staircase of No. 6,
in that highly classic locality. He slunk into the door-way, and by
taking a perspective glance up the staircase, he saw them stop upon the
first floor. He saw that they turned to the right. He darted up a few
stairs, and just caught sight of a black door. Then there was a sharp
sound, as of some small latch closing suddenly, after which all was
still. Todd ascended the stairs.

"Curses on them!" he muttered. "What can they mean by looking in such a
manner at my shop? I thought the last time I saw that woman, Ragg, that
she was cognizant of something. If now she, in her babbling, would give
me any news of Tobias--Pho! he is--he must be dead."

By this time Todd had got to the top of the first flight of stairs, and
stood upon the landing, close to several open doors--that is to say,
outer black heavy-looking doors--and within them were smaller ones,
armed with knockers.

"To the right," he muttered. "They went to the right--this must be the
door."

He paused at one and listened. Not a sound met his ears, and his
impatience began to get extreme. That these two women were going to have
a conference about him he fully believed; and that he should be so near
at hand, and yet not near enough to listen to it, was indeed galling. In
a few moments it became insupportable.

"I must and will know what they mean," he said. "My threats may wring
the truth from them; and if necessary, I should not scruple to silence
them both. Dead men tell no tales, so goes the proverb, and it applies
equally well to dead women."

Todd smiled. He was always fond of a conceit.

"Yes," he muttered, "every circumstance says to me now in audible
language, 'Go--go--go!' and go I will, far away from England. I feel
that I have not now many hours to spare. This _fracas_ with Mrs. Lovett
expedites my departure wonderfully, and to-morrow's dawn shall not see
me in London. But I will--I must ascertain what these women are about.
Yes, and I will do so at all risks."

A glance showed him that the act of temerity was a safe one. The door
opened upon a dingy sort of passage, in which were some mops, pails, and
brooms. At its further extremity there was another door, but it was not
quite shut, and from the room into which it opened, came the murmer of
voices. There were other doors right and left, but Todd heeded only that
one which conducted to the room inhabited. He crept along the passage at
a snail's pace; and then having achieved a station exactly outside the
door, he placed one of his hands behind one of his elephantine-looking
ears, and while his countenance looked like that of some malignant
demon, he listened to what was going on within that apartment. Martha
Jones was speaking.

[Illustration: Todd Listens And Learns A Dangerous Secret.]

"It is good, indeed, Mrs. Ragg, as you may well say, and the glasses
sticks to the table, when they is left over-night, showing, as Mr.
Juggus says, as it's a gluetenious quality this ale is."

"Sticks to the table?" said Mrs. Ragg.

"Yes, mum, sticks. But as you was a saying?"

"Well, Martha, in course I know that what goes to you goes no farther."

"Not a step."

"And you won't mention it to no one?"

"Not a soul. Another glass?"

"No, no."

"Only one. Nonsense! it don't get into your head. It's as harmless as
milk, Mr. Juggus says."

"But ain't you afeard, Martha, he may come in?"

"Not he, Mrs. Ragg. Chambers won't see him agin till night. Oh, he's a
shocking young man. Well, Mrs. Ragg, as you was a saying?"

"Well, it is good. As I was a saying, Martha, I don't feel uneasy now
about Tobias, poor boy; for if ever a poor lad, as was a orphan in a
half-and-half kind of way, seeing that I am his natural mother, and
living, and thanking God for the same, and health, leastways, as far as
it goes at this present moment of speakin, I--I--Bless me, where was I?"

"At Tobias."

"Oh, yes, I was at Tobias. As I was saying, if ever a poor body was well
provided for, Tobias is. The colonel--"

"The who?"

"The colonel, Martha--the colonel as has took the care of him, and who,
sooner or later, will have all the truth out of him about the _Toddey
Sween_."

"Who? Who?"

"Bless my poor head, I mean Sweeney Todd. Dear me, what am I thinking
of?"

"The barber?"

"Yes, Martha; that horrid barber in Fleet-street; and between you and
me, there isn't in all the mortal world a more horrid wretch living than
he is."

"I'm all of a shake."

"He--he--"

"Yes, yes. What--"

"He takes folks in and does for 'em."

"Kills 'em?"

"Kills 'em."

"What--why--what--? You don't mean to say--why--? Take another glass
Mrs. Ragg. You don't mean to say that Tobias says, that Todd the barber
is a murderer?--My dear Mrs. Ragg, take another glass, and tell us all
about it; only look at the cream on the top of it."

"You'll excuse me, Mrs. Jones, but the truth is, I aught not to say more
than I have said; and if the colonel only knew I'd said as much, I can
tell you, I think he'd be like a roaring lion. But Tobias is quite a
gentleman now, you see, and sleeps in as fine a bed as a nobleman could
have for love or money. The colonel is very good to him; and there never
was such a kind good--good--."

Mrs. Ragg began to run over with tears of ale.

"Bless me, and where does he live?"

"Who?"

"The colonel. The good, kind, colonel--colonel--a--a dear me, I forget
what you said his name was."

"Jeffery, and may his end be peace. He will get the reward of all his
good actions in another world than this, Martha. Ah, Martha, such men as
he can afford to smile at their latter ends.--No--no, I couldn't."

"Only half a glass; look at the--"

"No--no--"

"Cream on it."

"I must go, indeed. In course the colonel, since I have been his cook,
knows what cooking is, for though I say it, perhaps as should not, I am
a cook, and not a spiler of folks' victuals. Of course what's said, goes
no further. I know I can trust you, Martha."

"Oh dear, yes, in course. I'll just put on my shawl and walk a little
way with you, Mrs. Ragg. Dear me--dear me!"

"What is it, Martha?"

"Its a raining like cats and dogs, it is. Well, I never; what shall you
do, Mrs. Ragg? What shall you do?"

"Call a coach, I shall, Martha. The last words the colonel said to me
was, 'Mrs. Ragg, rather than there should be any delay in your return,'
says he, 'as Tobias may want you, call a coach, and I will pay for it.'"

Todd had only just time to dart down the staircase before the two ladies
made their appearance; and then hiding sometimes in doorways, and
sometimes behind columns and corners, he dodged them into Fleet-street.
A coach was duly called, and Mrs. Ragg by the assistance of Martha
Jones, was safely bestowed inside it. Todd heard distinctly the
colonel's address given to the coachman, who would have it twice over,
so that he should be sure he had it all right.

"That will do," said Todd.

He darted across the street, and made the best of his way to his shop
again. He listened at the door for a few moments before he entered, and
he thought he heard the sound of weeping. He listened more attentively,
and then he was sure. Some one was sobbing bitterly within the shop.

"It must be Charley," thought Todd.

He placed his ear quite close to the panel of the door, in the hope that
the boy would speak. Todd was quite an adept at listening, but this time
he was disappointed, for the sham Charley Green spoke not one word. Yet
the deep sobs continued. Todd was not in the best of tempers. He could
stand the delay no longer, and bouncing into the shop, he cried--

"What the devil is the meaning of all this? What is the meaning of it,
you young rascal? I suspect--"

"Yes, sir," said Johanna, looking Todd full in the face, "and so do I."

"You--you? suspect what?"

"That I shall have to have it out, for its aching distracts me. Did you
ever have the tooth-ache, sir?"

"The tooth-ache?"

"Yes, sir. It's--it's worse than the heart-ache, and that I have had."

"Ah!--humph! Any one been?"

"One gentleman, sir, to be shaved; he says he will call again."

"Very good--very good."

Todd took from his pocket the key of the back-parlour--that key without
which in his own possession he never left the shop; and then, after
casting upon Johanna a somewhat sinister and threatening look, he
muttered to himself--

"I suspect that boy. If he refuse to come into the parlour, I will cut
his throat in the shop; but if he come in I shall be better satisfied.
Charley? Come here."

"Yes, sir," said Johanna, and she walked boldly into the parlour.

"Shut the door."

She closed it.

"Humph," said Todd. "It is no matter. I will call you again when I want
you."




                             CHAPTER LXXXI.
                         JOHANNA IS ENCOURAGED.


Was Todd satisfied with Johanna's excuse about the toothache? Was he
satisfied of the good foible of the supposed Charley Green, by the
readiness with which she had come into the parlour? We shall see. If he
were not satisfied, he was staggered in his suspicions sufficiently to
delay--and delay just then was to Sweeney Todd--one of the most fatal
things that could be imagined. There are crumbs of consolation under all
circumstances. When Johanna was best sent out of the shop, upon the
occasion of the visit of Mrs. Lovett to Todd, she had scarcely got a
half dozen steps from the door of the barber's, when a man in passing
her, and without pausing a moment, said--

"Miss Oakley, be so good as to follow me."

Johanna at once obeyed the mandate. The man walked rapidly on until a
fruiterer's shop was gained, into which he at once walked.

"Mr. Oston," he said to a man behind the counter, "is your parlour
vacant?"

"Yes, Sir Richard, and quite at your service," said the fruiterer.

By this Johanna found that she had made no mistake, and that the person
she had followed was no other than Sir Richard Blunt, the magistrate,
who was interesting himself so much for her safety, as well as for the
discovery of what had befallen Mark Ingestrie. The fruiterer's parlour
was a prettily fitted up place, where a couple of lovers might in a very
romantic manner, if they chose, eat strawberries and cream, and quite
enjoy each other's blissful society, in whispered nothing the while. Sir
Richard handed Johanna a seat as he said--"Miss Oakley, I am very much
pleased, indeed, to have this opportunity of seeing you, and of saying a
few words to you."

"Ah, Sir, how much do I owe you."

"Nay, Miss Oakley, you owe me nothing. When once I happily become aware
of your situation, it becomes my duty as well as my inclination to
protect you in every way against what, I am sure you will forgive me,
for calling your rashness."

"Call it what you will, sir."

"Well, Miss Oakley, we will dismiss that part of the subject. Are you
going upon any errand, or have you a little time to spare."

"I have some time."

"Then it is a very proper thing that you should enjoy it in taking some
proper refreshment."

"I want nothing."

"Nay, but you shall have something whether you want it or not, before I
say any more to you about Todd and his affairs."

Johanna, whose mental excitement had prevented her completely from
feeling the amount of exhaustion, which otherwise must by that time have
come over her, would still have protested that she wanted nothing, but
Sir Richard Blunt opened the door of the parlour, and called out--

"Mr. Orton, is your daughter at home?"

"Yes, Sir Richard, Ann is up stairs."

"Very good. My young friend here can find the way, I dare say. Is it the
first floor?"

"Yes, don't you hear her practising upon her spinet."

The tinkling sounds of a spinet, then all the fashion; came upon their
ears, and Sir Richard, said to Johanna--

"Go up stairs, now, to that young lady. She is about your own age, and
her father's housekeeper. She will find you something to eat and drink,
and then come down to me, as soon as you can."

Sir Richard nodded to Mr. Orton, who nodded in return, and then Johanna
seeing that it was all right, ascended the staircase, and guided by the
sound of the spinet, soon found herself in a tolerably handsome room,
upon the first floor.

A young girl with a profusion of chesnut curls hanging down her back,
was seated at the spinet. Johanna made up to her at once, and throwing
her arms round her neck, said--

"And will you say a kind word to me?"

The girl gave a slight scream, and rose.

"Well, I'm sure, you impertinant--handsome--"

"Girl," said Johanna.

"Boy," faltered Miss Orton.

"No, girl," added Johanna. "Your father sent me to you, and Sir Richard
Blunt suggested it. Shall I leave you again."

"Oh, no--no," said Ann Orton, as she sprang towards Johanna, and kissed
her on both cheeks, "you are Miss Johanna Oakley."

"How is it that you know me?"

"My father is an old friend of Sir Richard's, and he has told us all
your story. How truly delighted I am to see you. And so you have escaped
from that odious Todd, and--"

"Immediate refreshment, my dear, and all the attention you can cram into
a very short space of time to Miss Oakley, my dear," said Mr. Orton,
just putting his head so far into the room as to make himself plainly
and distinctly heard.

"Yes, father, yes."

"How kind you all are," said Johanna.

"No--no--at least we wish to be, but what I mean is that we are no
kinder than we ought to be. My father is so good, I have no mother."

"And I, too, am motherless."

"Yes, I--I heard that Mrs. Oakley--"

"Lived, you would say; and yet am I motherless."

Johanna burst into tears. The sense of desolation that came over the
young girl's heart whenever she thought how little of a mother the
fanatical personage who owned that title was to her, generally overcame
all her firmness, as upon the present occasion. Ann flung her arms
around Johanna, and the two young creatures wept in unison. We will
leave them to their sacred intercourse.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Sir Richard Blunt remained in conversation with Mr. Orton for about a
quarter of an hour, and then both Johanna and Ann came down stairs.
Johanna looked calmer and happier. Ann had said some kind things to
her--such as none but a young girl can say to a young girl.

"I am ready," said Johanna.

"Ready for what?" enquired Sir Richard Blunt, with a look of earnest
affection in the face of the beautiful heroine--for if ever there were a
heroine, we really think Johanna Oakley was one, and we are quite sure
that you agree with us.

"For my mission," said Johanna, "I am ready."

"And can you really find courage to go again to that--that--"

Sir Richard could not find a fitting name for Todd's home, but Johanna
understood him, and she replied gently--

"I may not pause now. It is my duty."

"Your duty?"

"Yes. Oh, Mark--Mark, I cannot restore you from the dead, but in the
sacred cause of justice I may bring your murderer to the light of day.
It is my duty to do so much for your memory."

Ann turned aside to hide her tears. Mr. Orton, too, was much affected,
and there was an unwonted jar, as though some false note had had been
struck in voice of Sir Richard Blunt as he spoke, saying--

"Miss Oakley, I will not--I cannot deny that by your going back to
Todd's house, you may materially assist in the cause of justice. But yet
I advise you not to do so."

"I know you are all careful of my safety, while I--"

"Ah, Johanna," said Ann, "you do not know yet that you are so desolate
as to wish to die."

"Yes, yes--I am desolate."

"And so," added Sir Richard, "because you loved one who has been,
according to your judgment upon the circumstances that have come to your
knowledge, torn from you by death, you will admit no other ties which
could bind you to the world. Is that right? Is it like you?"

The tones of voice in which these words were uttered, as well as the
sentiment embodied in them, sunk deeply into Johanna's heart. Clasping
her hands together, she cried--

"Oh, no, no! Do no think me so inhuman. Do not think me so very
ungrateful."

"Had you forgotten, Arabella Wilmot? Had you forgotten your father? Nay,
had you forgotten the brave Colonel Jeffery?"

"No, no! I ought not to forget any, when so many have so kindly
remembered me, and you too, sir, I ought not, and will not forget you,
for you have been a kind friend to me."

"Nay, I am nothing."

"Seek not, sir, to disparage what you have done, you have been all
kindness to me."

Before he was aware of what she was about, Johanna had seized the hand
of Sir Richard Blunt, and for one brief moment touched it with her lips.
The good magistrate was sensibly affected.

"God bless me!" said Mr. Orton, "something very big keeps blocking up
the whole of my window."

They all looked, and as they were silent at that moment, they heard a
voice from the street, say--

"Come! Come, my dear! Don't set the water-works a-going. Always
remember, that easy does it. You come in here, and have something to
eat, if you won't go home. Lor bless me! what will they think has become
of me at the tower?"

"Why, it is Ben!" cried Johanna.

"Ben?" said Ann. "Who is Ben?"

"Hush! Stop," said Sir Richard, "I pray you, stop."

Johanna would have rushed out to speak to Ben, who certainly was at the
window of the fruiterer's shop, with Arabella Wilmot upon his arm,
endeavouring to persuade her to enter, and partake of some refreshment.

"I will bring him in," said Sir Richard. "Retire into the parlour, I beg
of you, Miss Oakley, for he will make quite a scene in the shop if you
do not."

Johanna knew well Ben's affection for her, and doubted not, but that as
Sir Richard said, he would not scruple to show it, even in the open
shop, probably to the great edification of the passers by. She
accordingly retired to the parlour with Ann. In a few moments, Sir
Richard Blunt ushered in both Ben and Arabella Wilmot. Arabella with a
shriek of joy, rushed into Johanna's arms, and then with excess of
emotion she fainted. Ben caught up Johanna fairly off her feet, as
though he had been dancing some little child, and holding her in a
sitting posture upon one arm, he said--

"Bless you! Easy does it. Easy I say--does--it. Don't you think I'm a
crying. It's a tea-chest has flew in my eye from that grocer's shop
opposite. Oh, you little rogue, you. Easy does it. What you have got
them what do you call 'ems on, have you?"

The kiss that Ben gave her might have been heard at Sweeney Todd's, and
then when prevailed upon to sit down, he would insist upon holding her
fast upon his knee.

"I must go," said Johanna, and then looking at Arabella, she added--"Let
me go, before she awakens from her transient forgetfulness to beg me to
stay."

Ben was furious at the idea of Johanna going back to Todd's, but Sir
Richard, overruled him, and after some trouble, got him to consent. Then
turning to Johanna, he said--

"The moment night comes on, you will have some visitors, and remember,
Miss Oakley, that St. Dunstan's is the watch-word. Whoever comes to you
with that in his mouth, is a friend."

"I will remember, and now farewell and God bless and reward you for all
your goodness to me. I will live for the many who love me yet, and whom
I love in this world."

                  *       *       *       *       *

Was it not a world of wonders that amid all this, Johanna did not go
mad? Surely something more than mortal strength must have sustained that
young and innocent girl in the midst of all these strange events. No
human power that she possessed, could have possibly prevented her mind
from sinking, and the hideous fascinations of an overcharged fancy from
breeding

    "Rude riot in her brain."

But there was a power who supported her--a power which from the
commencement of the world has supported many--a power which while the
world continues, will support many more, strengthening the weak and
trampling on the strong. The power of love in all the magic of its deep
and full intensity. Yes, this was the power which armed that frail and
delicate-looking girl with strength to cope with such a man--man shall
we call him? no, we may say such a fiend as Sweeney Todd. If it required
no small amount of moral courage to go in the first instance upon that
expedition--so fraught with danger, to Todd's shop--what did it require
now to enable her to return after having passed through much peril, and
tasting the sweets of friendship and sympathy? Surely any heart but
Johanna's must have shrunk aghast from ever again even in thought,
approaching that dreadful place. And yet she went. Yes upon her mission
of justice she went. To be sure, she was told that as far as human means
went, she would be upheld and supported from those without; but what
could that assure to her further than that if she fell she should not
fall unavenged? Truly, if some higher, some far nobler impulse than that
derived from any consciousness that she was looked after, had not
strengthened her, the girl's spirit, must have sunk beneath the weight
of many terrors. With a sad smile she once again crossed the threshold
of that house, which she now no longer suspected to be the murderer's
haunt. She knew it.




                            CHAPTER LXXXII.
                              TODD PLANS.


How she sped with Todd we are already aware. Let us take a peep at the
arch-demon in that parlour, which he considered his sanctuary, his city
of refuge as it were. At least Todd considered it to be such, whether it
was or not. He sits at a table, the table beneath which there was no
floor, and covering up his face with his huge hands, he sets about
thinking. Yes, that man now abandons himself to thought, as to how he
is, with a blaze of wickedness, to disappear from the scene of his
iniquities. It was not remorse that now filled his brain. It was not any
feeling of bitter heart-felt regret for what he had done that oppressed
him now. No such feeling might possibly find a home in his heart at the
hour of success, but now when he saw and felt that he was surrounded by
many difficulties, it had no home in his brain. But yet he thought that
they were only difficulties that now surrounded; he did not as yet dream
of positive danger. He still reasoned, as you have heard him reason
before, namely, that if anything beyond mere suspicion were entertained
regarding his mode of life, he would be at once apprehended. He thought
that somebody--most likely Colonel Jeffery--was trying to find out
something, and the fact that he, Todd, was there in his own parlour, a
free man, appeared to him proof-sufficient that nothing was found out.

"How fallacious!"

If he had but known that he was virtually in custody even then, as he,
indeed, really was, for Fleet-street was alive with officers and the
emissaries of the police. If he had but guessed so much for a moment
what a wild tumult would have been raised in his brain. But he knew
nothing and suspected little. After a time from generalizing upon his
condition, Todd began to be particular, and then he laid down, as it
were, one proposition or fact which he intended should be the groundwork
of all in other proceedings. That proposition was contained in the
words--

"Before the dawn of to-morrow I must be off!" "That's settled," said
Todd, and he gave the table a blow with his hand. "Yes, that's settled."

The table creaked ominously, and Todd rose to peep into the shop to see
what his boy was doing. Charley Green, alias, Johanna Oakley, was
sitting upon a low stool reading a bill that some one had thrown into
the shop, and which detailed the merits of some merchandize. How far
away from the contents of that bill which she held before her face, were
her thoughts?

"Good," said Todd. "That boy, at all events, suspects nothing, and yet
his death is one of the things which had better not be left to chance.
He shall fall in the general way of this place. What proper feeling
errand-boy would wish to survive his master's absence. Ha!"

Of late Todd had not been very profuse in his laughs, but now he came
out with one quite of the old sort.

The sound startled himself, and he retired to the table again.

By the dim light he opened a desk and supplied himself with writing
materials; the twilight was creeping on, and he could only just see.
Spreading a piece of paper before him, he proceeded to make a memoranda
of what he had to do.

It was no bad plan this of Todd's, and the paper, when it was finished
was quite a curiosity in its way.

It ran thus--

_Mem._--To go to Colonel Jeffery's, and by some means get into the house
and murder Tobias.

_Mem._--To pack off goods to the wharf where the Hamburg vessel, called
the Dianna, sails from.

_Mem._--To arrange combustibles for setting fire to the house.

_Mem._--To cut Charley Green's throat, if any suspicion arise--if not to
let him be smothered in the fire.

_Mem._--To have a letter ready to post to Sir Richard Blunt, the
magistrate, accusing Mrs. Lovett of her own crimes, and mine likewise.

"I think that is all," said Todd.

He folded the paper and placed it in his bosom, after which he came out
of the parlour into the shop, and called to Johanna.

"Charles?"

"Yes, sir."

"Go to the market, and get me a couple of stout porter--I want something
carried a short distance."

"Yes, sir."

Away went Johanna, but before she got half way down to Fleet Market she
met Sir Richard, who said--

"What is it?"

"He wants a couple of porters to carry something."

"Very well, get them. Depend upon me."

"I do, sir. I feel now in good heart to go through with anything, for
you are near to me, and I know that I am safe."

"You are safe. It will need to be some very extraordinary circumstances,
indeed, that could compromise you. But go at once for these porters; I,
and my men will take good care to find where they go to."

There was no difficulty in finding parties in abundance at the end of
Fleet Market, and Johanna speedily returned, followed by two sturdy
fellows. Todd had quite a smile upon his face, as he received them.

"This way," he said--"This way. I hope you have been lucky to day, and
have had plenty of work."

"No, master," said one, "we haven't, I'm sorry to say."

"Indeed," added Todd. "Well, I am very glad I have a little job for you.
You see these two little boxes. You can carry one each of you, and I
will go with you and show you where to."

One of the porters raised one of the boxes, and then he gave a long
whistle, as he said--

"I say, master is there penny pieces or paving stones in this here, its
deuced heavy, that it is."

"And so is this, Bill," said the other. "Oh, my eyes ain't it. There
must be a quarter of a pound of goose feathers in here."

"Ha! ha!" said Todd, "How funny you both are."

"Funny?"

"Yes, to be sure, but come. This will put strength into you if you had
none before."

He took a bottle and glass from a cupboard, and gave each of the men a
full measure of such frightfully strong spirits, that they winked again,
and the tears came into their eyes, as they drank it.

"Now shoulder the little boxes, and come along," he said, "and I tell
you what I'll do. If you step in here in the evening, and I should
happen to be at home, I'll give each of you a shave for nothing, and
polish you off in such a manner, that you will recollect it as long you
live."

"Thank you, master--thank you. We'll come."

One of the porters helped his companion with the chest on to his back
and head, and Todd then lent a helping hand with the other.

"Charley," he said. "I shall be back in a quarter of an hour."

Away he went, preceding the porter by some half dozen steps only, but
yet ever and anon keeping a wary eye upon the two chests, which
contained cash, and jewels, sufficient to found a little kingdom. If he
got clear off with those two chests only, he felt that he would not give
himself much uneasiness about what was left behind. But was Todd going
to trust these two porters from out his own immediate neighbourhood,
with the secret of the destination of the boxes? No. He was by far too
crafty for that. After proceeding some distance, he took them round the
unfrequented side of St. Paul's Church yard, and stopping suddenly at
the door of a house that was to let, he said--

"This will do."

"In here, master."

"This will do. Put them down."

The porters complied, and Todd set down upon one of the boxes, as he
said--

"How much?"

"A shilling each of us, master."

"There's double the money, and now be off, both of you, about your
business."

The porters were rather surprised, but as they considered themselves
sufficiently paid, they made no objection, and walked off with
considerable alacrity, leaving Todd, and his treasure in the street.

"Now for a coach," he muttered. "Now for a coach. Here boy"--to a ragged
boy who was creeping on at some short distance. "Earn a penny by
fetching me a coach directly."

The boy darted off, and in a very few minutes brought Todd a hackney
coach. The boxes, too, were got upon it by the united efforts of Todd,
the coachman, and the boy, and then, and not till then did Todd give the
correct address of the wharf in Thames Street from which the Hamburg
ship was going, and in which he fully intended to embark that night. The
ship was advertised to sail at the turn of the tide, which would be
about four o'clock in the morning. All this did not take long to do. The
coach rumbled along Thames Street, but Todd was not aware that Mr.
Crotchet had got up behind the vehicle, but such was the fact, and when
the lumbering old machine stopped at the wharf, that gentleman got down,
and felt quite satisfied with the discovery he had made. "He's a trying
of it on," soliloquised Mr. Crotchet in the bolting line, "but it ain't
no manner of a go. He'll swing, and he can't help it, if he were to book
himself to the moon, and there was a coach or a ship as went all the
way, and no stoppages."

"_Mem_," said Todd to himself. "To go to Colonel Jeffery's and murder
Tobias--Ha!"

"Lor!" said the coachman, "was that you, sir?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why as made that horrid sort of noise."

"Mind your business, my friend, and tell me if you can take me quickly
to Islington, for I have no time to lose."

"Like the wind, sir, you can go with these here _osses_," replied the
coachman, "did you ever see sich bits o' blood, sir, one on 'ems blind,
and' t'other on 'em is deaf, which is advantages as you don't get in one
pair."

"Advantages?"

"Lor bless you, yes, sir. The blind 'un goes unknown quick, cos you
sees, sir, he thinks he's only in some dark place, and in course he
wants to get out on it as soon as he can."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, sir, and the deaf 'un, he goes quick too, cos as he hears nothink,
he thinks as there never was sich a quiet place as he's go's, and he
does it out o' feeling and gratitude, sir, yer sees."

"Be quick then, and charge your own price."

Todd sprang into the vehicle, and stimulated by the idea of charging his
own price, the coachman certainly did make the bits of blood do wonders,
and in quite an incredibly short space of time, Todd found himself in
the immediate neighbourhood of the Colonel's house. It was now getting
dark, but that was what he wished. He dismissed the coach, and took from
the angle of a wall, near at hand, a long and earnest look at the
Colonel's house, and as he did so dark and hideous thoughts concerning
Tobias passed through his mind.




                            CHAPTER LXXXII.
                        TODD VISITS THE COLONEL


"Well, Tobias," said Colonel Jeffery, as he entered the pretty, cheerful
room into which the now convalescent boy had been removed. "Well,
Tobias, how are you now?"

"Much better, sir. Oh, sir,--I--I--"

"What would you say?"

"I feel that when I see you, sir, I ought to say so much to convince you
of how truly, and deeply grateful I am to you, and yet I can scarcely
ever say a word about it. I pray for your happiness, sir, indeed I do.
Your name and my mother's, and--and Minna Gray's, are always uttered to
God by me."

"Now, Tobias," said Colonel Jeffery gravely. "I am quite satisfied that
as regards all that has passed, you feel as you ought to feel, and for
my own part, I beg you to feel and to know that your saying anything
about it only distresses me."

"Distresses you, sir?"

"Yes, it does, indeed. I see your eyes are upon the door. You expect
Minna, to day, I am sure."

"Yes, sir,--she--she--my mother was to bring her, sir."

A ringing at a bell now came upon Tobias's ear, and his colour went and
came fitfully.

"You are still very weak, my poor boy," said the colonel, "but you are
certainly much improved. Do you feel any confusion in your head now?"

"None at all, only when I think of Todd suddenly, ever it makes me feel
cold and sick, and something seems to rush through my heart."

"Oh, that will go away. That is nothing. There, I will draw up the blind
for you. The evening is coming, and the sky is overclouded. You can see
better now, and there is one coming whom I know you wish to lose no
sight of."

"I hear her foot upon the stairs," said Tobias.

"Do you?--It is more than I do."

"Ah, sir, the senses are sharpened, I think, by illness."

"Not so much as by love. Tobias! do you hear her footstep now?"

"Yes, and it is like music."

He had his head on one side in an attitude of listening; and then with
joy sparkling from every feature of his face, he spoke again--

"She comes--she comes. Ah, she comes fast. My own--my beautiful. She
come--she comes."

"This is real love," said the colonel, and he stepped from the room.
Nearly on the landing at the head of the stairs, he met Minna Gray.

"Welcome," he said as he held out his hand to her. "You will find your
young friend up and much better."

Minna could only look her thanks. Mrs. Ragg was following her, and as
the ascent of stairs was always rather a task to that good Lady, she was
making a noise like a stranded grampus in breathing.

"Ah, colonel," she said, "young legs get up stairs faster than old ones,
sir, as you see. Well--well, there was a time when first I knew poor
dear Ragg, who is of course dead and gone, quite premature."

"Exactly, Mrs. Ragg," said the colonel, as he rapidly descended the
stairs.

"Did you ever, my dear, know such a strange man?" said Mrs. Ragg to
Minna.

"Who?"

"The colonel, to be sure. So soon as I begin to tell him any little what
do you call it. No it ain't _nannygoat_--that's ridiculous.
It's--it's--what is it?"

"Anecdote do you mean, Mrs. Ragg?"

"Yes, to be sure. Well, as I was a saying, no sooner do I begin telling
him a little nannygoat--no, I mean anecdote, than off he is like a
shot."

Minna smiled to herself, and she was far from wondering that the colonel
was off like a shot, for well she knew, that when Mrs. Ragg did begin
anything concerning the late Mr. Ragg, it usually lasted three quarters
of an hour at the very least.

"Minna, Minna!" called Tobias.

"I am here, Tobias."

In another moment she was in the room. Truly it was a pleasant thing to
see the face of Tobias, when, his sunshine, as he called Minna, came
close to him, and in her soft voice asked him if he was better.

"Don't mind me," said Mrs. Ragg, "I am going to darn a stocking or two.
that's all. Just say what you both like. Young folks will be young
folks. Bless me, I recollect just as if it were only yesterday, when I
used to speak to poor departed Mr. Ragg, who is, premature, dead and
gone, in a manner of speaking. Ah, dear me! How the world goes round and
round--round and round, continually."

Tobias and Minna were so well accustomed to the garrulity of Mrs. Ragg,
and so well aware that she required no answer, that they let her talk
on, and did not mind her, as she requested they would not; and so the
evening grew apace, and the light gradually began to wane, as those two
young loving hearts spoke together of the future, and indulged in that
day dream of happiness which can only belong to youth and love.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Todd is skulking round the angle of the garden wall, from which he can
get a view of the colonel's house, and yet not be seen himself.

The more he looked the more the desire grew upon him, notwithstanding
the immense risk he ran of personal detection, by so doing, to get into
the house, and finish the career of poor Tobias. He would have had no
particular objection rather to have taken the life of Mrs. Ragg, if it
could be easily and comfortably done.

It has been said that there are folks in the world who never forgive any
one for doing them a kindness; and such paradoxical views of human
nature have been attempted to be laid down as truths; but whether this
be so or not, is still to be proved, although it is certain that nothing
stirs the evil passions of men who will inflict injury upon the
innocent, as to find themselves baffled in their villany. From that
moment the matter becomes a personal affair of vengeance.

Hence, since Todd had become thoroughly aware that Tobias had escaped
from the death he had intended for him at the mad-house, his rage
against the boy knew no bounds.

Indeed, the reader will conclude that it must have been a feeling of no
ordinary strength, that, at such a busy and ticklish time, would take
Todd to the colonel's house at all.

It was revenge--bitter, uncompromising revenge!

Now, you must know the colonel's house was one of those half-villa,
half-mansion-like residences, that are so common in the neighbourhood of
London. There was a kind of terrace in the front, and a garden with
flowering shrubs, that had a pretty enough appearance, and which at
night afforded abundance of shelter.

It was by this front garden that Todd hoped to reach the house.

When it was nearly dark, he slunk in, crouching down among the trees and
shrubs, and crawling along like a serpent as he was. He soon came to a
flight of stone steps that led to the kitchens.

By the time Todd had got thus far, some of her domestic duties had
called Mrs. Ragg to the lower part of the house. He saw by the
fire-light that some one was going about the kitchen, close to the foot
of the stone steps; but he could not exactly, by that dim and uncertain
radiance, take upon himself to say that it was Mrs. Ragg.

She soon lit a candle, though, and then all was clear. He saw the good
lady preparing divers lights for the upper rooms.

While Todd was half-way down the stone steps, peeping into the kitchen,
one of the other servants of the house came into that receptacle for
culinary articles, and commenced putting on a bonnet and shawl. Todd
could not hear one word of what was said by Mrs. Ragg and this young
woman who was getting ready to go out; but he saw them talk, and by
their manner he felt convinced that it was only upon ordinary topics.

If the young woman left the house by the steps upon which Todd was, and
which it was more than likely she would do, his situation would be
anything but a pleasant one, and discovery would be certain.

To obviate the chance of this, he stepped back, and crouched down in
among the shrubs in the garden.

He was not wrong in his conjectures, for in a few moments the servant,
who was going out, ascended the steps, and passed him so closely, that
by stretching out his hand, he could, if he had been so minded, have
touched her dress. In a short time she was out of ear-shot.

Todd emerged from his concealment again, and crept down the steps, and
once more peeped into the kitchen.

Mrs. Ragg was still busy with the candles.

He was just considering what he should do, when he heard the tramp of
horses' feet in the road above. He ascended sufficient of the steps to
enable himself to get a peep at what was going on. He saw a groom well
mounted, and leading another horse. Then no other than Colonel Jeffrey
himself, although he did not of his own knowledge, feel assured that it
was him, come out at the front door of the house and mounted.

"Now, William," said the colonel, "we must ride sharply."

"Yes, sir," said the groom.

Another moment and they were gone.

"This is lucky," said Todd. "It is not likely that there is any other
room in the house; and if not, I have the game in my own hands."

He crept down the remainder of the stone steps, and placed his ear quite
close to the kitchen window.

Mrs. Ragg was enjoying a little conversation to herself.

"Ah!" she said, "it's always the way--girls will be girls; but what I
blame her for is, that she don't ask the colonel's leave at once, and
say--'Sir, your _disorderly_ has won my _infections_, and may he come
here and take a cup of tea?'"

This was Greek to Todd.

"What is the old fool talking about," he muttered. "But I will soon give
her a subject that will last for her life."

He now arrived at the door of the kitchen. It was very unlikely to be
locked or otherwise fastened, so immediately after the young woman, who
had left the house, and passed so close to him, Todd. Yet he listened
for a few moments more, as Mrs. Ragg kept making observations to
herself.

"Listeners hear no good of themselves, says the proverb, and at all
events it was verified in this instance."

"_Lor' a mussy_," ejaculated Mrs. Ragg, "how my mind do run upon that
horrid old ugly monster of a Todd to day. Well, I do hope I shall never
look upon his frightful face again, and how awful he did squint, too.
Dear me, what did the colonel say he had with his vision--could it be--a
something _afixity_? No that isn't it."

"Obliquity!" said Todd, popping his head in at the kitchen door. "It was
obliquity, and if you scream or make the least alarm, I'll skin you, and
strew this kitchen with your mangled remains!"

Mrs. Ragg sank into a chair with a melo-dramatic groan, that would have
made her fortune over the water in domestic tragedy if she could have
done it so naturally. Todd kept his eye upon her. That basilisk-like
eye, which had fascinated the good woman often, and this time it acted
as a kind of spell, for truly might he have said, or rather might some
one have said for him,

    "He held her with his glittering eye."

Todd's first care now was to get between Mrs. Ragg and the kitchen door,
lest upon some sudden impulse she should rise and flee. Then he folded
his arms, and looked at her calmly, and with such a devilish smile as
might have become Mephistopheles himself, while contemplating the ruin
of a soul. He took from his pocket a razor.

"Mercy," gasped Mrs. Ragg.

"Where is Tobias?"

[Illustration: Todd Horrifies Mrs. Ragg.]

"Up stairs. Back room, second floor, looking into the garden."

"Alone?"

"No, Minna Grey is with him."

"Listen to me. If you stir from here until I come to you again, I will
not only murder you, but Tobias likewise, and every one whom I meet with
in this house. You know me, and can come to some opinion as to whether
or not I am a man likely to keep my word. Remain where you are; move
not, speak not, and all will be well."

Mrs. Ragg slowly slid off her chair, and fell to the floor of the
kitchen, where she lay, in what seemed a swoon.

"That will do as well," said Todd as he glanced at her, "and yet as I
return." He made a movement with his hand across his throat to indicate
what he would do, and then feeling assured that he had little or,
indeed, no opposition to expect in the house, he left the kitchen, and
walked up stairs.

When he reached the top of the kitchen stairs he paused to listen. All
was very still in the house.

"'Tis well," he said "tis well. This deed of blood shall be done, and
long before it can be thought that it was I who struck the blow, I shall
be gone."

Alas! After passing through so much! After being persued in so almost a
miraculous manner from the murderous intentions of Todd, backed by the
cupidity of Fogg, and his subordinate Watson, was poor Tobias yet to die
a terrible death as a victim to the cruel passions of his relentless
persecutor? No, we will not yet believe that such is to be the fate of
poor honest Tobias, although at the present time, his prospects look
gloomy. Todd may, and no doubt has taken as worthy lives, but we will
hope that the hand of Providence will prevent him from taking this one.
He reached the landing of the first floor, and he paused to listen
again. He thought this time, that he heard the faint sound of voices
above, but he was not quite sure. Otherwise all was quiet. This was a
critical situation for Todd. If any one, who was a painter of pictures
or of morals had but seen him, Sweeney Todd, as he there stood, they
would no longer have doubted either that there was a devil, or that some
persons in this world, were actuated by a devilish fiend. He looked the
incarnate fiend!--the Mephistopheles of the imagination, such as he is
painted by the German enthusiast. His laugh too? Was not that satanic?
He set himself to listen to the voices that he heard in that quiet rooms
and the sounds, holy and full of affection as they were, awakened no
chord of answering feeling, in that bold, bad man's breast. He stood
apart from human nature, a solitary being. A wreck upon the ocean of
society

    "None loving, and by none beloved."

Who would be Sweeney Todd, for all the wealth, real or fabled, of a
million Californias?

"He is here," he said, "I know his voice. Tobias is here. Ah! he
mentions the name of God. Ha! He is more fitting to go to that heaven he
can talk of so glibly, but there is none. There is none! No, no! all
that is a fable."

Of course Todd could not believe in a divinity of goodness and mercy. If
he had, what on earth could have saved him from absolute madness?




                            CHAPTER LXXXIII.
                          TOBIAS IN JEOPARDY.


"And so you do love me, Minna?" said Tobias.

How his voice shook like a reed swayed by the wind, and yet what a world
of melody was in it.

"Can you ask me to say yes?" was the reply of the fair young creature by
his side. "Can you ask me to say yes, Tobias?"

"It seems to me," said Tobias, "as though it would be such a joy to hear
you say so, Minna, and yet I will not ask you."

"How well you have got, Tobias. Your cheek has got its old colour back
again. The colour it had long before you knew there was such a man as
Sweeney Todd in the world. Your eyes are bright too, and your voice has
its old pleasant sound."

"Used it to be pleasant to you, Minna?"

She held up her hand, and shook her head laughingly.

"No questions, Tobias! No questions. I will confess nothing."

"Stop!" said Tobias, as he put himself into an attitude of listening,
"what was that, I thought I heard something? It was like a suppressed
growl. I wish the colonel would come home. Did you not hear it, Minna?"

Minna had heard it, but she did not say she had.

"Where did it come from, Tobias?"

"From the stair-head, Minna."

"Oh, it is some accidental noise, such as is common to all houses, and
such as always defy conjecture and explanation, and being nothing and
meaning nothing, always comes to nothing. Yet I will go and see. Perhaps
a door has been left open, and is banging to and fro by the wind, and if
so it will only vex you to hear it again, Tobias."

It was Todd, who upon hearing the soft and tender speeches from the
young lovers, had not been able to suppress a growl, and now that he had
heard Minna Grey talk of coming to look what it was, he felt the
necessity of instantly concealing himself somewhere.

It was not likely she would come down the stairs, so Todd adopted an
original mode of keeping himself out of sight.

He descended steps sufficient, that by laying at full length along them,
his head did not reach the top, and in the darkness he then considered
that he should be quite safe from the casual glance, that in all
likelihood, merely to satisfy Tobias, Minna would give outside the room
door.

Todd thought by her manner she had heard nothing.

"No, no, Minna," said Tobias, "there is no occasion. It is nothing, I
dare say, and I don't like you to be out of my sight a moment."

"It is only a moment."

She rose, and proceeded to the door.

An unknown feeling of dread, she knew not why, was at the heart of
Minna. Certainly the slight sound she had heard, and that too in the
house of Colonel Jeffery, was not sufficient to warrant such a feeling,
and yet there, at her heart, it sat brooding.

She stood for a moment at the door.

It was only for a moment.

"How foolish I am," she thought, and then she passed out on to the
landing, where she stood for a moment glancing round her.

"It is nothing, Minna," called out Tobias, "or shall I try and come. I
feel quite strong enough to do so."

"Oh, no--no! It is nothing."

Minna stepped lightly back and sat down. She clasped her hands very
tight indeed together, and then placed both upon her breast.

_She had seen Todd._

Yes, Minna Grey had seen the man that had been, and who was for all she
knew to the contrary still to be, the bane of Tobias's existence. The
clear eyes of youth had noticed the lumbering figure as it lay upon the
stairs before them.

And she did not scream--she did not cry for help--she did not faint, she
only crept back as we have seen, and held her hands upon her heart, and
looked at Tobias.

There was no mistaking Todd. Once seen he was known for ever. Like some
hideous picture, there dwelt the memory of Sweeney Todd upon the young
imagination of the fair Minna Grey.

Once before, a long time ago, so it seemed to her, she had seen him in
the Temple skulking up an old staircase. From that moment the face was
Daguerreotyped upon her brain.

It was never to be forgotten, and with the face comes the figure too.
That she saw upon the stairs.

Alas! Poor Minn!

"And so it was nothing but one of those odd accidents that will occur in
defiance of all experience, and calculation," said Tobias.

"Just that," replied Minna.

"Ah, my dear Minna. We are so safe here. It always seems to me as though
the very air of this house, belonging as it does to such a man, so full
of goodness as the colonel is, such that nothing very bad could live in
it for long."

"I--I hope so--I think so.--What a calm and pleasant evening it is,
Tobias, did you see the new book of the seasons, so full of pretty
engravings in the shape of birds and trees, and flowers, that the
colonel has purchased."

"New book?"

"Yes, it lies in his small study, upon this floor. I will fetch it for
you, if you wish it, Tobias?"

"Nay, I will go."

"You are still weak. Remain in peace upon the couch, dear Tobias, and I
will go for you."

Before she left the room, she kissed the forehead of the boy. A tear,
too, fell upon his hand.

"Who knows," she thought, "that I shall ever see him in life again?"

"Minna, you weep."

"Weep? No--no--I am so--so happy."

She hastily left the room. Todd had heard what had passed, and had
turned to hide himself again. The young girl knew that she passed the
murderer within a hair's breadth. She knew that he had but to stretch
out his right hand and say--"Minna Gray, you are my victim!" and his
victim she would have become. Was not that dreadful? And she so young
and so fair--so upon the threshold, as it were, of the garden of her
existence--so loving, and so well-beloved. She felt for a moment, as she
crossed the landing--just for a moment as though she were going mad. But
the eye of the Omnipotent was upon that house. She staggered on. She
made her way into a bed-room. It was the colonel's. Above the
mantel-shelf, supported on a small bracket, was a pair of pistols. They
were of a large size, and she had heard from the current gossip of the
house, how they were always loaded, and how the servants feared to touch
them, and how even they shrank from making the bed, lest the pistol from
some malice aforethought, or from something incidental to such watching,
should go off at once of their own accord, and inevitably shoot whoever
chanced to be in the room. Minna Gray laid her hand upon the dreaded
weapons.

"For Tobias! for Tobias!" she gasped.

Then she paused to listen. All was still as the grave. Todd was not yet
ready for the murder, or he wished to take their lives both together,
and in the one room. That was more probable. Then she began to think
that he must have some suspicion, and that it was necessary upon her
part to do something more than merely make no alarm. The idea of singing
occurred to her. It was a childish song that she had been taught, when a
pretty child, that she now warbled forth a few lines of--

    "If I were a forest bird,
      I'd shun the noisy town;
    I'd seek the verdure of the spring
      The dear autumnal brown.
    And even when the winter came,
      By sunny skies bereft,
    I'd sleep in some deep distant cave,
      Which wanton winds had left."

She crossed the landing.

"Minna," said Tobias. "My Minna!"

"I come."

She passed into the room, and the moment she crossed the threshold--she
turned her face to it and presented both the pistols before her. Then as
she wound, inch by inch, into the centre of the room, all her power of
further concealment of her feelings deserted her, and she could only
say, in a strange choking tone--

"Todd!--Todd!--Todd!"

"No--no--no! Oh, God, no!" cried Tobias.

"Todd!--Todd!--Todd!"

"No--no! Help! help!"

"D--n!" said Sweeney Todd, as he dashed open the door of the chamber,
and stood upon the threshold with a glittering knife in his right hand.

"Hold!" shrieked Minna Gray. "Another step, murderer, and I send you to
your God!"

Todd waited. He could almost see down the barrels of the large pistols,
which a touch of the young girl's finger would explode in his face. With
a sharp convulsive cry, Tobias fell to the floor. The blood gushed from
his mouth, and he lay bereft of sensation.

[Illustration: Heroic Conduct Of Minna Gray.]

"Away!" cried Minna. "Monster, away! Another moment, and as Heaven hears
me, I will fire; once--twice--"

Todd darted to the stair head, but he darted away again quicker than he
had gone there; for who, to his horror, should he meet, advancing with
great speed up the steps, but Mrs. Ragg, who had managed to get out of
the kitchen, and who bore, as a weapon of offence and defence, the large
kitchen poker, which was of a glowing red heat. Todd caught a touch of
it on his face.

"Oh, you villain of the world!" cried Mrs. Ragg, "I'll teach you to come
here murdering people. My poor Tobias is no more, I know; but I'll take
the law of you, I will. Murder! murder! Police! Colonel!"

With an alacrity, that was far beyond to all appearance Mrs. Ragg's
powers, that good lady pursued Todd with the red-hot poker. He dared not
take refuge in Tobias's room, for there stood Minna with the pistols in
her hand, so he darted up the first flight of stairs he saw, which led
to the top of the house. Mrs. Ragg pursued him; but when she got to the
head of the stairs, Minna pressed too hard upon the hair-trigger of one
of the pistols, and off it went. Mrs. Ragg fully believed herself shot,
and rolled down the stairs, poker included; while Todd, labouring under
the impression that the shot was at him, became still more anxious to
find some place of refuge. Upon the landing, which he was not a moment
in reaching, he found a great show of doors; for he was, in fact, upon
the floor from which all the sleeping rooms of the servants opened. It
was quite a chance that the first one he bounced into was one that had
in the roof a little square trap-door, facetiously called "a fire
escape;" but which, in the event of a fire, would have acquired the
agility of a harlequin, and the coolness of a tax-gatherer to get
through. Todd dragged a bedstead beneath the trap; and then his great
height enabled him to thrust it open, and project his head through it.
He found that part of his corporality was in the roof as it were--that
is to say, in the cavity, between the ceiling of the room and the house.
A trap-door of somewhat larger size in the actual roof, opened to the
air. Todd dragged himself through, and was fairly upon the top of the
colonel's house. A slippery elevation! But surely that was better than
facing a red-hot poker, and a pair of hair-trigger duelling pistols; and
so, for a time, the desire to escape kept down every other feeling. Even
his revengeful thoughts gave way to the great principle of
self-preservation; and Todd was only intent upon safely getting away. He
glared round him upon the night sky, and a gaudy assemblage of chimney
tops. What was he to do? In a minute he uttered a string of such curses,
as we cannot very well here set down, and he turned preternaturally calm
and still.

"Shall I go back," he said, "or escape?"

He heard the tramp of horses' feet, and peeping carefully over the front
parapet of the house, he saw Colonel Jeffery arrive on horseback, and
dismount. His groom led the horse away, and the colonel ascended the
steps. Then, and not until then, Todd made up his mind.

"Escape," he said, "and be off."

There was a long sloping part of the roof close to where he was, and he
thought that if he slid down that very carefully he should be able to
get on to the roof of the next house, and so perchance through their
trap door, and by dint of violence or cunning, or both united, reach the
street.

It was a desperate resource, but his only one.

The top part of the long sloping roof was easily gained, and then Todd
began to let himself down very carefully, but the angle of the roof was
greater than he had imagined, and by the time he got about half way down
he found a dangerous and most uncomfortable acceleration of motion
ensuing.

It was in vain he tried to stop himself: down he went with a speed into
the gutter behind the copping-stone, that left him lying there for a few
moments half stunned, and scarcely conscious if he were safe or not.

The colonel's house, however, was stoutly built, and Todd's weight had
not displaced anything; so that there he lay safe enough, wedged into a
narrow rain gutter, from which, when he did recover himself sufficiently
to make the attempt, he found some difficulty in wrenching himself out
of.

Sore and shaken, Todd now looked about him. He was close to the roof of
the next-door house. To be sure there was a chasm of sixty feet; but its
width was not as many inches, so Todd ought, with his long legs, to
easily step it.




                            CHAPTER LXXXIV.
                        TODD'S WONDERFUL ESCAPE.


The step was but a trifle; and yet, shaken as Todd was by his fall, it
really seemed to him to be one of the most hazardous and nervous things
in the world to take it.

He made two feints before he succeeded. At length he stood fairly upon
the roof of the adjoining house. He did not say "Thank God!"; such words
were not exactly in the vocabulary of Sweeney Todd; but he wiped the
perspiration from his brow, and seemed to think that he had effected
something at last.

And yet how far was he from safety? It is some satisfaction to have got
such a man as Todd upon the house-tops. Who pities him? Who would be
violently afflicted if he made a false step and broke his neck? No one,
we apprehend; but such men, somehow, do not make false steps; and if
they do, they manage to escape the consequences.

Surely it was about as ticklish a thing to crawl up a sloping roof as to
come down one. Todd did not think so, however, and he began to shuffle
up the roof of the house he was now on, looking like some gigantic
tortoise, slowly making its way.

Reasoning from his experience of the colonel's house, Todd thought he
should very well be able to pitch upon the trap, in the roof of the
domicile upon which he was, nor was he wrong. He found it in precisely
the same relative position, and then he paused.

He drew a long breath.

"What a mad adventure this is," he said; "and yet what a satisfaction it
would have been to me, before I left England, to be able to feel that I
had had my revenge upon that brat Tobias. That he had not altogether
failed me after I had paid so much money to be rid of him. But that is
over. I have failed in that attempt; but they shall not say it cost me
my life. They will be bold people who stop me in my passage to the
street in this house."

He felt the trap-door. It was fast.

"Humph!" he said, "doors are but bonds; and the rains of a few winters
rot them quickly enough. We shall see."

The knife, with which he would have been well pleased to give poor
Tobias his quietus, was thick and strong. He slid it under the wooden
trap, and by mere force lifted it up. The nails of the bolt easily
withdrew themselves from the rotten wood.

Todd was right. The rains of a few winters had done their work.

It was not exactly a time in the evening, when, in such a class of
house, any one might be expected to be found in the attics; so Todd made
no scruple of at once removing the lower trap in the ceiling.

He dropped comfortably enough on to the floor.

And now, coming suddenly as he did from the light, faint as it was, of
the open air in the room, which he found himself, seemed to be involved
in profound darkness; but that he knew would wear away in a few moments,
and he stood still for his eyes to get accustomed to the semi-obscurity
of the place.

Gradually, then, as though out of chaos, there loomed a bedstead and all
the necessary appointments of a bed-room. It was untenanted; and so
Todd, after listening intently, and believing, from the marked stillness
that there prevailed, that the upper part of the house was deserted,
walked to the door, and opening it, stood upon the landing.

"If I can now but step down stairs noiselessly, and open the street
door, all will be well. People don't sit upon the staircase, and I may
be fortunate enough to encounter no one."

There was no time to lose. Affairs in Fleet-street required his
presence; and, besides, the present moment might be the most propitious,
for all he knew, for the enterprise.

Down he went, not clinging to the balustrades--for who should say they
might not wheeze and creak?--not walking upon the middle of the stairs,
for there was no saying what tell-tale sounds they might give vocality
to; but sliding along close to the wall, and stepping so quietly, that
it would have required attentive ears to have detected his silent and
steady march.

And so, flight by flight of these stairs Todd descended in safety, until
he reached the passage. Yes, he got to the passage without the shadow of
an interruption.

Then he heard voices in one of the parlours.

"Confound them!" said Todd, "they will hear me open the street door to a
certainty; but it must be done."

He crept up to the door. There was some complicated latch upon it that
defied all his knowledge of latches, and all his perseverance; and yet,
no doubt, it was something that only required a touch; but he might be
hours in finding out in the dark where to apply that touch.

He still heard the voices in the parlour.

More than five minutes--precious minutes to him--had already been
consumed in fumbling at the lock of the street door; and then Todd gave
it up as useless, and he crept to the parlour-door to listen to the
speakers, and so, perhaps, ascertain the force that was within.

A female voice was speaking.

"Oh, dear me, yes, I daresay," it said. "You no doubt think that house
can be kept for nothing, and that a respectable female wants no clothes
to her back; but I can tell you, Mr. Simmons, that you will find
yourself wonderfully mistaken, sir."

"Pshaw!" said a man's voice. "Pshaw! I know what I mean, and so do you.
You be quiet wife, and think yourself well off, that you are as you
are."

"Well off?"

"Yes, to be sure, well off."

"Well off, when I was forced to go to Mr. Rickup's party, in the same
dress they saw me in last Easter. Oh! you brute!"

"What's the matter with the dress?"

"The matter? Why I'll tell you what the matter is. The matter is, and
the long and short of everything, that you are a brute."

"Very conclusive indeed. The deuce take me if it ain't."

"I suppose by the deuce, you mean the devil, Mr. Simmons; and if he
don't take you some day, he won't have his own. Ha! ha! you may laugh,
but there's many a true word spoken in jest, Mr. Simmons."

"Oh, you are in jest, are you?"

"No sir, I am not, and I should like to know what woman could jest with
only one black silk, and, that turned. Yes, Mr. Simmons, you often call
upon the deuce to take this, and to take that. Mind he don't come some
day to you when you least expect it sir, and say--"

"Lend me a light!" said Todd, popping his awfully ugly face right over
the top of the half open door, a feat which he was able to accomplish by
standing on his tip toes.

There are things that can be described, but certainly the consternation
of Mr. and Mrs. Simmons cannot be included in the list. They gazed upon
the face of Todd in speechless horror, nor did he render himself a bit
less attractive by several of his most hideous contortions of visage.

Finding then that both husband and wife appeared spell-bound, Todd
stepped into the room, and taking a candle from the table, he stalked
into the passage with it.

The light in his hand threw a light upon the mystery of the lock. Todd
opened the street-door, and passed out in a moment. To hurl the candle
and candlestick into the passage, and close the door, was the next
movement of Todd, but then he saw two figures upon the steps leading to
Colonel Jeffery's house, and he shrunk back a moment.

"Now William," said Colonel Jeffery himself, "you will take this letter
to Sir Richard Blunt, and tell him to use his own discretion about it."

"Yes, sir."

"Be quick, and give it into no hands but his own."

"Certainly, sir."

"Remember, William, this is important."

The groom touched his hat, and went away at a good pace, and Colonel
Jeffery himself closed the door.

"Indeed," muttered Todd. "Indeed. So, Sir Richard Blunt, who is called
an active magistrate, is to know of my little adventure here?
Well--well--we shall see."

He darted from the door of the house, through which he had made so
highly successful and adventurous a progress, and pursued William with
such strides as soon brought him close up to him. But the thoroughfare
in which they were was too public a one for Todd to venture upon any
overt act in it.

He followed William sufficiently closely however to be enabled to take
advantage of any opportunity that might present itself to possess
himself by violence of the letter.

Now William had been told the affair was urgent, so of course he took
all the nearest cuts he could to the house of Sir Richard Blunt, and
such a mode of progress soon brought him into a sufficiently quiet
street for Todd's purpose.

The latter looked right and left. He turned completely round, and no one
was coming--a more favourable opportunity could not be. Stepping lightly
up to William he by one heavy blow upon the back of his neck felled him.

The groom lay insensible.

Todd had seen him place the colonel's letter in his breast-pocket, and
at once he dived his huge hand into that receptacle to find it. He was
successful--one glance at the epistle that he drew forth sufficed to
assure him that it was the one he sought. It was duly addressed to Sir
Richard Blunt--"With speed and private."

"Indeed, very private," said Todd.

"Wretch! Wretch!" cried some one from a window, and Todd knew then that
the deed of violence had been witnessed by some one from one of the
houses.

With an execration, he darted off at full speed, and soon placed a
perfect labyrinth of streets between him and all pursuit. He thrust the
letter all crumbled up into his pocket, and he would not pause to read
it until he was much nearer to Fleet-street than to the colonel's house,
or the scene of his attack upon the groom. Then, by the light of a more
than usually brilliant lamp, which with its expiring energies was
showing the world what an old oil lamp could do, he opened and read the
brief letter.

It was as follows.

    "DEAR SIR RICHARD.

    "Todd has been here upon murderous thoughts intent. Poor Tobias has,
    I fear, broken a blood-vessel, and is in a most precarious
    condition. I leave all to you. The villain escaped, but is injured I
    think."

    "Yours very faithfully,
    "JOHN JEFFERY."
    "To SIR RICHARD BLUNT.

"Broken a blood-vessel," said Todd. "Ha! ha! Broken a blood-vessel. Ha!
Then Tobias may yet be food for worms, and the meat of the pretty
crawlers to the banquet. Ha!"

He walked on with quite a feeling of elation; and yet there was, as he
came to think, a something--he could not exactly define what--about the
tone of the letter, that began upon second thoughts to give him no small
share of uneasiness.

The familiar way in which he was mentioned as Todd merely, without
further description, argued some foregone conclusion. It seemed to say,
Todd, the man whom we both know so well, and have our eyes upon.

Did it mean that? A cold perspiration broke out upon the forehead of the
guilty wretch. What was he to think? What was he to do?

He read the letter again. It sounded much more unmeaning and strange
now. He had at first been too much dazzled by the pleasant intelligence
regarding Tobias, to comprehend fully the alarming tone of the epistle;
but now it waked upon his imagination, and his brain soon became vexed
and troubled.

"Off--off, and away," he muttered. "Yes, I must be off before the dawn.
The interception of this letter saves me for some few hours. In the
morning, the colonel will see Sir Richard Blunt, and then they will come
to arrest me; but I shall be upon the German Ocean by then. Yes, the
Hamburgh ship for me."

He was so near his home now that it was not worth while to call a coach.
He could run to Fleet Street quicker, so off he set at a great pace till
his breath failed him.

Then he held on to a post so faint and weak, that a little child might
have apprehended him.

"Curse them all," he said. "I wish they all had but one throat, and I a
knife at it. All who cross me, I mean."

Time was rather an important element now in Todd's affairs, and he felt
that he could not allow himself a long period even to recover from the
state of exhaustion in which he was.

After a few minutes rest, he pushed on.

One of those sudden changes that the climate of this country is subject
to, now took place; and although the sky had looked serene and bright,
and there had been twinkling stars in the blue firmament but a short
time before, Todd began to find that his clothing was but little
protection against the steady rain that commenced falling with a
perseverance that threatened something lasting.

"All is against me," he said. "All is against me."

He struggled on with the rain dashing in his face, and trickling,
despite all his exertions to the contrary, down his neck. Suddenly he
paused, and laid his finger upon his forehead, as though a sudden
thought of more than ordinary importance had come across his mind.

"The turpentine!" he said. "The turpentine. Confound it, I forget the
turpentine."

What this might mean was one of Todd's own secrets; but before he went
home, he ran down several streets until he came to a kind of wholesale
drug warehouse.

He rang the bell violently.

"What is it?" said a voice.

"The small keg of turpentine that was to be sent to Mr. Todd's in Fleet
Street, is particularly wanted."

"It was sent about half an hour ago."

"Oh, thank you--thank you. That will do. A wet night."

In a few minutes more he was at his own shop-door.




                             CHAPTER LXXXV.
                        SIR RICHARD MAKES PLANS.


Johanna had had a long time to herself in Todd's shop now. When first he
left upon that expedition of murder, she had almost been afraid to stir,
for she had feared he might momentarily return; but as his stay became
longer and longer protracted, she plucked up courage.

She began to look about her.

"As yet," she said to herself, "what has been done towards arriving at a
solution of the mysteries of this dreadful place?"

The more she thought, the more she felt compelled to answer this inquiry
in an unsatisfactory manner. What had been done?

The only thing that could be said to be settled, was the fact that Todd
was guilty, and that Mrs. Lovett was his accomplice. That he, by some
diabolical means, murdered people who came into his shop to be shaved,
was a fact, incontestable; but how he did the deed, still remained a
mystery.

The care which Todd always bestowed for the purpose of concealing the
manner in which he committed the murder, had hitherto been successful.
No one but himself, and probably Mrs. Lovett, knew exactly how he did
the deed.

It has been of course sufficiently observed that he never attempted
anything amiss when two people were in the shop. That he always made it
a point to get rid of Johanna upon occasions when he thought he had a
chance of making a victim; and that in fact he had, by the very fact
that Sir Richard Blunt and his officers had in various disguises
followed people into his shop, been for some time prevented from the
commission of his usual murders.

Now without in the smallest degree disguising what he did know, it is
quite clear that Sir Richard Blunt up to that time did not know how Todd
did the deeds of blood for which his shop was to become famous, and
himself infamous.

That people went in and never came out again, was about the extent of
what was really known.

The authorities, including Sir Richard Blunt, were extremely anxious to
know exactly how these murders were committed, and hence they waited
with the hope, that something would occur to throw a light upon that
part of the subject, before they apprehended Todd.

At any moment, of course, he could have been seized, and he little
suspected that he was upon such a mine.

If anything, however, could be said to expedite the arrest of Todd, it
would certainly be what had taken place at the colonel's house.

Now, to all appearance, when the colonel came home so close upon the
events that had happened in his absence, and had so very nearly been
fatal to both Minna Gray and Tobias, Todd had made his escape.

A rapid, but effective search of his, the colonel's house, sufficed to
prove that there he was not.

The appearance of Tobias, with blood gushing from his mouth, was
sufficiently alarming, and it was under the impression that he was dying
from the rupture of a blood-vessel, that the colonel wrote the note to
Sir Richard Blunt, which was intercepted by Sweeney Todd himself.

Upon the arrival, however, of the surgeon, who was immediately sent for,
it was soon ascertained that the blood-vessel which had given way in
poor Tobias, was not on the lungs, and that the danger arising from it
was by no means great, provided he were kept quiet and properly attended
to.

Minna Gray received this information with deep thankfulness, and the
colonel, upon hearing it, immediately sought Sir Richard to consult with
him upon the subject in its now altered state, for the idea that Tobias
was dying, had made him, the colonel, view the affair much more
passionately than prudently.

By dint of some trouble, the colonel found Sir Richard Blunt, and then
to his no small surprise, for he had known his groom long, and thought
he could thoroughly depend upon him, he found that the magistrate had
received no note at all upon the subject, so that of course no steps had
been taken.

Upon hearing the affair detailed to him, Sir Richard Blunt said--

"I regret this much, as it will put Todd in a fright and expedite his
departure."

"But was he not going by the Hamburgh packet before day-dawn? At any
rate, I understood you that by the manner in which you had dogged him,
you had thoroughly ascertained that fact?"

"I had, but had taken steps to prevent him."

"You would arrest him to-night?"

"No, I do not think it advisable to arrest him just yet. The fact is, I
do not know all that I want to know; but in order to stop him from
leaving his shop to-night, I have caused the Hamburgh Captain Owners, to
write to him, since he had taken a passage, telling him that the ships
stores would not be ready until to-morrow, when at one hour before
sunrise he would sail."

"Then you want to keep him in his shop another day?"

"I do. I hope and expect that during that day, something may occur to
clear up the mystery that still attaches to the mode in which he commits
his murders."

"It may so."

"I think I can take measures by running some little personal risk to
make it do so; but something must be hit upon to calm his mind,
regarding this affair at your house now, for he will expect nothing but
instant arrest on its account."

"What can I do?"

"If you will be guided by me you will write Todd a letter, threatening
him that if there is any more interference with Tobias, you will
prosecute him, but that you will, if you hear no more of him at your
house, say nothing of the past. You need be under no fear that he will
derive any future advantage from such a promise, as any charge against
him connected with poor Tobias will sink into insignificance, compared
with other offences."

"True! true!"

"Such a letter, couched with the one concerning the non-departure of the
ship, may keep him in his shop over to-morrow."

"And then--"

"Then he sleeps in Newgate, from which building he steps on to the
scaffold."

"But has he not sent many trunks and packages to the ship?"

"Yes, and I have as regularly removed them all to the police-office at
Bow Street. We have already some thousands of pounds worth of property
of the most costly description."

"But Johanna? What is to become of her?"

"You may depend upon it that Todd will pursue the same course with her
that he did with Tobias. He will give her a trifle of money, and tell
her to get a night's lodging out; and in that case she knows where to
come to be quite safe and comfortable. But if such should not be the
case, my protecting arm is over her; I think I can almost defy Todd to
do her any injury."

"Think you so?"

"Yes, I have made such arrangements that if she were missed only for ten
minutes, Todd's house would be searched from top to bottom. I would not,
for this right hand, that any harm should come to her."

"Nor I--nor I."

"Be at ease regarding her, colonel."

"I know how fully we may trust to you, and therefore I will be at ease
regarding her; and I will at once write the letter to Todd you suggest
to me."

"Do so. His fears upon your account must be calmed down."

The colonel accordingly wrote the necessary note to Todd. Of course,
neither he nor Sir Richard Blunt knew that Todd had another reason for
wishing to be off that night, which consisted in his great unwillingness
to meet Mrs. Lovett in the morning; for it will be recollected that he
had an appointment with that lady upon money matters at an early hour.

The reader is now fully aware of how matters stand, and will be able to
comprehend easily the remarkable events which rapidly ensued upon this
state of things, and therefore we can at once return to Todd.

We left him upon his door-step.

It was never Todd's custom to walk at once into his house as any one
else would do upon their arrival, whose

    "Conscience was not redolent of guilt!"

but he would peep and pry about, and linger like a moth fluttering
around a candle, or a rat smelling at some tempting morsel, which might
be connected with some artfully contrived trap, before he entered.

He wanted sadly to get a peep at what Charley was doing.

Now, poor Johanna, fortunately at that moment, was only sitting before
the little miserable fire, holding her face in her hands, and deeply
thinking of the once happy past. She had brought out from beneath the
counter the sleeve of a sailor's jacket, which she had found upon her
former examination of the shop, and after sprinkling it with some tears,
for she fully believed it must have belonged to Mark Ingestrie, she had
hidden it again.

And now as she sat in that house of murder all alone, she was picturing
to herself every tone and look of her lover when he had first told her
that he loved her before, as she might have said in the words of the old
song--

    "He loved me, and he sped away
      Far o'er the raging sea,
    To seek the gems of other lands,
      And bring them all to me."

At that moment, with all external objects hidden from her perception she
could almost fancy she could hear his voice as he had said to her--"My
darling, I shall come back rich and prosperous, and we shall be happy."

Alas! how sadly had that dream ended. He who had escaped the perils of
the deep--he who had successfully battled with the tempest, and all the
perils by sea and by land incidental to the life he had embarked in, had
returned miserably to perish, almost within hearing of her for whom he
had adventured so much.

The thought was maddening!

"And I live!" she said; "I can live after that! Oh, Mark--Mark--I did
not love you well enough, or I could not have existed so long after the
horrible certainly of your fate has been revealed to me. They may say
what they will to try to make me calmer and happier, but I know that he
is Todd's victim."

After this she sat for a time in a kind of stupor, and it was during
that interval that Todd arrived home.

There was no light in the shop but what at times came from a little
flickering flame, that would splutter into a moment's brief existence in
the fire; but Todd, as he glared through the upper portion of the
half-glass door at a spot where he knew the blind did not prevent him,
could just see Johanna thus sitting.

"Humph!" he said. "The boy is quiet enough, and probably, after all, may
suspect nothing; although I don't at all like his manner at times; yet
it is safer to kill him before I go. It is absolute security. He shall
help me to arrange everything to set the house on fire, and then when I
have completed all my arrangements, it will be easy to knock him on the
head."

With this he opened the door.

Johanna started.

"Well," said Todd, "well, any one been?"

"Only a man to be shaved, sir. I told him you would be home soon, but he
could not wait, so he left."

"Let him leave and get shaved at the devil!" said Todd. "You are sure no
one has been here peeping and prying, and asking questions which you
would be quite delighted to answer, eh?"

"Peeping and prying, sir?"

"Yes, peeping and prying. You know the meaning of that. Don't put on a
look of surprise at me. It won't do. I known what you boys are. Curse
you all! Yes, I know what you are."

Johanna made no answer.

Todd took off his hat, and shook the rain from it violently. Then in a
voice that made Johanna start again, he cried--

"Light the lamp, idiot!"

It was quite clear that the occurrences at the colonel's had not
improved Todd's temper at all, and that upon very little pretext for it,
he would have committed some act of violence, of which Johanna might be
the victim. Anything short of that she could endure, but she had made up
her mind that if even he so much as laid his hand upon her, her power of
further patience would be gone, and she would be compelled to adopt the
means of summoning aid which had been pointed out to her by Sir Richard
Blunt--namely, by casting something through the window into the street.

She lit the shop-lamp as quickly as she could.

"A lazy life you lead," said Todd. "A lazy life, indeed. Well, well," he
added, softening his tone, "it don't matter--I shall polish you off for
all that, Charley. What a pretty boy you are."

"Sir?"

"I say what a pretty boy you are. Why, you must have been your mamma's
pet, that you must. I was. Ha! ha! Look at me, now. I was fondled and
kissed once, and called a pretty boy. Ha!"

Johanna shuddered.

"Yes," added Todd, as he wiped himself down with a soiled towel, "yes,
my mother used to make quite a pet of me. I often used to wish I was
strong enough to throttle her! Ha! ha! That I did!"

"Throttle her, sir?"

"Yes," added Todd, fiercely. "What the devil did she bring me into the
world for her own gratifications, unless she had plenty of money to give
me that I might enjoy myself in it?"

"I don't know, sir."

"You don't know? Who the devil supposed you did know? Answer me that,
you imp! Well, well, Charley, you and I won't quarrel about such
matters. Come, my boy, I want you to be of use to me to-night."

"To-night, sir?"

"Yes, to-night. Is it broad daylight? Is the sun shining? Is there no
such thing as night, under cover of which black deeds are done? Curse
you! why do you ask if to-night is the time for action?"

"I will do your bidding, sir."

"Yes; and--Ah! who is this?"

"Is this here keg of turpentine for you?" said a man, with it upon his
shoulder. "Mr. Todd's this is, ain't it?"

"Yes--yes. Put it down, my good fellow. You ought to have something to
drink."

"Thank you kindly, sir."

"But you must pay for it yourself. There is a public-house opposite."

The man went away swearing; and scarcely had he crossed the threshold,
when a letter was brought by a lad, and handed to Todd. Before he could
ask any questions, the lad was gone.

Todd held the letter in his hand, and glared at the direction. It was to
him, sure enough, and written in a very clerk-like hand, too. Before he
could open it, some one hit the door a blow upon the outside, and it
swung open.

"Is this Todd's, the barber?"

"Yes," said Johanna.

"Then give him that letter, little chap, will you?"

"Stop!" cried Todd. "Stop. Where do you come from, and who are you?
Stop, you rascal. Will you stop? Confound you, I wish I had a razor at
your throat."




                            CHAPTER LXXXVI.
      TODD RECEIVES TWO EXTRAORDINARY LETTERS, AND ACTS UPON THEM.


Todd looked the picture of amazement.

"Two letters!" he muttered, "two letters to me, who seldom receive any?
To me who have no acquaintances--no relations? Bah! It must be some
mistake, or perhaps, after all, some infernal nonsense about the
parish."

He tore open the last received one, and read as follows:--

"Colonel Jeffery informs Sweeney Todd that, although from a variety of
reasons he may not think proper to prosecute him for his recent outrage
at his house, he will, upon a repetition of such conduct, at once hand
him over to the police."

Todd's countenance, during the perusal of this brief note, betrayed a
variety of emotions; and when he had concluded it, he let it drop from
his hands, and knitting his brows, he muttered--

"What does this mean?"

That there was--that there must be something much more than met the eye
in this boasted clemency of the colonel towards him, he felt quite
convinced; but what it was, he was puzzled to think for a time. At
length, brightening up, he said--

"Yes, I have it. It is Tobias--it is Tobias. He cannot rid himself from
the idea that I have some mysterious power of injuring his mother; and
perhaps, after all, he may have made no disclosures to the colonel
injurious to me."

Comforted by this wide supposition, Todd picked up the letter again, and
put it in his pocket carefully.

"It is as well," he said, "for I shall not now be hurried. No, I shall
not be at all hurried now, which I might have been.--Charley."

"Yes, sir."

"Trim the lamp."

Johanna did so; and while the process was going on, Todd opened the
other letter, it was as follows:--

    "Sir,--We beg to inform you that our Hamburgh vessel in which you
    have done us the favour to take passage, will not sail until
    to-morrow night at four, God willing, and that consequently there
    will be no occasion for your coming on board earlier.--We are, sir,

    "Your obedient servants,

    "BROWN, BUGGINS, MUGGS, AND SCREAMER."

    "To Mr. S. Todd."

Todd ground his teeth together in a horrible manner. He dashed the
letter to the floor, and stamped upon it.

"Curse Brown and Buggins!" he cried. "I only wish I could dash out Muggs
and Screamer's brains with Brown and Buggins's skulls. Confound them and
their ships. May they all go to the bottom when I am out of them, and be
smashed and d--d!"

Johanna was amazed at this sudden torrent of wrath. She could not
imagine what had produced it, for Todd had read the letter in a
muttering tone, that effectually prevented her from hearing any of it.

Suddenly he rose and rushed into the back room, and bolted the door upon
himself. He went to think what was best to be done.

When he was alone he read both the letters again, and then he burst out
into such a torrent of wrath against the ship-owners, that it was a
mercy Johanna's ears were spared the dreadful words that came from his
lips.

Suddenly he saw a postscript at the foot of the ship-owner's letter,
which he had at first overlooked.

    "P. S.--The ship is removed to Crimmins's Wharf, but will be at her
    old moorings at time mentioned above."

"D--n Crimmins and his wharf, too!" cried Todd.

He flung himself into a chair, and sat for a time profoundly still.
During that period he tried to make up his mind as to what it would be
best for him, under the circumstances, to do. Many plans floated through
his imagination. He could not for a long time bring himself to believe
that the letter of the colonel's was anything but a feint to throw him
off his guard in some way.

At length he got into a calmer frame of mind.

"Shall I leave at once, or stay till to-morrow night, that is the
question?"

He argued this with himself, pro and con.

If he left he would have to secret himself somewhere all the following
day, and the fact of his having left would make an active search, safe
to be instituted for him, which would possibly be successful. Besides,
how was he to conveniently set fire to his house, unless he was off on
the moment that the flames burst forth?

Then if he stayed he had Mrs. Lovett to encounter, but that was all; and
surely he could put her off for a few hours? Surely she, of all people
in the world, was not to run to a police-office and destroy both him and
herself, just because she did not get some money at ten o'clock that he
had promised to hand to her.

"She shall be put off," he said, suddenly, "and I will stay over
to-morrow. I am safer here than anywhere else, of that I feel assured.
If there are any suspicious whisperings about me at all, they will grow
to loud clamours the moment I am gone, and then they may reach the ears
of these ship-owners, and they may say at once, 'Why we have such a man
with a passage taken in one of our Hamburgh ships.' Let them say that
when the ship is some twenty hours gone with me on board, and I don't
care; but with me on land, and the ship only to sail, instead of having
actually sailed, it is quite a different matter."

He rose from his seat. His mind was made up. He had not quite decided
what he should say to Mrs. Lovett, but he had decided upon staying.

"Charley will live another day," he muttered; "but to-morrow night he
dies, and his body will be consumed with this house, and, I hope, a good
part of Fleet-street. It will not be prudent to get him to assist now in
disposing the combustibles to fire the house. He might speak of it
before to-morrow night."

Todd came out into the shop.

"Charley, my boy!" How kindly he spoke!

"I am here, sir."

"You must not mind what I say when I am vexed. Many things happen to put
me out of the way. Sometimes people that I have done I don't know how
much for, turn out to be very ungrateful, and then I get chafed, you
see, Charley."

"Yes, sir, no doubt."

"But, after I have retired to the parlour and prayed a little, my mind
soon recovers its usual religious tone, and its wonted serenity; and for
the sake of the Almighty, who, you know, is good to us all, Charley, I
forgive all that is done to me, and pray for the wicked."

Johanna shuddered. This hypocrisy sounded awful to her.

"Never go to rest, Charley, without saying your prayers. There's
threepence for you. You can get yourself a bed in the neighbourhood for
that amount somewhere, I daresay. I am very sorry I cannot accommodate
you here, Charley. Now go away, and let me have you here by seven in the
morning; and mind, above all things, cultivate a religious spirit, and
do unto your neighbours as you would that your neighbours should do unto
you."

Johanna could not reply.

"Here is a tract that you can read before you go to sleep, if they allow
you a candle, when you get a-bed. It is entitled 'Groans of Grace, or
the Sinner Sifted,' a most godly production, from a pious bookseller in
Paternoster-row, Charley."

"Yes," Johanna just managed to say.

"Now you may go."

She darted from the shop.

"Hilloa! hilloa! Stop--stop, Charley! Stop--stop, will you? Confound
you, stop! The infernal shutters are not up. Do you hear? I forgot
them."

Todd rushed to his door. He looked right and left, and over the way,
and, in fact, everywhere, but no Charley was to be seen. The fact is,
that Johanna, the moment she felt herself released from the shop, had
darted over the way, and into the fruiterers, where she had found so
friendly a welcome before, and all this was done in such a moment, that
she was housed before Todd could get his shop-door open.

"Welcome!" said a voice.

She found it proceeded from the fruiterer's daughter, who had behaved so
kindly to her.

Johanna burst into tears.

"What has happened?--what has happened?" cried the young girl.

"Nothing, now," said Johanna. "But I cannot keep up longer than when I
am in that shop. As soon as I am fairly out of the presence of that
dreadful man, I feel ready to faint."

"Be of good cheer," said a deep-toned voice.

She looked up, and saw Sir Richard Blunt.

"You here, sir?"

"Yes, Johanna. I have been now for some time watching Todd's shop from
our friend's first-floor window. I saw you dart across the road, and for
the moment feared something had gone wrong. Did Todd get two letters?"

"He did."

"They will, I hope, keep him quiet until another night. Dare you go back
again, Johanna, to that place?"

"Yes, if it be necessary; but he has told me to sleep out, and the gust
of pleasure I felt at the permission, almost, I fear, betrayed me."

"He came to the door and looked furiously after you, but he did not see
which way you had come. You were over here like a flash of light."

"He would have had me back again, then?--What could that be for?"

"At all events, you shall not go until the morning, and not then, unless
after a night's rest here, you feel that you can do so with a good
heart."

"Oh yes, I will fulfil my mission."

"Todd is putting up his shutters," said the fruiterer, as he came in
from his front shop.

"Ah, then the secret is out," said Sir Richard Blunt. "That is what he
wanted you back for, Johanna. He had forgotten at the moment all about
the shutters you may depend. I am glad he spared you the trouble, at any
rate. I do not like you to perform any service for such a rank villain
as he is."

"It would not have been for him, sir."

"For who, then?"

"For the dead. I feel that I am bound to bring to justice the murderer
of Mark Ingestrie. When I was here last, sir, you strove to comfort me,
by making me feel a sort of hope that he was not dead, but I cannot
think that--I would that I could, but indeed I cannot, sir."

"Do not be too sure, Johanna."

"Nay, look at that."

She laid before the magistrate the sleeve of the jacket that she had
found at Todd's, and which fancy, for she certainly had no proof that
way tending, told her had belonged to Mark Ingestrie.

"What is this?"

"Look at it, sir. My heart tells me it was his!"

"And so you suppose there was never but one sailor's jacket with ivory
buttons on the wrist in the world, and never any one who wore one, but
Mark Ingestrie?"

"Nay, the place in which it was found brings conviction."

"Not at all. Do you forget there was such a person as Thornhill in the
world, Johanna?"

"No; but why will every one persist in fancying Thornhill and Ingestrie
to be two persons, when I am convinced they were but one? Let who will
identify this as part of Thornhill's apparel, and I will weep for Mark."

"I cannot just now shake this supposition."

"You never will."

"If I live I will, Johanna, I give you my word for so much. Pray who is
the best to judge of such things? You, a young girl who have seen little
or nothing of the world, and whose natural apprehension is rendered
obscure by the conflict of your affections, or I whose business it is to
come to an accurate conclusion of such matters? I repeat my conviction,
that Thornhill was not Mark Ingestrie."

"Oh, if I could think so!"

"You will."

"You have no doubt, sir, but Thornhill perished by the hand of Todd?"

"None whatever."

Johanna looked deeply affected.

"Come," added Sir Richard, "you want both rest and refreshment, and you
can have both here at this house. To-morrow I hope will end all your
trials, my dear girl, and I shall live, I trust, to see you smile as you
ought to smile, and to be as happy as only a very dim recollection of
the past will make you."

"Ah, no--never happy."

"You must love some one. You must recover, and in the cares and joys of
a new existence, you must only look back upon what has passed, as though
you pondered upon the phantasma of some fearful dream; and when you see
all around you smiling--"

"It will be cruel for them to smile, sir; and it is now cruel of you to
speak to me of loving another, when you know my affections are with
Ingestrie, in that world to which he has gone before me, but to which I
look forward to as the place of our happy meeting, where we shall part
again no more."

"Well, I thought I could find you a lover that would be to your mind
when all these affairs were over."

"Sir?"

"Nay, be not offended. You know I am your sincere friend."

"I know you are, and that is what makes it so grievous to me to hear you
talk in such a strain, sir."

"Then I will say no more."

"I thank you, Sir Richard; and I will forget what you have said, because
I will recollect nothing from you, or committed with you, but kindness
and consideration."

Sir Richard smiled slightly for a moment, as he turned aside and spoke
to his friend the fruiterer for some minutes in a low tone. The young
girl who had before behaved with such kindness to Johanna, took her by
the hand, and led her up-stairs.

"Come," she said, "you shall tell me all you have suffered opposite
since we parted last, and I will speak to you of him whom you love."

"You are too good to me."

While all this was going on so close to him, Todd, with many oaths and
execrations, was putting up his own shutters, which he did with a
violence that nearly knocked the front of the window in. When he had
finished, he walked into his house, and closing the door, he said, in a
low tone--

"I must make up my mind what to say to Mrs. Lovett in the morning. I am
afraid she will be hard to pacify."

At this moment a man peered out from the inn gateway opposite, and said
to himself--

"Now begins my watch. I dare say now Mrs. Lovett has some particular
reason for watching this barber, though she did not tell me. However, a
guinea for one night's work is not bad pay."




                            CHAPTER LXXXVII.
              MR. LUPIN MEDDLES WITH OTHER FOLKS' AFFAIRS.


"Brother Oakley, is sister Oakley within?"

This rather cool speech--cool considering all the circumstances--was
uttered by no other than the Reverend Mr. Lupin to Mr. Oakley, who was
working in his shop on the morning after Johanna had gone upon her
perilous enterprise to Todd's.

Mr. Oakley looked up with surprise upon his features.

"What?" he said.

"Is sister Oakley within, brother?"

"Don't call me brother, you canting hypocrite. How do you make out any
such relationship, I should like to know?"

"Are we not all brothers in the Lord?"

"Pho! Go along."

"Nay, brother Oakley, my coming to you upon this day hath, in good
truth, a meaning."

As he said these words, the countenance of the pious man had upon it a
malignant expression, and there was a twinkle about his eyes, which said
as plainly as possible, "And that meaning is mischief!" Old Oakley
looked at him for some few seconds, and then he said--

"Hark you, Mr. Lupin, you have already meddled too much in my affairs,
and I desire now that you will be so good as to leave them alone."

"Humph! brother Oakley, what I have to say, concerns thee to hear, but I
would rather say it to thy wife, who is a sister in the faith, and
assuredly one of the elect, than I would say it to you, who will
assuredly go to a warm place below for your want of faith; so I say
again, is sister Oakley within?"

"If you mean my wife," replied the old spectacle-maker, "I am sorry to
say that nobody knows less of her going out and coming home than I do."

"Truly, she frequents the Tabernacle of the Lord, called Ebenezer, where
we all put up a hearty and moving prayer for you."

"Nobody asks you. I believe you are a set of rascals."

"How pleasant this is."

"What is pleasant?"

"To be nailed. How charming it is for the friends of Satan to call the
Saints hard names. Brother Oakley, you are lost, indeed."

"If you call me brother again, you shall be lost, Mr. Lupin. I tell you
once for all, I don't know anything of my wife's going out or coming
home, and I don't want to see you in my shop any more. If it were not
for one person in this world, and that one an angel, if ever one lived
upon the earth, I should not care how soon my head was laid low."

"Humph! brother Oakley! Humph!"

Oakley caught up a file to throw at the head of the hypocrite, but there
was such an expression of triumph upon his face, that the heart of the
old spectacle-maker sunk within him as he thought to himself, "This man
brings ill news, or he would never look as he does." The file dropped
from his hands, and pushing his spectacles up to the top of his head, he
glared at Lupin as he said--

"Speak--speak! What have you to say?"

"Humph!"

"Speak man, if you be a man!"

"Humph, brother Oakley; you have a daughter--Johanna?"

"Yes, yes!" cried old Oakley. "My heart told me that it was of my child
this wretch came to speak. Tell me all instantly. Speak--what of my dear
Johanna? I will wrest the truth from you. Has anything happened--is she
well? Speak--speak!"

Mr. Oakley sprang upon the preacher, and seizing him by the throat,
forced him back until he fell upon an old chest in the shop that was
full of tools and the lid of which giving way with Lupin's weight and
the sudden concussion with which he came upon it, precipitated him into
the box among a number of pointed implements, the effect of which may be
better imagined than described, as the newspapers say.

"Murder! murder!" screamed the preacher.

"Now you rascal!" cried old Oakley. "Say what you have got to say, and
at once, too."

"Murder!" again gasped Lupin. "Brother Oakley, spare my life."

"I will not spare it if you are not quite explicit as regards what you
have hinted of my child. Speak at once. Tell me what you have to say?"

"Let me get up. Oh, be merciful, and let me get up."

"No. You can stay very well where you are. Be quiet and speak freely, in
which case no harm will come to you."

"Did you say, be quiet, brother Oakley? Truly you would be anything but
quiet in my situation. What induces you to keep all your tools in this
chest with the points uppermost?"

"You are trying to prevaricate now," said Oakley, suddenly snatching
from the wall of his shop an antique sword, that had hung there as a
sort of ornament, not entirely inconsistent with his trade. "You are
trying to prevaricate with me now, and I must and will have your life.
Prepare for the worst. You have now aroused feelings that cannot be so
easily quelled again. Your last hour has come!"

The sight of the sword awakened the most lively feelings of terror in
the mind of the preacher. He gave a howl of dismay, and made the most
frantic efforts to get up out of the tool-chest; but that was no easy
matter, particularly as old Oakley flourished the antique sword in
dangerous proximity to his nose. At length, lifting up his hands in the
most supplicating manner, he cried--

"Mercy--mercy, and I will tell."

"Go on, then. Quick."

"Yes--yes. Oh, dear! Yes. I was sojourning in this ungodly city, and
taking my way, deep in thought, upon the wickedness of the world, the
greater portion of the inhabitants of which will assuredly go down
below, where there is howling and--"

"You rascal, I'll make you howl if you do not come to the point
quickly."

A flourish of the sword, so close to the face of Mr. Lupin that he
really believed for the moment it had taken the end of his nose off,
admonished him that the patience of Mr. Oakley was nearly exhausted, and
in a whining tone, he added--

"Truly, I was in the street called Fleet-street; when as I was crossing
the way, a young lad nearly upset me into the kennel. He did not see me,
but I saw him. Truly, brother Oakley, I saw the face of that--that
individual."

"Well, what is that to me? I ask you what is he to me? Go on."

"Oh, oh, oh! Don't say I have not prepared you for the worst. Oh, oh,
oh! Now, brother Oakley, I will tell you, even although it provoke an
abundance of wrath. That boy--that individual who nearly overthrew me,
one of the elect as I am, into the kennel, had the face of your
daughter, Johanna."

The spectacle-maker looked confused, as well he might.

"The face of my daughter, Johanna?" he said. "What do you mean? Is all
this cock-and-a-bull story about some boy in the street, who happened in
your eyes to bear a resemblance to my child?"

"Humph! Ay, truly. Humph! so striking a resemblance, that sitting here,
even as I am upon the points of many instruments of steel and of iron, I
aver that that boy was Johanna Oakley."

Oakley staggered back, and the antique sword dropped from his hand, a
proceeding which Mr. Lupin proffited sufficiently by to scramble out of
the tool-chest, and make towards the door. In another moment he would
have left the shop, for he had done all the mischief he could, by
telling the anxious father such a tale, but suddenly Oakley snatched the
sword from the floor again, and rushing after Mr. Lupin, he caught him
by the skirts at the very nick of time, and dragged him into the shop
again. Holding then the sword to his throat, he said--

"Scoundrel! How dare you come and tell me such a thing? Your life, your
worthless life, ought to pay the penalty of such an odious falsehood."

"No, no!" cried Lupin falling upon his knees, for he saw the sword
uplifted. "No! What if it be true? What if it be true?"

The old man's hands shook, and the point of the sword which had been in
most dreadful proximity to Mr. Lupin's throat, was gradually lowered
until it touched the floor.

"Tell me again--tell me again!" gasped Oakley.

The preacher saw that his danger was over, and rising, he took a
handkerchief from his pocket, and began deliberately to dust his knees,
as he said in a low snuffling voice--

"Truly, you are a vessel of wrath, brother Oakley."

"Stop!" cried Oakley. "I have told you before not to call me brother: I
have no fellowship or brotherhood with you. Do not tempt me to more
violence by the use of that word."

"Let it be as you please," said Lupin, "but as regards the maiden, who
for a surety is fair to look upon, although all flesh is grass, and
beauty waneth after a season--"

"I want none of your canting reflections. To your tale. When and where
was it that you saw my child?"

"In the street called Fleet, as I and all of us are sinners. She wore
nether garments suitable and conformable unto a boy, but not to a girl,
as the way of the world goeth; and yet she looked comely did the
maiden--ay, very comely. I was moved to see her truly. Her eyes there
was no mistaking, and her lips--Ay, it was the maiden; but after sitting
in the kennel for one moment into which I fell, and getting up again
amid the laughter of the ungodly bystanders, I found that she was gone."

"And so you have come on to me with this monstrous tale?"

"Monstrous tail?" said Mr. Lupin, turning round as though he expected to
find such an appendage flourishing behind him. "I am not aware--"

The old spectacle-maker staggered into a seat, and holding his hands
clasped before him for a few moments, he strove to think calmly of what
had been told to him.

The preacher was not slow in taking advantage of this condition into
which Mr. Oakley fell, to protect himself against any further danger
from the sword. He picked up that weapon from the floor, and not finding
any place readily in the shop where he might effectually hide it, he
held it behind his back, and finally thrust the long blade of it between
his coat and his waistcoat, where he thought it was to be sure
wonderfully well hidden. He did not calculate that the point projected
above his coat-collar and his head some six inches or so, presenting a
very singular appearance indeed.

He then waited for Oakley to speak, for to tell the truth, the curiosity
of Lupin was strongly excited concerning Johanna, as well as his sense
of enjoyment, tickled by the distress of the father whom he considered
his enemy.

After this he waited patiently enough to see what course the afflicted
man would pursue, and, indeed, the whole conduct of Lupin was most
convincing of the fact, that he entertained no doubt whatever as to the
identity of the supposed boy he had seen in Fleet Street. The time at
which he had seen Johanna, must have been when she ran over the road
from Todd's shop, and took refuge in the fruiterer's.

Well, then, poor Mr. Oakley was trying to think. He was trying to
convince himself that it could not possibly have been Johanna who had
been seen by the preacher; but then there was still present to his mind,
the impression that had been made upon it by the singular manner in
which she had bidden him adieu upon the last occasion of his seeing her.
He remembered how she had come back, after leaving the shop with her
young friend, Arabella Wilmot, and how then, with a burst of feeling,
she had taken of him a second farewell.

No wonder then that, by combining that with the information Lupin had
brought, the father found enough to shudder at; and he did shudder.

Mr. Lupin watched him attentively.

Suddenly rising, with a face pale as death itself, Oakley advanced to
Lupin, and laying his hand upon his breast, he said to him--

"Man, I suspect that there is much hypocrisy in your nature. It may be
unjust to do so--it may be that I am doing you a wrong, but yet I do
think in my heart that you are one of those who adopt the garb and the
language of piety for the selfish purposes of human nature. And yet you
must have some feeling: at the bottom of even such a heart as yours,
there must be some touch of humanity; and by that I conjure you to say
if you have told the truth to me in this matter concerning my child."

"I have," said Lupin.

"If you have not, I will say nothing to you, I will be guilty of no
attempt at revengeful violence. Only tell me so, and you shall go in
peace."

"What I have told you of the maiden is true," said Lupin. "I saw
her--with these eyes I saw her."

The spectacle-maker slipped off his working apron and the black sleeves
he wore over his coat to protect it from the dust and other destructive
matters incidental to his work-bench, and then he snatched his hat from
a peg upon which it hung in the shop.

"Come," he said. "Come. You and I will walk together to the house, where
I was told Johanna was to be; and if I do not find her there, I will
thank you for the information you have given to me. I will not stop to
inquire what were your motives in giving it, but I will thank you for
it. Come. Come with me."

"Truly I will come with you," said Lupin, "for I am curious--that is to
say, I am in a religious point of view, anxious to know what has become
of the maiden, who was so fair to look upon always, although she had not
a godly spirit."

Oakley locked up his shop, and put the key in his pocket. Then taking
the preacher by the arm, he set off at a fast pace for the house of
Arabella Wilmot.




                           CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
                   TODD ASTONISHES MRS. LOVETT'S SPY.


We return to Todd. After he had put up his own shutters, and properly
secured his doors for the night, he lit the lamp in his parlour, and
glancing curiously around him, he muttered--

"Yes. This will assuredly be the last night here. How I hate the look of
anything, and how eagerly I shall banish from my mind all kind of
remembrance of this place when I am in another land, as I shall be
shortly. Let me see: I will embrace the catholic religion, and I will be
most devout. The regularity of my religious exercises shall do much for
me. Indeed, I do not think I could have remained so long in London, if I
had not had the prudence to be regular at the church. It is true that of
late I have neglected all that, but then I am going soon, and it does
not matter."

Todd sat down, and looked over the memoranda of things he had to do that
he had made. He felt tolerably satisfied with the condition of affairs.
That Colonel Jeffery and that others suspected him, he could not doubt;
but he felt quite confident that he should be far off, before those
suspicions repaired into anything dangerous to him.

He still clung to the idea that they knew nothing, or else they would
arrest him; and while such did not ensue, he considered himself as in a
tolerably safe position.

He then set about the preparations for firing his house. We need not
follow him through those preparations. We need not state how he soaked
clothes in turpentine and oil, and how he placed them in such positions,
combined with small packages of gunpowder, and lumps of rosin, that if a
torch were to be applied at the lower part of the house, the whole would
be in a few moments in a blaze. Suffice it to say, that Todd worked hard
for the next two hours, and that by the time they had gone, he had got
everything ready for the perpetration of that last crime which he
intended to commit, before he crossed the threshold of his house upon
the following night, to leave it for ever.

[Illustration: Todd Preparing Combustibles To Fire His House.]

More than once during these two hours he drank brandy. The ardent spirit
had become necessary to the existence of Todd now; and when he took a
draught at the conclusion of his labours, he smiled grimly as he said--

"Charley Green will have quite a funeral of flame. He shall die, and his
body shall be consumed in the blazing fragments of this house, and it
will go hard but this side of Fleet Street suffers. Oh, if the flames
would only spread to the old church, I should rejoice much at that, and
they may do so.--Yes, they may do so. Ha! ha! I shall be remembered in
London."

As he spoke, a dull heavy sort of sound at the outer door of his house
came upon his ears. It was as though something heavy had been thrown
against it. With fear expressed upon every feature of his face, Todd
listened for a repetition of the sound.

It did not come again.

Todd began to breathe a little more freely, and yet he kept asking
himself--"What was it?"--and the utmost powers of his imagination could
return him no feasible answer to the interesting inquiry. But nothing
was more easy than to go to the door and see if any one was there, or if
anything had happened to it. Should he open it for such a purpose?
Should he unbar and unbolt at the risk of he knew not what? No: he
would, from the first floor balcony, and there was a frail one,
reconnoitre the street. He should then be easily able to see if there
were any danger.

He had no sooner made this determination, than he carried it out, by
ascending the dark blackened staircase, conducting to the upper part of
his house, that staircase which was now so completely covered by
combustible materials.

At every few steps he took he listened attentively. He thought there
might yet be a repetition of the sound; but no--all was still; and by
the time he reached his first floor, he was in some sort recovered from
his first fright. That was something. He left his light upon the
stair-head, for he had no wish to point himself out to the chance
passengers in Fleet Street, or perhaps to some enemy, by going into that
room with a light in his hand. No, Todd was much too acute for that; so
carefully closing the door, so that no ray of light got in from the
staircase, he crept to the window.

The shutters had to be unfastened, for Todd's house was always carefully
closed up like the Duke of Wellington's at the present day. He very
quickly unclosed one of the long-disused windows, and opening it gently,
looked out over the edge of the little crazy balcony into the street.

Something big and black was against his door.

The more Todd bent his gaze upon this object, the more a kind of
undefined terror took possession of him, and the more puzzled he was to
give a name to the dark mass that had been laid upon his threshold.
There was no lamp very near his house, or else, miserable as was the
light from those old oil apologies for illuminators, some few rays might
have fallen upon the dark mass, and told Todd what it was.

But no--all was dark and dubious, and he strained his eyes in vain to
penetrate the mystery.

"I must go down," he said; "I must open the door. Yes, I cannot live and
not know what this is. I must open the door, however reluctantly, and
ascertain precisely. Ah!"

While Todd was talking, and still keeping his eyes fixed upon the
mysterious object at his door, he saw suddenly in the midst of it a
bright luminous spark, as if something connected with it was of a red
heat, and slowly smouldering on fire.

If he was before puzzled to account for the phenomenon of a dark object,
without shape or form, lying propped up against his door, he was now
more than ever confounded, and his imagination started some of the most
improbable conjectures in the world, to account for the appearance.

He thought that it must be some combustible, which, in the course of a
few moments, would go off with a stunning report, and blow his
street-door to atoms; but then again, what could be the object of such a
thing?

The more he considered the affair from above, the more he was puzzled
and terrified; so at last, with a feeling of desperation, he ran down
stairs and began to unfasten the street-door. He did not pause in his
work until he had flung it open, and then the mystery was explained.

A man, half asleep, with a lighted pipe in his mouth, rolled backwards
into the shop; and as he did so, with the dreamy half-consciousness that
he was upon some sort of duty, he said--

"I'll watch him, Mrs. Lovett. He shan't get away without your knowing of
it, ma'am."

Todd understood the man's errand in a moment. Of course he had been
employed to watch him by Mrs. Lovett, who had a slight idea that he
might not be forthcoming for the promised morning settlement. Todd
seized the man by the collar, and dragging him fairly into the shop,
closed the door again.

"Ah!" he said, "a good joke."

"What's a joke, sir?" said the man. "What's a joke? Murder! Where am
I?--where am I? Help!"

"Hush!" said Todd. "Hush! It's of no consequence. I know all about it
man. Mrs. Lovett employed you to watch me. She was a little jealous, but
we have made it all right now, and she asked me, if I saw you, to pay
you and give you a glass of something, beside."

"Did she, sir?"

"To be sure she did; so come in, and you can tell her when you see her
in the morning, that you had of me a glass of as good liquor as could be
found in London. By-the-bye, what am I to pay you?"

"A guinea, sir."

"Exactly. It was a guinea, of course. This way, my friend, this way.
Don't fall over the shaving-chair, I beg of you. You can't hurt it, for
it is a fixture; but you might hurt yourself, and that is of more
importance to you, you know. While we do live in this world, if it be
for ever so short a time, we may as well live comfortably."

Talking away thus all suspicion from the man who was not one of the
brightest of geniuses in the world, Todd led the way to the
parlour--that fatal parlour which had been the last scene of more than
one mortal life.

He closed the door, and then in quite a good-humoured way, he pointed to
the seat, saying--

"Rest yourself, my friend--rest yourself, while I get out the bottle.
And so it is one guinea that I am to give you, eh?"

"Yes, sir; and all I can say is that I am very glad to hear that you and
Mrs. Lovett have made matters all right again. Very glad, indeed, sir, I
may say. In course, I shouldn't have took the liberty of sitting down by
your door, sir, if she had not told me to watch the house and let her
know, if so, be as you come out of it, or if I saw any packages moving.
She didn't say anything to me what it was for; but a guinea is just as
well earned easy as not, you see, sir!"

"Certainly, my friend, certainly. Drink that."

The man tossed off the glass of something that Todd gave him, and then
he licked his lips, as he said--

"What is it, sir? It's strong, but I can't say, for my part, that I like
the flavour of it much."

"Not like it?"

"Not much, sir."

"Why it's a most expensive foreign liquor that is, and by all the best
judges in the kingdom is never found fault with. Very few persons,
indeed, have tasted it; but of those few, not one has come to me to say,
Mr. Todd--"

"Good God!" said the man, as he clasped his head with both of his hands.
"Good God, how strange I feel. I must be going mad!"

"Mad!" cried Todd, as he leant far over the table so as to bring his
face quite close to the man's. "Mad! not at all. What you feel now is
part of your death-pang. You are dying--I have poisoned you. Do you hear
that? You have watched me, and I have in return poisoned you. Do you
understand that?"

[Illustration: Todd Poisons Mrs. Lovett's Spy And Tells Him Of It.]

The dying man made an ineffectual effort to rise from the chair, but he
could not. With a gasping sob he let his head sink upon his breast--he
was dead!

"They perish," said Todd, "one by one; they who oppose me, perish, and
so shall they all. Ha! so shall they all; and she who set this fool on
to his destruction shall feel, yet, the pang of death, and know that she
owes it to me! Yes, Mrs. Lovett, yes."

He closed his arms over his breast, and looked at the body for some
moments in silence; and then, with a sneer upon his lips, he added--

"No, Mrs. Lovett, you did not show your judgment in this matter. Had you
wished to watch me, you should have done it yourself, and not employed
this poor weak wretch who has paid the price of his folly. Go--go!"

He struck the chair from under the dead man with his foot, and the
corpse that had partially been supported by it and the table, fell to
the floor. Another kick sent it under the large table, and then, as
another of Todd's victims had once done, it disappeared.

"To-morrow night, by this time," said Todd, musingly, "where shall I
be!"




                            CHAPTER LXXXIX.
            MR. OAKLEY IS IN DESPAIR AT THE LOSS OF JOHANNA.


The anxiety of poor Mr. Oakley increased each moment as he and the
preacher neared the house of Arabella Wilmot's friends. We regret to say
that Mr. Lupin did enjoy the mental agony of the father; but it was in
his nature so to do, and we must take poor humanity as we find it.

It must be recollected that Mr. Lupin had, through Johanna, suffered
great malefactions. The treatment he had received at the hands of Big
Ben, although most richly deserved, had been on account of Johanna, and
as regarded the old spectacle-maker himself, he had always occupied an
antagonistic position as regarded Mr. Lupin.

No wonder then, we say, that human nature, particularly in its
evangelical variety, was not proof against the fascination of a little
revenge. Now, Mr. Lupin felt so sure that he had made no mistake, but
that it was no other than the fair Johanna whom he had seen in what he
called the unseemly apparel, that he did not feel inclined to draw back
for a moment in the matter. Curiosity, as well as a natural (to him)
feeling of malignity, urged him to stick by the father in order that he
might know the result of inquiries that he, Lupin, had no opportunity or
excuse for making, but which Mr. Oakley might institute with the most
perfect and unquestionable profundity.

As we have before had occasion to remark, the distance between Oakley's
shop and the residence of the friends of Arabella was but short, so
that, at the speed which the excited feelings of the fond father induced
him to adopt, he soon stood upon the threshold of the residence, beneath
the roof of which he hoped, notwithstanding the news so confidently
brought by Lupin, to find his much-loved, idolized child.

"You shall see," he said to Lupin, catching his breath as he spoke; "you
shall see how very wrong you are."

"Humph!" said Lupin.

"You shall see," continued poor Oakley, still dallying with the knocker;
"you shall see what an error you have made, and how impossible it is
that my child--my good and kind Johanna--could be the person you saw in
Fleet-street."

"Ah!" said Lupin.

Mr. Oakley knocked at the door, and, as one of the family had seen him
through the blinds of the parlour-window, he was at once admitted, and
kindly received by those who knew him and his worth well. He asked, in
an odd gasping manner, that Mr. Lupin might have permission to come in,
which was readily granted; and with a solemn air, shaking his head at
the vanities he saw in the shape of some profane statuary in the hall,
the preacher followed Oakley to the dining-room.

It was an aunt of Arabella's to whom they were introduced, and, with a
smile, she said--

"Really, Mr. Oakley, a visit from you is such a rarity that we ought not
to know how to make enough of you when you do come. Why, it must have
been Christmas twelvemonths since you were last beneath this roof. Don't
you remember when your dear, good, pretty Johanna won all hearts?"

"Yes, yes," said Oakley, glancing triumphantly at Lupin. "My dear child,
whom all the world loves--God bless her!--She is pure, and good, and
faultless as an angel."

"That, Mr. Oakley," said the lady, "I believe she is. We are as fond of
her here, and always as glad to see her, as though she belonged to us.
Indeed, we quite envy you such a treasure as she is."

Tears gushed into the grateful father's eyes, as he heard his child--his
own Johanna--she who reigned all alone in his heart, and yet filled it
so completely--so spoken of. How glad he was that there was some one
besides himself present to hear all that, although that one was an
enemy! With what a triumphant glance he looked around him.

"Humph!" said Lupin.

That humph recalled Oakley to the business of his visit, and yet how hot
and parched his lips got, when he would have framed the all-important
question, "Is my child here?"--and how he shook, and gasped for breath a
moment before he could speak.

At length, he found courage--_not_ to ask if Johanna was there. No--no.
He felt that he dared not doubt that. It would have been madness to
doubt it, sheer insanity. So he put the question indirectly, and he
contrived to say--

"I hope the two girls are quite well, quite--quite--well."

"Two girls!" said the aunt. "Two girls!"

"Yes," gasped Oakley. "Johanna and Arabella, you know--your Arabella,
and my Johanna--my child."

"You ought to know, Mr. Oakley, considering that they are at your house,
you know. I hope that neither of them have been at all indisposed?
Surely that is not the case, and this is not your strange way of
breaking it to us, Mr. Oakley?"

The bereaved father--yes, at that moment he felt that he was a bereaved
father--clutched the arms of the chair upon which he sat, and his face
turned of a ghastly paleness. He made an inarticulate effort to speak,
but could only produce a strange gurgling noise.

"Gracious Heavens! he is ill," cried Arabella's aunt.

"No, madam," said Lupin. "He is only convinced."

"Convinced of what?"

"Of what he himself will tell you, madam."

"Help! help!" cried Oakley. "Help! My child--my Johanna--my beautiful
child. Mercy--help. Give her to my arms again. Oh, no--no--no, she could
not leave me thus. It is false--it is some desperate juggle! My
child--my child, come once again to these arms.--God--God help me!"

Arabella's aunt rose in the greatest alarm, and rung the bell so
sharply, that it brought everybody that was in the house to that room,
and Mr. Lupin, when he saw what a congregation there was, rose up and
said in a snuffling voice--

"Is there any objection to a prayer?"

"The greatest at present, sir," said Arabella's aunt. "Sir, there is a
time for all things. The state of poor Mr. Oakley, now claims all our
care. If you are his friend--"

At these words, Oakley appeared to shake off much of the prostrating
effects of the first dreadful conviction, that what Lupin had told him
was true, and he said--

"No--no, he is no friend--he is a bitter enemy. The enemy of my peace,
and of my dear child. I am calmer now, and I demand--I implore, that
that man be made to leave this house."

"Brother Oakley," said Lupin, "you brought me here."

"And I now command you hence. Begone, villain, begone; go and exult over
the heart-broken father's grief; go and tell the tale where you will.
You cannot move me now--go--go--go."

"Truly I will go presently, but first of all, I say to you, brother
Oakley, hardened sinner as you are, repent. Down upon your knees all of
you, and join me in prayer, that the unbelievers may roll upon billows
of burning brimstone, and that--"

"Come," said a man, who happened to be in the house upon some domestic
errand, "Mrs. Wilmot says you are to go, and go you shall. Come, be
off--I know who you are. You are the rascal that married the widow in
Moorfields, but who, they say, has another wife in Liverpool. If you
don't go, I shall give you in charge for bigamy, and the widow says she
will spend her last penny in prosecuting you."

[Illustration: Mr. Lupin Unmasked.]

To meet any one half so well informed about his affairs, would have been
a terrible blow to Mr. Lupin; but when he found that this man, who was a
kind of jobbing cabinet-maker, knew so much, his great goggle eyes
opened to an alarming width, and he made a movement towards the door.
Still, he did not like to go without saying something.

"Flee, ye wretches," he said, "from the wrath to come! You will all go
into the bottomless pit, you will, and I shall rejoice at it; and sing
many songs of joy over you. Scoffers and mockers, I leave you all to
your fate. The devil will have you all, and that is a great comfort and
gratification to the elect and to the saints."

With this, Mr. Lupin made a precipitate retreat, having achieved about
as little in the way of satisfying his curiosity as could very well be
conceived.

It was a relief--a great relief to Mr. Oakley to be rid of such a
witness to his feelings as Lupin; and when he had fairly gone, and the
outer door was closed upon him, the spectacle-maker, with clasped hands,
and countenance expressive of the greatest possible amount of mental
agony, spoke--

"Dismiss all but ourselves, madam," he said. "There's that to say which
may be said to you alone, but which it would break my heart to say to
many."

The room was soon clear, and then Oakley continued in a low faltering
voice to make those inquiries, each answer to which was so fatal to his
peace of mind.

"Madam," he said, "is not my child--my Johanna--here staying on a visit
with Arabella?"

"No, no--certainly not."

This was so frightfully conclusive, that it was some few moments before
he could go on; but when he did, he said--

"Is Arabella in the house?"

"That, Mr. Oakley," replied the aunt, "is a question I cannot answer you
at the moment; but rest and compose yourself for a few moments, and I
will ascertain myself if she be in or out, and if the latter, when she
was last seen."

"I am much beholden to you, madam. I am a poor old man, much broken in
spirit, and with but one strong tie to bind me to a world which has
nearly done with me. That tie is the love of my dear child, Johanna.
Alas! if that be broken, I am all adrift, and at the mercy of the winds
and waves of evil fortune; and the sooner I close my eyes in the long
sleep of death, the better for me and all who feel for me."

"Nay, Mr. Oakley, I look upon it as a thing almost criminal to despair.
There is one maxim which I have learnt in my experience of life, and
which I am sure you must have had abundant opportunities of learning
likewise. It is, 'Never to trust to appearances.'"

The old man looked at her with a saddened aspect. It was quite evident
his feelings had been too strongly acted upon to make any philosophy
available to him; and when she left the room to make the inquiries
concerning Arabella, he wrung his hands, and wept.

"Yes," he said, "yes, I am indeed alone now--a wreck--a straw upon the
ocean of society. The sooner I drift in the grave now, the better for
me, and all who pity the old man. Oh, Johanna--Johanna. My child--my
beautiful, why did you not wait until I was dead before you left me?
Then I should have slept calmly, and known nothing; but now my days and
nights will be dreams of horror."

The door opened and the aunt re-appeared.

"Arabella is not within," she said, "and has not been seen for some
hours now. When last seen her manner was evidently perturbed. But now,
Mr. Oakley, sit down by me and tell me as clearly and as distinctly, all
you know and all you fear. There are few evils in this world but there
are some remedies for, and you shall have my true and calm opinion if
you will tell me all."

It is something astonishing, and yet one of the most ordinary of mental
phenomena, to note what a power a cool and clear intellect will exert
over one that is distracted and full of woe and clamorous grief. Mr.
Oakley did sit down by the side of Arabella's aunt, and he told her all
that happened the girl of which, of course, was the real or supposed
appearance of Johanna in Fleet Street, in male attire. The collateral
circumstances, such as the hurried and half frantic farewell of him in
the shop by Johanna, and the misrepresentation by Arabella, that she
(Johanna) was going to stop there, evidently made a deep impression upon
the aunt. Her countenance changed visibly, as she said faintly--

"God help us all."

"Lost! lost," cried Oakley. "Yes, you--even you, hopeful as you were,
and hopeful as you would fain have made me--even you, now that you know
all, feel that she is lost. God, indeed, only can help me now."

"No, Mr. Oakley," said the aunt, rallying, "I will not yet trust to
appearances, although I own that they are bad. I will come to no
conclusion until I have seen Arabella, and got the truth from her. It is
quite clear that there is some secret between the two young creatures.
It is quite clear that there is something going on that we know nothing
of, and to speculate upon which may only involve us in an inextricable
labyrinth of conjectures. I say, there is some secret, but it may not be
a guilty one."

"Not--not guilty?"

"No, Mr. Oakley, there are many degrees of indiscretion to pass through
ere the gulf of guilt is reached at last. I have faith in Arabella--I
have faith in Johanna; and even now, admitting for a moment the truth of
what that man whom you brought with you here, reports, Johanna may only
have to be blamed for folly."

"Do--do you think he did so see her?"

"I doubt it much."

"Mother," said a lad of fifteen, coming hastily into the room. "Mother
I--"

He paused upon seeing Mr. Oakley there, and stammered out some apology--

"He had only come to tell his mother that a whole suit of his clothes
were missing from his room and that he could find them nowhere, and he
could not make it out; and one of his hats was gone too, and a pair of
shoes, and--"

Old Oakley fell back in his chair with a groan.

"She has them," he said. "She has them. My child, whom I shall never see
again, has them."




                              CHAPTER XC.
                     MORNING IN FLEET STREET AGAIN.


Another day has dawned upon the great city--another sun has risen upon
the iniquities of hosts of men, but upon no amount of cold-blooded,
hardened, pitiless criminality that could come near to that of Sweeney
Todd. No, he certainly held the position of being in London, then, the
worst of the worst.

But who shall take upon himself now to say that in this pest-ridden,
loyalty-mad, abuse-loving city of London, there are not some who are
more than even Sweeney Todd's equals? Who shall say that hidden scenes
of guilt and horror are not transacting all around us, that would, in
their black iniquity, far transcend anything that Sweeney Todd has done
or dreamt of doing? Let the imagination run riot in its fanciful
conjectures of what human nature is capable of, and in London there
shall be found those who will reduce to practice the worst frenzied
deeds that can be conceived.

Yes, the dawn of another day had come, and Todd had made all his
preparations. Nothing was wanting, but the match that was to set Fleet
Street, he fondly hoped, in a blaze. His own house, he felt quite
certain, could not escape. It would be a charred mass long before any
effectual means could be procured to check the devastation of the
flames, and then as the good ship spread its swelling sails to the wind
to bear him to another shore, he should be lighted upon his way by the
glare of the great fire in Fleet Street, that no one would be able to
guess the origin of.

So he told himself.

Short-sighted mortals that we are! How little Todd, with all his
cleverness--all his far-seeing thrift and fancy--dreamt of the volcano
upon which he stood. How little he for one moment imagined it was
possible that the sword of justice hung over him by so slender a thread.
How he would have glared at any one who might have told him that he only
moved about by sufferance; and yet such was the fact.

Sir Richard Blunt could put his hand upon him at any moment, and say,
"Todd, you are my prisoner. To Newgate--to Newgate, from whence only you
will emerge to your trial, and to the scaffold!"

No, Todd, good easy soul, had not the slightest idea of his real
position upon that morning.

He waited rather impatiently for the arrival of Johanna to take down the
shutters, and she urged upon Sir Richard Blunt and her friends at the
fruiterer's, the propriety of her going and doing that morning piece of
work; but they would not hear of it. She at length used an argument
which made Sir Richard adopt another course than keeping her at the
fruiterer's until Todd should get out of all patience and open his shop
himself.

"It is possible," she said, "that I may be subjected to ill-usage if I
am not there; and then being compelled to call for aid as I might, you
would feel that you were forced to take Todd into custody before the
time at which you have resolved so to do."

"That is true," said Sir Richard; and then, after some little
consideration, he added, "I have a plan that will save you both ways.
You shall be in time, and yet you shall not take down Todd's shutters."

They could none of them conceive at the moment how Sir Richard intended
to manage this; but they quickly saw that it was easy enough. Opening
just a little way one of the windows of the first floor at the
fruiterer's, he blew a whistle that he had suspended round his neck by a
small chain. In the course of a few moments, Crotchet walked into the
shop.

"Governor here?" he said. "I heard him a chirping for me just
now--didn't I?"

"Yes, Crotchet," said the fruiterer, who knew him quite well. "Step
up-stairs; you will find him there."

Crotchet was soon in the presence of Sir Richard, and Johanna, and the
fruiterer's daughter. He made a rough sort of salute to the whole party,
and then remarked again that he had heard the governor a chirping, he
rather thought.

"Yes, Crotchet," said Sir Richard, "you're quite right. You know this
young lady here?"--indicating Johanna.

"Reether!" said Crotchet.

"Well, then, you will seem to be passing Todd's shop when she commences
taking down the shutters; and, seeing that they are too heavy for such a
mere boy, you good-naturedly take them down for him--you understand? It
is the last time that they will be taken down for Todd, I think."

"All's right," said Crotchet; "I understands--it's as good as done.
Lord! what a scrouge there will be at the hanging o' that barber, to be
sure, unless he manages to cheat the gallows; and I takes notice in my
_hexperieace_ as them 'ere wery bad 'uns seldom does try that 'ere game
on, with all their bounce."

"Now, Miss Oakley," said Sir Richard Blunt, "I think, then, your time
has come; and, as Crotchet will take down the shutters, you may as well
go over at once. I think you thoroughly understand what you have to
do--and if Todd asks you where you lodged, you had better say that the
servants here offered to let you sleep by the kitchen fire, and you
accepted the offer--for he may be watching for you now, and see you come
out of this house, for all we know to the contrary. And now remember,
without any reference to my plans or what I would rather do, if you feel
yourself, or fancy you feel yourself in the least danger, take the means
I have pointed out to you of summoning aid, and aid will come to you."

"I will," said Johanna.

"Heaven speed you, then! This will be the last day, I think, of the
career of that bold bad man. I intend to make such an effort to get
under his house to-day, as I hope and expect will enable me to come at
the grand secret, namely, of how he disposes of his victims so
quickly--for that there is some wonderful jugglery in it, I am certain."

Johanna took a kind leave of the fruiterer's daughter, who had lavished
upon her all those attentions which, in Johanna's position, became so
precious from one of her own sex; and then, assuming a careless manner,
with her hat put on in a boyish slovenly sort of way, she boldly crossed
the road to Sweeney Todd's.

He had been watching through a hole in the upper part of one of the
shutters. In a moment all sorts of ugly suspicions took possession of
his mind. What could Charley Green, his errand-boy from Oxford, who knew
no one, and was unknown to all London, doing at a tradesman's house in
Fleet Street at such an hour in the morning? How came he to know the
people of that house? How came he to dream of going there?

Todd was boiling with anger and curiosity when he opened the door and
admitted Johanna, a thing that he was unmindful enough to do before she
knocked for admission, which alone would have been amply sufficient to
point out to her that she had been watched from some peep-hole in the
house.

He stretched out his hand and dragged her in. He controlled his temper
sufficiently to enable him to gratify his curiosity. He made quite
certain that Charley Green would tell him some story of where he had
been, which should not convict the fruiterer. By the light of a
miserable candle that Todd had burning in the dark closed shop, he
glared at Johanna.

"Well--well," he said. "A good night's rest, Charley?"

"Tolerable, sir!"

"Humph! ha! And did you find a place to sleep at cheaply and decently,
my good lad, eh?"

"I was very fortunate indeed, sir."

"Oh, you were very fortunate indeed?"

"Yes, sir. I am, through being country bred I suppose, fond of fruit, so
when I left you last night, I bought an apple at a shop opposite."

"Oh, at Mr. a--a--"

"I don't know the name, sir," said Johanna, "but I can run out and
ascertain, I dare say."

Todd gave a low sort of growl. He did not know if he were being foiled
by innocence or by art. With an impatient gesture, he added--

"Never mind the apples, I wish to know where you slept, Charley, that I
may judge if it was a proper place, there are so many wicked people in
London."

"Are there, sir?"

"Bah! Go on. Where did you sleep?"

"Well, sir, as there was a kind tempered-looking servant in the
fruiterer's shop, I thought she might be able to tell me of some place
where I could lodge, and when she had heard my story--"

"Story--story? What story?"

"How destitute I was, sir, and how kind you had been to employ me
without a character, and how happy and contented I was in your service,
sir. So when she had heard all that, she said, 'It is too late for you
to go lodging-hunting to-night. There is an old bench in our kitchen,
and if you like you may sleep on that.'"

Todd gave a growl.

"And so you slept there?"

"Yes, sir."

He paced the shop for some few moments in deep thought, knitting his
brows and trying to make something out of what he had heard, contrary to
what it seemed; but Johanna's story was too straightforward and simple
for him to find any flaw in it, and after a few moments he felt
compelled to admit to himself that it must be the truth. Turning to her
with something of the amount of amiability one might expect from a bear,
he said--

"Open the shop!"

"Yes, sir, directly."

Johanna propped the door wide open, and then having, by the dim light of
the miserable candle, found a screw which fastened a bar across the
shutters, she speedily released it, and then went into the street. At
that moment Crotchet came along, whistling in so thoroughly careless a
manner, that even Johanna thought he had forgotten his instructions and
was about to pass the shop. She had her hand upon the bar when he
stopped, saying, in an off-handed manner--

"Why little 'un, them 'ere shutters is too much for you, I'll give you a
helping hand. Lor bless you, don't say anything about it. It ain't no
sort o' trouble to me my little chap. Here goes."

Mr. Crotchet began opening Todd's shop with such a fury and a vengeance,
that the clatter and the speed with which the operation was being
accomplished, brought Todd out of the parlour to see what on earth
Charley was about. When he saw Crotchet coming in with three shutters in
his arms at once, he could scarcely believe his eyes, and he roared
out--

"What's this? Who are you?"

"Easy--easy," said Crotchet. "Don't get in the way old gentleman. Easy.
There now!"

Crotchet managed to give Todd such a rap on the side of the head with
the shutters, that a thousand lights danced in his eyes, and he writhed
with pain.

"Well, I never," said Crotchet, "I hope I haven't hurt you, old man? You
see I was a passing, and seed as these here shutters was rather a bit
top-heavy for your little son here, and I thought I'd give him a helping
hand. To be sure he didn't want me to, but you see I would, and perhaps
as your old head is getting better, you wouldn't mind a pint of beer,
old gentleman?"

"You atrocious villain," yelled Todd, "I'll cut your throat. I'll polish
you off. I'll--I'll--would you like to be shaved?"

"I've had a scrape already," said Crotchet, "and if you won't stand the
beer, why you won't, and there's no bones broke arter all. Good morning,
old Grampus. Good morning my little chap, I wishes you good luck; and if
I am passing again, I don't mind lending you a helping hand, though the
governor is about one o' the ugliest, nastiest tempered brutes, I ever
came near in all my life."

Crotchet went away whistling with great composure.




                              CHAPTER XCI.
                      MR. TODD'S FIRST CUSTOMERS.


Todd seized Johanna by the arm, and dragged her into the shop. He locked
the door, and then confronting her, he said--

"How kind it was of your friend, to take down the shutters for you,
Charley Green."

"My friend, sir?"

"Yes, your friend who declined being shaved, you know, because you told
him last night that he had better go to some other shop."

"Really, sir," said Johanna, "I don't know what you mean."

"Come, come, Charley, confess that you do know some one in London, as
well as you know me. Confess, now, that people are so fond of
interfering in other folk's affairs, that you have been set on to watch
me. I shall not be at all angry, indeed, I shall not, I assure you. Not
the least; only tell me the truth. That is all I ask of you, my boy, and
you will find that it is no bad thing to make a friend of Sweeney Todd."

"If I had, sir, anything to confess," replied Johanna, "except that at
times I do feel that I wish I had not run away from my mother-in-law at
Oxford, I should soon tell it all to you."

"And so that is all, Charley?"

"All at present, sir."

"What a good lad. What an exemplary lad. Light the shop fire, if you
please, Charley. Humph! I am wrong," muttered Todd to himself; "but yet
I will cut his throat before I leave to-night. It will be safer and more
satisfactory to do so, and besides, he has given me some uneasiness, and
I hate him for his quiet gentle ways. I hate everybody. I would cut the
throats of all the world if I could. Light the fire quickly, you young
hound, will you?"

Johanna trembled. She felt that anything but a blow from Todd she could
put up with, but in her pocket she kept a jagged piece of flint stone,
which would go through the window in a moment; and she felt that through
she must throw it, if he only so much as raised his hand against her.

The fire blazed up, and Todd at that moment had no further excuse for
abusing Charley. With a sulky growl, he said--

"You can call me out if any one comes," and then he retired to his back
parlour, closing and locking the door as usual.

The morning felt rather raw, and Johanna was glad to warm her hands at
the fire in the shop, which soon burnt brightly; but she did not venture
upon keeping up a bright blaze for long. Todd's mode of managing the
fire, was always to keep a dry turf smouldering upon the top of it, from
which ample heat enough was emitted to keep the shaving-pot upon the
simmer. She now placed upon the fire one of those turfs, a small pile of
which were always ready in the corner of the shop.

She had scarcely done so, when the shop door opened, and a man walked
in.

"Is Mr. Todd in, my little man?" he said.

"Yes, sir. Do you wish to see him?" Johanna wished, if it were possible,
to discourage visitors, but the man sat down at once in the shaving
chair, and placed his hat upon the floor, adding as he did so--

"Yes, a right down good shave I want. As good as if _St. Dunstan_
himself wanted one."

The manner in which the man pronounced the words St. Dunstan was so
marked that Johanna felt convinced at once he was a friend, and she felt
quite a gush of pleasure at the thought that Sir Richard Blunt had such
a continual supervising eye upon her safety.

She felt that she must not look at this man otherwise than as a
stranger. She felt that the least word of recognition might be fatal
both to him and to her. She knew that Todd had some small orifice
through which from his parlour he peeped into the shop, and that his eye
was now upon her she did not doubt.

"I will call Mr. Todd, sir," she said in a moment. "He is close at
hand."

"Thank you," replied the man. "I sit here as comfortable as _St.
Dunstan_."

"Yes," said Johanna, as she heard the watch-word of safety and
friendship once more uttered by that man who was in truth one of Sir
Richard's most confidential and trustworthy officers.

She at once now proceeded to the door of the parlour, and tapped at it
until Todd opened it, and popped his head out with a grim smile.

"Oh, Charley my dear," he said, "does a gentleman want me?"

"Yes, sir."

"A-hem! Good morning, sir," added Todd, as he advanced, tying on his
apron. "A shave, I presume, sir? A close shave, sir? I do think of all
the luxuries in life, sir, a good close shave--what I call a regular
polish off, sir--is one of the greatest in a small way. Charley, ain't
it near breakfast time, my good lad?"

"Yes, sir," said Johanna. "I daresay it is."

"Very good. The hot-water. Thank you my dear--you will take two pence
from the till, Charley, and get yourself somewhere about the market
a--Well now?"

A thin man in a cloak made his appearance at the door of the shop, and
taking off his hat, made a bow, as he said--

"I believe I have the pleasure of speaking to the pious Mr. Todd?"

"My name is Todd, sir. What is it?"

"I am truly delighted," said the tall thin man sitting down upon the
nearest seat, and placing his hat upon his knees. "I am truly delighted
to see you. Pray go on shaving that gentleman, as I shall be some time."

"Some time about what?" almost screamed Todd.

"Finding the tract, from which I purpose reading to you a few extracts
upon the all-important subject of the election of grace, and the
insufficiency of works."

Todd stropped a razor, and glared at the intruder, who, fitting on his
nose with great precision a pair of blue spectacles, began rummaging in
his hat.

"Humph! this is it. No--this is not it. Well, I thought I had it here,
and so I have. This is--no. This is an imaginary and highly religious
discourse upon saints, and _St. Dunstan_ in particular."

Johanna knew in a moment that this other man was a friend likewise. He,
too, had pronounced the words St. Dunstan in a peculiar manner.

Todd suddenly became quite calm.

"Sir," he said, "I take it as a very particular favour, indeed, that you
should have called here upon such an errand, and I only beg that you
will not hurry yourself in the least; I can go on shaving this
gentleman, and perhaps when he is gone, you will permit me the honour of
operating upon you?"

"With great pleasure," replied the man. "Dear me, where can the tract
be? Is this it? No--this is about the pious milkmaid, who always put up
a prayer for the milking-pail, to prevent the cow from kicking it over.
Dear me, where can it be? Oh, is this it? No--this is the story of the
pious barber's boy, who, when he had an opportunity, went over the way
and found his father there! Dear me, where can it be?"

Johanna started.

"The barber's boy," she thought, "who went over the way and found his
father there? Those words are for me."

She was now in quite a fever of anxiety to leave the shop, for she did
not doubt but that by some means her father had heard of her position,
and she felt that then nothing but the actual sight of her in perfect
health and safety would satisfy him. But she dared not show the anxiety
she felt. She bent over the fire, and affected to be stirring the turf.

"You can go and get your breakfast, Charley," said Todd.

"Thank you, sir."

Johanna would not betray any haste, but she shook with agitation as she
neared the door; and then she recollected that she had not taken the
twopence from the till as she had been told to do, and that the
circumstance of not doing so might create suspicion.

She crept back and possessed herself of the pence. Todd watched her with
the eyes of a demon.

"Are you going, my dear Charley?" he said.

"Yes, sir."

She left the shop, and then her first impulse would have induced her to
hurry over the road to the fruiterer's shop, but her eyes fell upon the
figure of Sir Richard Blunt standing in the fruiterer's doorway. He
moved his hand signifying that she should go towards the market, and she
did so. He quickly followed her.

She did not look behind her, until she was quite in the old
Fleet-market; and then, just as she looked round, Sir Richard Blunt
touched her arm.

"You understood my message?" he said.

"Yes. My father."

"Exactly. It is concerning him. It appears that some busy-body, a man I
understand named Lupin, has seen you in your present disguise, and
informed him of it."

"I know the man. He is one of those saintly hypocrites, who make
religion the cloak for their vices."

"Yes, there are not a few of them," said Sir Richard. "They revel in
vice, and daily try to make the Almighty an accomplice in their offences
against society. Well, then, Johanna, this man has tortured your father
with an account of your being in this disguise."

"It would torture him."

"Naturally, without he knew all the reasons for it; but it appears that
he went to the house of Miss Wilmot, and after some trouble saw her,
when she, finding that he knew quite enough to make him wretched, and
not enough to explain your position, frankly told him all, and brought
him to me."

"It was the best."

"Most decidedly it was, and I need only say that he is anxiously waiting
to see you, at our friend the fruiterer's house; but as it would not do
for you to go direct from Todd's door to there, I have intercepted you,
you see, to take you by a safer route."

"How good, and kind, and considerate you are to me," said Johanna, as
she looked up in the face of the magistrate, while tears started to her
eyes. "Without you how miserably I must have failed in this adventure.
Todd would no doubt before this have discovered me, and taken my life."

"Don't say a word about that," replied Sir Richard. "Recollect that
after all it was my duty to protect you; and if I have been a little
more anxious than usual in the performance of that duty, it is because I
admire your heroic constancy and courage, and hope to see you happy
yet."

"Alas! the sun of my happiness has set for ever. I can only now pray to
Heaven, that it will endow me with patience to bear its decrees with
serenity."

"Well," added Sir Richard, "we will say no more upon that subject, just
now. Come with me, and I will take you to your father by a safer way
than just crossing the road from Todd's shop to the fruiterer's."

He led her down a court in Bridge-street, and thence through a complete
labyrinth of passages, some of which still exist at the back of Fleet
Street, and some of which have been swept away, until they reached a
door in a dingy-looking wall, at which he paused.

"This is the back of the fruiterer's house," he said, "and I dare say
some one is waiting for me."

He tapped three times distinctly at the door, and then it was opened
immediately by the fruiterer's daughter, who with a smile clasped
Johanna in her arms.

"Welcome," she said. "Welcome once again."

"Ah, my dear friend," said Johanna, "I shall learn to bless the
circumstances, commencing in affliction as they did, that have brought
me acquainted with such kind hearts."

They all three now crossed a little paved yard, and were soon in the
fruiterer's house.

"Where is my dear father?" said Johanna. "Where is he?"

"This way," said the young girl, who took so great an interest in the
fate of Johanna. "This way, dear. He is in our room up stairs, and will
be no less delighted to see you, then you will be delighted to see him."

"I am sure of that," said Johanna.

She ran up the stairs with more speed that the fruiterer's daughter
could make, and in another moment was in her father's arms.




                             CHAPTER XCII.
                 MR. OAKLEY'S ANXIETIES MUCH DIMINISH.


For some few moments after this meeting, neither Mr. Oakley nor Johanna
could speak. At length the old spectacle-maker was just able to say--

"Great God, I thank thee, that once again I hold my darling to my
heart."

"Father--father," said Johanna. "Did you think for one moment that I
could have left you?"

"No my dear, no; but I was bewildered by all I heard. I was half mad I
think until I was told all; and now we will go home, my pretty darling,
at once, and we will have no secrets from each other. Dear heart, what a
pretty boy you make to be sure. But come--come. I am in an agony until I
have you home again."

"Father, listen to me."

"Yes my child--my darling. Yes."

"If it had not been for Sir Richard Blunt I should now have been with
the dead, and you and I would never have met again, but in another
world, father. I owe him, therefore, you will say, some gratitude."

"Some gratitude, my darling? We owe him a world of gratitude. Alas, we
shall never be able to repay him, but we will pray that he may be as
happy as his noble heart deserves, my dear. God bless him!"

"And, father, we will do any little thing he asks of us."

"We will fly to obey his commands, my dear, in all things. Night or day,
he will only have to speak to us, and what he says shall be our law."

"Then, father, he asks of me, for the cause of public justice, that I
should go back to Todd's, and wear this dress for the remainder only of
to-day. Can we refuse him?"

"Alas! Alas!" said the old man, "more trouble--more anxiety--more
danger."

"No, father. No danger. He will watch over me, and I have faith that
Heaven is with me."

"Can I part with you again?"

"Yes, for such an object. Do not, father, say no to me, for you may say,
and I will obey you; but with your own free consent, let me go now, and
do the bidding of the great and the good man who has saved me to once
more rest upon your breast, and kiss your cheek."

The old man shook for a moment, and then he said--

"Go, go, my child. Go, and take with you my blessing, and the blessing
of God, for surely that must be yours; but, oh! be careful. Remember, my
darling, that upon your safety hangs my life; for if I were to hear that
anything had happened to you, it would kill me. I have nothing now but
you in the world to live for."

"Oh, father, you do not mean to tell me that my mother is no more?"

"No, my dear. No.--Ask me nothing now. You shall know all at another
time. Only tell me when I shall see you again."

"At sunset," said Sir Richard Blunt, as he stepped into the room at this
moment. "At sunset, I hope, Mr. Oakley; and in the meantime be assured
of her perfect safety. I offer my life as security for hers, and would
not hesitate to sacrifice it for her."

The manner of the magistrate was such that no one could for one moment
doubt that he spoke the genuine sentiments at his heart; and such words,
coming from such a quarter, it may be well supposed were calculated to
produce a great impression.

"I am satisfied," said Mr. Oakley. "I should be more than an
unreasonable man if I were not fully convinced now of the safety of
Johanna."

When she had got her father to say this much, Johanna was anxious to be
off, and she signified as much to Sir Richard Blunt, who fully
acquiesced in the propriety of the measure, for already her absence had
been quite long enough from the shop, and Todd might not be in the best
of humours at her return.

After one more embrace, Johanna tore herself from her father's arms, and
followed the magistrate from the fruiterer's house, by the same route
which had conducted her to it.

On their way, he explained to her some little matters of which she was
in ignorance, or at least concerning which she could only conjecture.

"Both the persons, whom you left in Todd's shop," he said, "belong to my
force; and the one only went for the protection of the other, as I, of
course, surmised that you would be at once sent out of the way upon some
real or mock errand, to give Todd opportunity of committing a murder. My
great object is to find out precisely how he does the deed; and the man
who came in to be shaved was to make what observations of the place he
could during the ceremony, while the other distracted Todd's attention."

"I understand," said Johanna. "I of course knew that they were friends
when they mentioned the watchword of St. Dunstan to me."

"Exactly. I gave them instructions to seize the very first opportunity
of letting you hear the watch-word. Are there any large cupboards in the
shop?"

"Yes. There is one of great size."

"Would it, do you think, hold two men?"

"Oh, yes. Perchance you, who are tall, might have to stoop a little; but
with that exception as to height, there is most ample space."

"That will do then. I cannot tell you, of course, the exact hour; but be
it when it may, the moment Todd leaves the shop to day to go upon any
business out of doors, two persons from me will come to hide themselves
in that cupboard."

"They will use the watch-word?"

"Yes, certainly; and you will so dispose any movable article in the
shop, as to take away any idea that the cupboard had been visited, or in
the slightest degree interfered with."

"That I can easily do."

"Well, here we are, then, in Fleet-street again; and mind all this that
I have planned has nothing to do with your proceedings to call for
assistance, if any special or unforeseen danger should occur to you."

Johanna, upon this, showed him the jagged stone she had in her pocket,
to cast through the window.

"Yes, that would do," said Sir Richard; "but I would gladly supply you
with arms. Do you think you could manage a pistol, if you had one?"

"Yes. I have often looked at some fire-arms that my father had in his
shop to sell once, and I have seen them used."

"I am glad of that," continued Sir Richard. "Here are two very small
pistols loaded. They may be thoroughly depended upon in a room; but they
would not carry any distance, in consequence of the shortness of the
barrel. If, however, you should be in any sudden and extreme danger from
Todd, anywhere else than in the shop, or there, if you are pushed for
time, one of these fired in his face will be tolerably effective. You
can keep them both in your pocket."

The magistrate, as he spoke, handed to Johanna a pair of very small, but
exquisitely made pistols, encircled with silver mounting, and she
carefully concealed them, feeling still more secure from any treachery
upon the part of Todd, now that she held his life as much, if not more,
in her hands, than he held hers in his.

[Illustration: Sir Richard Gives Johanna Pistols For Her Protection.]

She shook her kind friend warmly by the hand, and then hastened to the
barber's shop. As she got near to it, she saw the tall thin man who had
so perplexed Todd about the religious tract, come out, and Todd followed
him to the door, looking after him with such an expression of deadly
malice, that Johanna could not but pause a moment to look at him.

He suddenly turned his eyes towards her, and saw her. He beckoned with
his finger, and she entered the shop.

"Well, Charley," he said, with quite an affectation of good humour. "You
are a good lad."

"I am glad you think so, sir," she replied, seeing that Todd paused for
an answer.

"I cannot but think so. I shall have to look over some accounts in the
parlour this morning, and if anybody--any female, I mean--comes for me,
say I have gone to the city, and that, after that, I said I would call
in Bell Yard before I came home. You well remember that, Bell Yard. Be
vigilant and discreet, and you shall have the reward that I have all
along intended for you, and which you should not miss upon any account."

"I am much beholden to you, sir. But if any one should come to be shaved
while you are in the parlour, what shall I say to them?"

"You can say I have gone to the Temple to dress Mr. Block's new wig, if
you like, so that you got rid of them, for I must not be disturbed on
any consideration."

"Very well, sir."

"Put another turf on the fire, Charley, and make yourself quite
comfortable."

What inconsistent amenity this was upon the part of Todd. It seemed as
though he had turned over a new leaf completely, and intended to put an
end to all suspicions, if he had any, of Charley Green; and after
that--after that, Todd still preserved his kind intention of cutting his
throat with one of the razors.

"The very best thing you can do with people," muttered Todd to himself,
as he went into the parlour, "is to cut their throats as soon as they
cease to be useful to you, for from that moment, if you do not put them
out of the way, they are almost certain to be mischievous to you."

What a pleasant lot of maxims Todd had, and what a beautiful system of
moral philosophy his was, to be sure!

One thing was quite evident, and that was that he fully expected and
dreaded the visit of Mrs. Lovett upon money matters. It will be
recollected that ten o'clock was named as about the hour when that lady
was to bring in her little account in the partnership affair of Todd,
Lovett, & Co.; and as he (Todd) had for once in his life been fairly
bothered to make any further excuses to so pertinacious a creditor as
Mrs. Lovett, he had hit upon the plan of trying to put her off during
the day by one means or another, and at night he would, at an earlier
hour than he had before intended, be off and away.

Everything was in readiness, and he considered Mrs. Lovett his only
hindrance--a danger he scarcely thought her--for, at the very worst, he
could not conceive that even her passion would be sufficient to induce
her to sacrifice herself, for the sake of revenge upon him.

His house was prepared so that a match would at any moment suffice to
give the touch that would set it in a blaze; and then, as he said--"Who
shall say where the conflagration among the old well-dried wooden houses
of Fleet-street may reach to?"

His passage in the Hamburgh ship was secure--the fearful proceeds of his
life of rapine and murder were in her hold. How uncommonly safe Todd
thought himself, and how well he considered he had managed his affairs.

Short-sighted mortals that we are! How often we mistake the shifting
morass of difficulty for the _terra firma_ of prosperity, and how often
do we weep for those events, which, in themselves and their results,
form the ground-work of the happiness of a life! Truly we are

    "Such things as air is made of."

If Todd now for one moment could have imagined that his plunder, which
he believed was so safe on board the Hamburgh ship, was actually, on the
contrary, at the office of Sir Richard Blunt, in Craven-street, what
would have been his sensations? Would he have laughed and sniggered over
the bumper of brandy he was holding to his lips in his parlour? No,
indeed.

If he could but have guessed that the ship in which he had intended to
embark, was then twenty-four hours on her route, and battling with the
surging waves of the German Ocean, how would he have felt!

Strange to say, he never had felt so confident of success and triumph as
upon that day. He could have said with Romeo in Mantua--

    "My bosom's lord sits lightly on its throne,"

while, like Romeo, he was on the eve of a blow that at once was to
topple to the dust the very structure of all his hopes. He of course
fully expected a visit from Mrs. Lovett, but he did hope that she would
take an answer from Charley, and go away again. If she did not he
trusted to the inspiration of the moment to be able to say something to
her which might have the effect of producing that which he wanted only,
namely, delay.




                             CHAPTER XCIII.
              SIR RICHARD BLUNT'S SUBTERRANEAN EXPEDITION.


While Todd is thus waiting anxiously for the arrival of his old ally in
iniquity, but who now he considered to be his most deadly foe, and his
worst possible hindrance to carry out his deeply--by far too
deeply--laid schemes, we shall have time to take a peep at some
proceedings of Sir Richard Blunt's, which are rather entertaining, and
decidedly important.

Johanna had not been long gone from the fruiterer's shop, before Sir
Richard said to the fruiterer--

"If you are ready we will go now to the church at once. I have left
quite a sufficient guard over the safety of Miss Oakley, and besides
this affair will not take us I daresay above a couple of hours."

"Not so long I think," replied the fruiterer. "I am quite ready, and no
doubt your men are in the church by this time. They are apt to be
punctual."

"They would not suit me for long if they were not," replied Sir Richard.
"Punctuality is the one grand principle which is the hinge of all my
business, and the secret of by far the larger portion of my success."

They walked rapidly up Fleet Street together, until they came opposite
to St. Dunstan's Church, and then they crossed the road and tapped
lightly at a little wicket in the great door of the building. The wicket
was immediately opened by a man who touched his hat to Sir Richard.

"All right?" asked the magistrate, "and every one here?"

"Yes, sir. Every one."

"That will do then. Be sure you fasten the door in the inside, so that
that troublesome beadle, if he should be smitten with a desire to visit
the church, cannot get in; and if he should come and be troublesome,
take him into custody at once, and shut him him up anywhere that may
keep him out of harm's way for the next twelve hours or so."

"Yes, sir."

This man, whose business it evidently was to stay by the door, carefully
fastened it, and Sir Richard Blunt with his friend from Fleet Street
advanced into the body of the church. He had not gone far before a pew
opened, and six persons came out. One of these was a well-dressed
elderly man, who said, as the magistrate approached him--

"I have made all the necessary observations, Sir Richard, and am quite
easy and confident that I can direct your men how to excavate directly
to Todd's house."

"Thank you Sir Christopher," said the magistrate. "I am very much
indebted to you for the trouble you have taken in this affair, which I
think is now near its climax."

"I hope so, Sir Richard. This way if you please."

The whole party now proceeded to the same slab of stone which the
magistrate had had before removed, for the purpose of making his
inquiries below the surface of the earth. The slab was standing on its
edge against a column of the nearest aisle, and the deep dark opening to
the vaults was before them.

"There is but little foul air," said Sir Christopher. "The stone has
been off they tell me many hours. Shall I go first, or will you, Sir
Richard?"

"Allow me," said the magistrate; "should there be any risks, it is my
duty first to encounter them."

"As you please, Sir Richard. As you please, sir. I willingly give place
to you, because I know, if there be any difficulty how much better
calculated you are than any one here to overcome it."

The magistrate made a slight bow to the compliment, and then taking a
link in his hand, he descended the stairs leading to the vaults of St.
Dunstan's.

It will be well recollected that he had been in those vaults before, and
that he had made certain discoveries, which to a vast extent implicated
Mrs. Lovett in the crimes of Sweeney Todd; but his object upon this
present visit was of a different character. In plain language, this was
an attempt to ascertain if there were any underground modes of
communication between Todd's house, and the vaults of old St. Dunstan's
church.

That there were some such subterraneous passages had become, after the
most mature consideration, a firm conviction upon the mind of Sir
Richard Blunt, and hence he had resolved upon such an exploration of the
spot as should confirm or dispel the idea for ever.

Those whom he had with him, were all persons upon whom he could
thoroughly depend; and the ancient architect, who had given his
services, was to point out the exact direction in which to proceed.

Upon reaching the foot of the stone steps, instead of traversing the
passage that led in the direction of Bell Yard, which he had formerly
done, Sir Richard turned directly the other way, saying as he did so--

"This, I presume, will be our direction?"

"We shall see in a moment," said the architect. "I have taken the
bearings so exactly, that I can point out to you the precise course."

He forced into the ground to a sufficient depth to make it stand steady,
his walking stick, and then removing a little gold cap from the top of
it, he disclosed a small compass, which after some oscillations,
steadied itself.

"Then," said Sir Christopher, "through that wall would lead in a direct
line to Todd's house."

"This will assist us," said Sir Richard. "We will, before we actually
begin excavating, endeavour to find some of the vaults which may run in
that direction, and so perhaps save ourselves an immense amount of
labour."

"Very good," said Sir Christopher Wren, "I can at any time give you,
from any place, the exact bearing of Todd's house, for I have it fixed
in my mind, and can read it off from the compass plate in a moment."

They now at once made their way into the vaults, and by dint of keeping
to the right hand, they avoided going much out of their course. These
vaults were of great extent, and although some of them, owing to being
full of the dead, had been bricked up, yet they were very easily opened,
and in many cases a direct thoroughfare for considerable distances was
affected.

Ever and anon the compass was appealed to, and showed them that they
were approaching Todd's house.

One of the party, a well-dressed gentlemanly-looking man, now stepped
forward, and said to Sir Richard--

"Here, according to the plans of the church, the vaults end."

"Then we can get no further?"

"Not an inch, Sir Richard."

"Then here commences in reality our mission, which is to try to discover
some communication between the lower part of the house occupied by
Sweeney Todd, and these vaults. Let us each use our utmost
discrimination to affect that object."

He lighted for himself a small lantern, and commenced a rigorous search
of the walls, but for some few minutes could find nothing to excite the
least suspicion. At length he paused at one portion of one of the
vaults, where a kind of wooden tomb had been erected close to the wall.
A large piece of dirty oak was placed upright against the earth work.

"If there be any mode of leaving this vault, but the one we have
entered," he said, "it is here."

At these words, so significant as they were of some discovery having
been made by Sir Richard, all those who were with him made their way to
that spot, and from their several lanterns, a glare of light was thrown
upon the wooden monument.

"This," said the person who had before spoken of the plan of the vaults,
"this is the monument of a Sir Giles Horseman, who was killed by
accident and interred here about twenty-two years ago. It was a very
unusual thing to make any such erection in a vault, but his widow wished
it, and the authorities saw no good reason for interfering."

The monument had evidently consisted of an oaken kind of square
ornamental tomb affixed to the wall, and extending out about six feet
into the vault. That portion of it which did so extend into the vault
had fallen in, but the piece of oak which had been originally affixed to
the wall there remained.

"What leads you to suppose, Sir Richard," said the architect, "that this
place will show us anything?"

"This," said the magistrate, as he picked up from amid the rubbish of
the broken monument, a nearly new glove of thick leather. "How did this
get here?"

The glove was passed from hand to hand, and duly examined. No one owned
it, and the only remark that could be made upon it was, that it was of
an immense size.

"Then," said Sir Richard Blunt, "since it belongs to none of us, I give
it as my opinion that it belongs to Sweeney Todd, and has fallen from
his hand in this place."

"It must be so," said the fruiterer. "I know of no hand in the City of
London that such a glove would fit but his."

"But how came he here?" said Sir Christopher. "That is the question. How
could he get here."

"We shall see," said the magistrate. "Lend me that small iron crow-bar,
Jenkins."

The crow-bar was handed to Sir Richard Blunt, and at one touch with it
down come the piece of oak that was against the wall. That was
conclusive, for, instead of the solid wall beyond it, there was a deep
crevice or opening just sufficient to enable one person to go through
it.

"This is the place," said the magistrate.

There was a death-like silence among all present. Every ear was on the
stretch, and every eye was fixed upon the narrow opening in the wall of
the vault. It would almost seem as though every one expected Sweeney
Todd to appear with one of his victims on his back that he had just, to
use his own expressive phraseology, succeeded in polishing off.

Sir Christopher stuck up his compass again, and it was his voice that
first broke the stillness.

"The route is direct," he said.

"To Todd's house?" asked Sir Richard.

"Yes, direct."

"Then all we have got to do is to follow it. It is an enterprise perhaps
attended with some danger, and certainly with much horror, I think. Now,
I do not ask any one to follow me, but go I will."

"I will follow you, Sir Richard," said the fruiterer. "I reside in Fleet
Street, and rather than not ferret out such a villain as Todd from the
neighbourhood, I would run any risks. I am with you, sir."

"And I," said Sir Christopher Wren.

"And I--and I," cried every one.

"Come on," said the magistrate. "Come on. I will take the small lantern,
and if I meet Todd, my great aim will be to take him a prisoner, not to
kill him; and mind all of you, if by any chance a scuffle with that man
should ensue, it would be a scandalous cheating of the gallows to do him
any injury that might even delay his execution. Now, come on."

It required no small amount of real courage to lead the way in that
expedition into the very bowels of the earth as it were; but with the
small lantern elevated as far above his head as the roof of the passage
would admit of, Sir Richard stepped cautiously and slowly on.

The excavation in which they were was roughly but well made. At
intervals of about twelve feet each, there always occurred two upright
pieces of plank supporting a third piece on the roof, and firmly wedged
in, so that there was but little likelihood of a fall of earth from
above.

Suddenly a scuffling noise was heard, and Sir Richard for a moment
paused.

"What is it?" said the fruiterer.

"Only some rats," he replied. "I daresay there are plenty of such
gentlemen in this quarter of the world, and probably they never saw so
large a party here before. They are scudding along in a regiment here."

After going on for about twenty paces further, Sir Richard found a door
completely blocking up the passage. By dint of careful investigation of
it, he found it was locked, and the key in the other side of the lock.
He pushed it through with some difficulty, and then, with a skeleton
key, opened the door in the course of a few moments.

"Come on," he said. "Ah! this is a different place."

They now found themselves in some regularly constructed vaults, arched
with stone, down the sides of which there rolled long streams of
moisture. They were all quite at a loss to know what place they had got
into, for they knew of nothing of the sort beneath Fleet Street, and
they gazed about them with wonder.




                             CHAPTER XCIV.
                             IN THE VAULTS.


"Who on earth would have thought of vaults like these in such a
situation?" said the fruiterer.

"They are," said Sir Christopher, "undoubtedly the remains of some
public building, which probably at a very distant date has occupied the
site above. They are well built, and really of considerable
architectural beauty in some respects. I am quite pleased at the
opportunity of seeing such a place."

"It looks," remarked the magistrate, "as though it had been long hidden
from the world. It is such men as Sweeney Todd who find out more
underground secrets in a month than we should in a lifetime; but I hope
that we shall find out all his cleverness and most abhorrent iniquities
now."

The air in this stone place was by no means very bad, and indeed, after
the vaults, there was rather an agreeable damp kind of freshness in it;
while it was evident, by the manner in which the lights burnt in it,
that there was no want of vitality in its atmosphere. At first it was no
easy matter to find any kind of outlet from the place. After some
searching, however, another door was discovered, very similar, indeed,
to the one that Sir Richard Blunt had opened with the picklock, and
that, too, was found to be locked on the other side, and the key, as in
the former case, in the lock.

"All this locking of doors," said the magistrate, "was, I have no sort
of doubt, to protect himself from any night visit upon the part of Mrs.
Lovett, from whom I feel certain that Sweeney Todd has been expecting
attempts upon his life, as much as to my own knowledge he has made
attempts upon hers; but by some kind of fatality, or providence, they
seem to be unable to harm each other."

"It is a providence," said Sir Christopher. "They must both suffer the
penalty of outraging, as they have done, the laws of God and man; and
the retribution would be by no means complete were they to fall by the
hands or each other."

"I think you are right, sir," said the fruiterer.

The door which was now opened, only led to some other vaults, which
somewhat resembled those the party had just left, only that they were by
no means so lofty or so carefully constructed as they were; and before
they had proceeded far, some evidences of habitation began to show
themselves. Some old boots occupied a place in one corner, and some old
hats, and other articles of clothing, were lying in a confused heap in
another. Sir Richard Blunt looked upon all this as ample testimony that
he was quite close to the abode of Sweeney Todd, and he accordingly
turned to his friends, saying--

"It is necessary that we proceed with the utmost caution. I think, a
very few steps will take us into the cellars of Todd's house, and the
object now is not by any means to give him the least alarm, but merely
to find out, if possible, by what means he murders and disposes of his
victims."

Acting upon this caution, they extinguished all the lights, with the
exception of one lantern, and that Sir Richard Blunt himself carried, as
he still continued to head the expedition. Suddenly he came upon an
arched doorway without a door; and hardly had he proceeded a few paces,
when he saw something lying in a strange confused mass upon the floor,
which, upon a closer examination, proved to be a dead body.

The reader will probably in this body see the spy who had been employed
by Mrs. Lovett to see that Todd did not run away in the course of the
preceding night.

[Illustration: The Body Found Under Todd's House.]

The body was lying upon some stones, that seemed to have been placed one
upon another in such a position that their most jagged corners and
uneven surfaces should be uppermost. A glance at the roof showed a
square, black-looking hole.

Sir Richard Blunt was upon the point of saying something, when overhead
they heard the distinct tramp of a man. The magistrate immediately
placed his finger upon his lips, and all was as still as the grave in
that place. Presently they heard a voice, and they all knew that it was
the voice of Sweeney Todd. It came from above, and reached their ears
with sufficient clearness to enable them to catch the words--

"Her death is certain if I can but get her to cross the threshold of
this parlour!"

Then the pacing to and fro of that really wretched man continued. The
few words that Todd had spoken, had been sufficient to convince Sir
Richard Blunt of one thing, which was, that they were beneath the
parlour, and not the shop. It was from the shop the people disappeared,
so the heart of Todd's mystery remained yet to be reached. There was
another small door-way a little to the left of where he stood, and Sir
Richard, upon the impulse of the moment, passed through it alone. He
came back again in a moment.

"Gentlemen," he whispered, "have we seen enough?"

They nodded, and without another word, he led the way back again from
the dreary subterranean abode of murder. It was only to the fruiterer he
whispered, after they had gotten some distance from the spot upon which
the dead body lay--

"I know all."

"Indeed?"

"Yes. When we get back to your home, I will tell you. Let for the
meantime the general impression be, that all there was to learn
consisted of the secret of that square hole in the flooring of the
parlour."

"Yes, yes! But there is more?"

"Much more. You and Sir Christopher at present, I think, are the only
two persons I shall be communicative with. The whole world will know it
all, soon enough, but long and old habits of caution, always induce me
to keep my information as quiet as I possibly can."

"You are quite right, Sir Richard. Even I shall feel it to be no offence
if you keep entirely to yourself what you have seen."

"No, no! I wish to avail myself of your advice, which has done me good
service upon more than one occasion; so when we get to your house, we
will talk the matter fully over."

By this time they had got so far from the immediate vicinity of Todd's
house, that such excessive caution in conversing was no longer
necessary, and the magistrate pausing, made a general remark to all.

"The less that is said about what we have seen here, the better it will
be. Let me beg of every one not to give the smallest hint to any one,
even in the most confidential manner, of the discoveries that have been
made here to-day."

An immediate assent was of course given to this proposition, and in the
course of five minutes they were all in St. Dunstan's church. It was
something amusing to Sir Richard, at that moment, to notice the look of
relief there was upon every countenance, now that the investigation into
that underground and unknown region was over. Each person seemed as if
he had just escaped from the toils and hazards of a battle. By a glance
at his watch, Sir Richard ascertained that only one hour and a quarter
had been consumed in the whole affair, and he was pleased to think how
soon again he should be personally superintending the safety of Johanna.

Before, however, the party got half way to the door of the church, they
heard a vociferous argumentation going on in that quarter, and the voice
of the beadle, who was well known to Sir Richard, was heard exclaiming--

"I will come in. I'm the beadle. Fire! Fire! I will come in. What! keep
a beadle out of his own church? Oh! Oh! Oh! Conwulsions conwulsions! It
ain't possible."

"Gentlemen," said the magistrate, "we must repress our friend the
beadle's curiosity. Let us all say 'Hush' to him as we go out, and not
another word."

This was generally understood, and they walked slowly in a kind of
procession to the church door.

"Pitchforks and hatchets!" cried the beadle. "I will come in. Dust to
dust, and ashes to ashes. Look at my hat and coat; I ain't a himposter,
but a real beetle! Bless us, who is here? Why--why, there ain't no
service nor a wedding. What a lot of folks. Have they been a grabbing of
the Communion plate? Oh, murder, conwulsions, and thieves!"

Sir Richard went close up to him, and in the most mysterious way in the
world, whispered in his ear "Hush."

"Eh?" said the beadle.

Sir Christopher took hold of him by the collar of the coat, and
said--"Hush."

"Well, but--but--"

The fruiterer beckoned to him with great gravity, and when he come
forward a pace or two, said--"Hush."

"But good gracious what am I to hush about? What is it all--what does it
mean--tell us, for goodness gracious sake? I don't know anything; I'm an
ass--an idiot. What am I to hush about--I shall sit upon no end of
thorns and nettles, till I know.--What is it?"

"Hush! hush! hush!" said every one as he passed the now nearly
distracted beadle, and finally there he was left in the church porch
with nothing in the shape of information, but hush! The man who had been
left by the magistrate as a sentinel at the church door, was the last to
leave, and he took his cue from all the others; and when the beadle laid
hold of him crying--"I'll take you up. I won't let you go," he gently
sat him on the floor; and then saying "Hush!" away he went likewise.

The large slab in the church, that usually covered up the passage
leading to the vaults, was left uncovered; but then the beadle perfectly
understood that that was for the sole purpose of relieving the vaults,
during the week, of the accumulation of mephitic vapours supposed to be
in them; and at all events no impulse of curiosity could be sufficiently
strong in him to induce so desperate a step as a descent alone into
those dreary abodes of the departed; so that he was, in a manner of
speaking, compelled to put up entirely with "Hush!" for his portion of
the mystery.

Sir Richard bade good-day to every one but the fruiterer at the door of
the church; and then with him he walked to his shop opposite to Todd's.
Crotchet was close at hand, and he came into the shop, at a signal from
the magistrate to do so.

"Is all right, Crotchet?"

"Right as a trivet, sir. Lord bless you about so much as a sneeze, but
I'll find it out; and as for little Miss Thingamybob, he shan't hurt a
hair of her pretty little bit of a head."

"That's right, Crotchet. Remember that the bringing to justice, with
ample evidence of all his crimes, of Sweeney Todd, is a great object;
but it is an infinitely greater one to preserve the life of Johanna
Oakley."

"I knows it," said Crotchet.

"Resume your charge, then, Crotchet. All will be well, and this will be
Todd's last day out of Newgate."

Crotchet nodded, and made his exit.

In the succeeding half hour, it would seem that Sir Richard Blunt made
his old acquaintance, the fruiterer, thoroughly acquainted with all he
knew of the way in which Todd got rid of his victims. What that way was
will very shortly now appear; and we think it had better appear in this
regular and most authentic narrative, than in a chance conversation
between Sir Richard Blunt and his friend.

It was the special duty of one officer to come into the fruiterer's shop
with a report and a description of whoever went into Todd's house, and
now this man made his appearance.

"Well, Jervis," said the magistrate, "so Todd has a customer, has he?"

"I don't know, sir. It is a woman, well dressed, and rather tall than
otherwise."

"Mrs. Lovett, without a doubt. No one need go and look after that lady,
for I don't know any one, except you or I, Jervis, who is so capable of
taking care of number one. Todd will find her a troublesome customer,
and if she is at all the woman I take her to be, she will not go into
his back parlour quite so easily as he would fain persuade her."

"Then no one need follow, sir?"

"No; but if the young lad comes out, you may just look in and ask some
frivolous question to see what is going on. If the female is not in the
shop--she is dead."

"Dead, sir!"

"Yes. She will not live a minute after she leaves the shop; but you may
depend she will not do so; she is to the full as well acquainted with
Todd as we are, so there is no sort of apprehension of her coming to any
harm. I should indeed be sorry to lose her."

Sir Richard Blunt was right in his guess. It was no other than Mrs.
Lovett, who, agreeably to her appointment with Todd, called upon him for
her half of the plunder for the last few years.




                              CHAPTER XCV.
                 MRS. LOVETT IS VERY INTRACTABLE INDEED


Before entering the shop, Mrs. Lovett hovered about it, peeping at the
things in the window, and glancing about her as though she had some
uncomfortable ideas in her mind concerning the place, and was coquetting
with her feelings a little before she could make up her mind to go into
it.

At length she laid her hand upon the handle of the door, and turned it.
She stood upon the threshold, and her sharp glance at once comprehended
that Todd was not there. Johanna advanced towards her, and waited for
her to speak.

"Oh," she said. "Is Mr. Todd in?"

"No," said Johanna. "No, madam."

Johanna did not think it worth while at that time to expose herself to
the great danger of disobeying Todd's positive commands, to say he was
not at home, merely upon a point of punctilious truth. Mrs. Lovett
looked keenly at her.

"So," she said, "he is out--is he?"

"Yes, madam."

"And you are Mr. Todd's _boy_?"

The emphasis which Mrs. Lovett placed upon the word boy, rather alarmed
Johanna, and she was more terrified when Mrs. Lovett marched twice round
her, as though she were performing some incantation, glaring at her all
the while from top to toe.

Whatever was Mrs. Lovett's opinion of Johanna, however, she
magnanimously kept it to herself; but the young girl had a sort of
perception, that her suit had not escaped the keen and penetrating eyes
of Mrs. Lovett. This conviction gave a great air of timidity to
Johanna's manner in speaking to the bold bad woman who confronted her.

"And so he is out?" added Mrs. Lovett.

"Yes, madam."

"How long has he been gone?"

"Only a short time."

"Well, my principal business this day, is to see Mr. Todd. I have made
such arrangements at home, that I can wait here the whole day if
necessary, for see him I must--and see him I will; I had a sort of
presentiment that he might be out, notwithstanding I have an appointment
with him."

With this Mrs. Lovett sat down and composed herself evidently for a long
wait--she did not sit in the shaving-chair though. Johanna thought that
as she passed it, she rather shuddered; but that might have been a mere
fancy upon the part of our young friend.

Mrs. Lovett was not exactly of the shuddering order of human beings.

"Did he say when he should return?"

"No, madam."

All these questions of Mrs. Lovett's were asked with a sneering kind of
incredulity, that was quite sufficient to show Johanna how completely
she disbelieved the statement concerning the absence of Todd. That she
would wait until Todd was perforce obliged to show himself, Johanna did
not doubt. There was something about the pale face and compressed lips
of Mrs. Lovett that at once bespoke such a determination; but should any
scene of unusual violence ensue, Johanna made up her mind to rush from
the shop, if near the door, and if not able to do that, to cast a
missile through the window, which she knew would bring her immediate
help.

"How long have you been with Mr. Todd?" asked Mrs. Lovett of Johanna.

"Only a few days, madam."

"And what made you come?"

"My necessities, madam. I was in want of a situation, and Mr. Todd
wanted an errand boy."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Lovett. "This is very strange." She rested her head
upon her hand for a few moments, and appeared to be lost in thought, and
at times Johanna could see that she was keenly eyeing her. Truly,
Johanna had never felt so thoroughly uncomfortable since she had been in
Todd's shop, for she could not but feel that she was discovered.

The only question was now whether, when she did see Todd, Mrs. Lovett
would think it worth her while to speak of the affair at all. The
probability, however, was that she was too much engrossed in the
business that brought her there to pay more than a passing attention to
a mystery which, to all appearance, could not in any way concern her.

But Todd all this while was a prisoner in his own parlour, and it may
easily be imagined how he chafed and fumed over such a state of things.
If any convenient mode of taking the life of Mrs. Lovett had but
presented itself to him, how gladly he would have embraced it; but none
did; and after enduring the present state of affairs for about a quarter
of an hour, he coolly opened the parlour door and walked into the shop
as if nothing were amiss.

Mrs. Lovett was not at all taken by surprise at this proceeding. She
merely rose and took a step towards the door, as she said, in a cool
sarcastic tone--

"I am glad you have come home."

"Come home?" said Todd, with a well-acted look of surprise. "Come home?
What do you mean, my dear madam? I am particularly glad to see you, and
was particularly desirous to do so."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, to be sure. Really, do you know, I told the lad here, to deny me
to anybody but you."

"And he made the slight mistake of denying you to me only."

"Is it possible?--Can such things be? Oh, you careless rascal. Upon my
word, some employers would pull your ears--that they would. I'm ashamed
of you--that I am. Really, Mrs. Lovett, these boys are always annoying
one in some way or another; but walk in, if you please--walk in, and we
will soon settle our little affairs."

"Excuse me," said Mrs. Lovett, "I prefer the shop, Mr. Todd."

"You don't say so?"

"You hear me say so, and you might know by this time, that when I say
anything--I mean it."

"Of course, Mrs. Lovett, of course," said Todd; "I know you for a lady
of infinite powers of mind--of great susceptibility--of feeling--of
uncommon intellect and thrift. Please to step into the parlour, and I
will settle with you at once, for I believe you call for a small trifle
that you are entitled to from me, Mrs. Lovett."

"I do call for what I am entitled to, and I will have it here."

"Charley, just go to St. Dunstan's, my lad, and bring me word the exact
time; and then, you can do it all under one, you know, just walk down
Fleet-market, and see if you can find any love-apples, and if so, you
can ask the price of them, and let me know."

"Yes, sir," said Johanna.

In another moment she was gone. Mrs. Lovett took another step nearer to
the door, and actually laid her hand upon it to prevent it closing
thoroughly. She did not think that she would be safe if it were shut;
and then addressing Todd, she said--

"All disguise between you and I, is useless now, Todd. Give me my half
of the money that has been earned by blood. It may have the curse of
murder clinging to it, but I will have it--I say I will have it."

"Are you mad?"

"Not yet--not yet. But I shall be, and then it will be time for you to
beware of me."

"Mrs. Lovett--Mrs. Lovett, is it not a melancholy thing, that you and I,
who may be said to be at war with all the world, should begin to quarrel
with each other? If we are not true to one another, what can we expect
from others? Have we not for so long carried on our snug little business
in safety, merely because we were good friends?"

"No, Todd, no. We never were friends--you know that as well as I do. It
is a principal of human nature, that those who are associated together
for wicked purposes are never friends. You and I have not been
exceptions to the rule. We hate each other--we always did and will, you
know it."

"Dear, dear!" said Todd, lifting up his hands, and approaching a step
nearer to Mrs. Lovett. "This is afflicting--this is truly afflicting to
hear such words from you, Mrs. Lovett."

"Keep off--keep off, I say! Another step, and I will at once into the
street, and then to the passers-by scream out for public vengeance upon
Todd the murderer!"

"Hush!--hush! God of Heaven! woman, what do you mean by speaking of
murder in such a tone?"

"I mean, Todd, what I say; and what I threaten I will do. Keep off--keep
off! I will not have you another step nearer to me with that hang-dog
look."

"Moderate your tone, woman!" said Todd, as he stamped upon the floor of
the shop; "moderate your tone, woman, or you will destroy yourself and
me."

"I care not."

"You care not?--what do you mean by that? Have you gone mad in earnest?
What do you mean by you care not? Has the scaffold any charms for you?"

"It might have for once, with you for a companion on it, Sweeney Todd;
but if I am desperate and reckless, you have yourself to thank for it.
Well you know that, Todd. I have toiled, and sinned, and murdered, for
what you have done the same, for gold!--Gold was the God of my idolatry,
and it was yours. We both seized the same idea. We both saw how gold
alone was worshipped in the land. We saw how Heaven was affected to be
worshipped by all; but we found out that gold was the real divinity. We
saw that it was for the lucre of gain that the priest clothed himself in
the garments of his pretended ministry, and spake his mock prayers to
the people. We saw that it was for gold only that the rulers of the land
struggled and fought. We found that the love and the worship of gold was
the true religion of all; and we sought to possess ourselves of the
idol."

"Mad!--mad!" cried Todd.

"No, I speak sanely enough now. I say, we found out that by the
possession of gold in christian, canting, religious, virtuous England,
we should find many worshippers. We found out that thousands upon
thousands would bend the knee to us on that account, and on that account
only. If we were paragons of virtue, we might rot and starve; but if we
were monsters of vice, if we had but gold, and kept but by the side of
the law, we should be kings--emperors upon the earth."

"Bah! bah! bah!" cried Todd.

"Well, we took a royal road to our object. We murdered for it, Todd. You
dipped your hands in gore, and I helped you. Yes, I do not deny that I
helped you."

"Peace, woman!"

"I will not hold my peace. The time has come for you to hear me, and I
will make you do so. I will speak trumpet-tongued, and if you like not
that word murder, I will shriek it in your ears. If you like not the
word blood, I will on the house-tops proclaim and tell the people that
it is synonymous with Todd. Ha! ha! You shrink now."




                             CHAPTER XCVI.
                         THE BOAT ON THE RIVER.


Todd did shrink aghast. This wild vehemence of Mrs. Lovett's was
something that he did not expect. Every word that she uttered filled him
with alarm. He began really to think that she had gone mad, and that he
might have everything to dread from her wild vehemence, and that
probably he had gone too far in cheating her out of the result of her
labours.

"Peace," he said. "Peace, and you shall be satisfied."

"I will be satisfied."

"Well, well, of course you shall. But you cannot be if you destroy both
yourself and me, which your present conduct threatens."

"I tell you I joined with you in murder for the love of gold, and I will
have my recompense. Give me that which is mine own. I will have it, or I
will drag you with me to the halter. Do you understand that, Sweeney
Todd? I ask you, do you understand that?"

"It is plain enough," said Todd.

"Then give me my gold--gold for blood. Give it to me, and let me go."

"You are really so precipitate. Upon my word, Mrs. Lovett, you are quite
an altered woman, that you are. I certainly never did expect to hear
such language from you. Any one would think that you had an idea I meant
to cheat you."

Mrs. Lovett made an impatient gesture, but Todd continued--

"Now, anything more repugnant to my feelings than that could not
possibly be, I assure you; and I consider you fully entitled to £22,000
8s. 3d., which is precisely your half of the proceeds of the little
business."

"Give me the money."

"Now, do you suppose, Mrs. Lovett, that I am so green as to keep here in
the house no less a sum than £22,000 8s. 3d.? You really must think I
have taken leave of my senses, to dream for one moment of such a thing."

"Where is it, then?--where is it? I see you are bent upon driving me
mad."

"Why, really, Mrs. L., it would be insulting you to say that you were
perfectly in your right senses at this moment; but come, sit down, and
we will see what can be done. Sit down, and compose yourself."

"In the shaving chair"

"Ha--ha, that's a good joke. In the shaving chair! Ha--ha! No Mrs. L., I
don't exactly want to polish you off. Sit down where you like, but not
in the shaving chair, if you don't fancy it, Mrs. L. Pray sit down."

"For you to cut my throat?"

"What?"

"I say, for you to cut my throat? Do you think I am not sharp sighted
enough to see that razor partially hidden in your sleeve? No, Todd, I am
well aware that you are panting to murder me. I tell you I know it, and
it is useless your making the faintest attempt to conceal it. The fact
is broad and evident; but I am upon my guard, and I am armed likewise,
Todd."

"Armed?"

"Yes, Todd, I am armed, and you are terrified at the idea, as I knew you
would be. Nothing to you is so horrible as death. You who have sent so
many from the world, will yourself go from it howling with fright. I am
armed, but I do not mean to tell you how."

"You are wrong, Mrs. Lovett. What on earth would be the use of my taking
your life?"

"You would have all then."

"All? What do I want with all? I am not a young man now, and all I wish
is the means of enjoyment for the remainder of my days. That I can well
command with a less sum than my half of that which we have to divide
will come to. I have no one that I care to leave a sixpence to, and
therefore what need I trouble myself to hoard? You are quite mistaken,
Mrs. Lovett."

"Give me my money then."

"I will, of course; but I tell you it is at the banker's, Messrs. Grunt,
Mack, Stickinton, and Fubbs. Yes, that is the name of the highly
respectable firm in whose hands for the present both my money and yours
is deposited; and from the high character of the house, I should say it
could not possibly be in safer hands."

"My share will be quite safe with me, or if unsafe, you need not care. I
will have it."

"Step into the parlour, and I will write you an order for your half, and
you can get it in half an hour."

"No Todd. You will make the attempt to murder me if I step into the
parlour. I will not even come further into your shop, than here upon the
threshold of it, with the door in my hand. Why do you keep a razor
concealed in your sleeve?"

"Oh--I--It's a little habit of mine; but allow me to assure you how very
incorrect your suspicions are, Mrs. Lovett; and if you will not come in,
I will write the order, and bring it to you; or what do you say to my
going with you to the bankers, where you can yourself ask what is the
amount of the sum standing in my name there; and when you have
ascertained it, you can have half of it to a sixpence."

"Come, then. I confess, Todd, I am sufficiently suspicious of you, that
I would rather not lose sight of you."

"Dear me, how dreadful it is for friends to be in such a state of
feeling towards each other, to be sure. But the time will come, Mrs.
Lovett, when you will see my conduct in a different light, and you will
smile at the suspicion which you say you now entertain, but which
sometimes I cannot help thinking are not the genuine sentiments of your
heart."

"Come--come, at once."

"I must wait for the boy; I cannot leave the shop until the boy is here
to mind it in my absence.--Oh, here he is."

At this moment, Johanna, who had not troubled herself to go to the
market at all, came back.

"Well, what is the exact time," said Todd, "by St. Dunstan's?"

"A quarter-past eleven, sir."

"How very satisfactory. I am only going a little way with this lady, and
will soon be back. You can keep up the fire, Charley, and in that corner
you will find some religious tracts, which will I hope improve your
mind. Above all things, my lad, never neglect your religious exercises.
I hope you said your prayers last night, Charley?"

"I did, sir," said Johanna, and she said it with a look that added the
query, "did you say your's?"

Todd hesitated a moment, as though something were passing through his
mind respecting Johanna, and then he muttered to himself--

"There is time enough, yet."

No doubt he had begun to entertain serious suspicions of Master Charley,
and in those few words was alluding to his intention of taking his life
before the coming night.

"Now, my dear Mrs. Lovett," said Todd, as he put on his hat, and pressed
it down unusually over his brows, "I am ready."

"And I," she said.

Todd only glanced round the shop, to be certain that he had left
everything as he wished it, and he tried the parlour door. Then he at
once stalked into Fleet Street, followed by Mrs. Lovett.

"It will look better for you to take my arm," he said.

"I don't care how it looks," she replied. "All I want is my money. Do
not touch me, or you will see good cause shortly to me having done so.
Go on and I will follow you; but if you attempt to escape me, I will
raise the street in pursuit of you, by screaming out that you are Todd
the mur--"

"Hush--hush, woman. Do you know where you are?"

"Yes, in the street, but I do not care. All I want is my money, and I
will have it."

"Curses on you and your money too," muttered Todd, as he crossed Fleet
Street, and turned up Bridge Street at a rapid pace. He passed all the
turnings leading to the city, and kept on his way towards the bridge.

Mrs. Lovett followed him closely.

"Stop!" she said. "Stop!"

Todd stopped and turned about. He was mortally afraid that she would
carry out some of her threats if he exhibited anything of a restive
spirit towards her.

"Whither are you going?" she said. "This is not the way to the City."

"It is by the Thames."

"By the Thames?"

"Yes, I go by water; I do not wish to run the risk of meeting all sorts
of people in the streets. I have not communicated to you that we are in
great danger, but it is a fact. I do not now think that I shall get
fairly off, but you will, if I am not interfered with before you get
your money. By taking a boat at the stairs here by Blackfriars Bridge,
we can be landed at a spot within about twenty yards of the
banking-house, which will be by far the safer route."

Mrs. Lovett did not much fancy the river excursion; but she considered
that after all there would be a waterman in the boat, and that the river
at that time of the day was populous, so she thought that Todd dared not
attempt anything.

"Very well," she said; "so that we are quick, I care not."

"I am to the full," said Todd, "as anxious as you can be to get the job
settled."

Mrs. Lovett thought that there was something ominous in the way in which
he pronounced the word "job;" but then she thought perhaps she was too
critical, and she followed him to the stairs by the side of the old
bridge, certainly not without suspicions, but they were only general
ones. The idea struck her, however, that she should be safer with two
watermen, and she said--

"We will have two men, and by so doing we shall go quicker down the
stream."

"So we shall," said Todd; "it is a good idea. Hilloa! first oars,
here--first oars!"

"Here you are, sir," said a waterman.

"We want a couple of you," said Todd.

"Yes, your honour. Here we are--me and my mate. All's right, your
honour. Now, Bill, look alive.--Mind the step, ma'am. That's yer sort.
Where to, your honour?"

"To Pigs Quay."

"Ay, ay. Give way, Bill, give way. A nice day for the water, your
honour; a fine fresh air, and not too much of it. Easy, Bill."

"Very," said Todd, as he took his place beside Mrs. Lovett in the stern
of the boat, which in a moment, propelled by the vigorous strokes of the
two rowers, shot out into the middle of the stream. He whispered to Mrs.
Lovett--"Now, how delightful it would be if you and I, with all our
money, were going from England to-day!"

"No."

"No? Why, I cannot conceive anything more pleasant. Ha! ha!"

Both Todd and Mrs. Lovett were so much occupied in watching each other,
that they did not perceive another boat push off from the same stairs at
which they had embarked with two men in it, and which kept in their wake
pretty closely. The two watermen of Todd's boat, however, saw it, and
they looked at each other, but they said nothing. They went upon the
wise plan, that it was no business of theirs; and so they pulled away,
while Todd glanced uneasily into the pale face of Mrs. Lovett.

To say that Mrs. Lovett kept an eye upon Todd, would be but faintly to
express the feline-like watchfulness with which she regarded him, as
they sat together in the boat. There was not the slightest movement of
his eye--the least twitch of a muscle of his face, that she did not
observe, and strive to draw some conclusion from; and he felt that his
very soul was being looked into by that bold woman, who had been the
companion of his iniquity, and whom he was now plotting and planning, by
some mad desperate means, to deprive of her share of that ill-gotten
wealth, which never in this world, even if ten times the amount, could
make either of them happy.




                             CHAPTER XCVII.
                  THE ATTEMPTED MURDER ON THE THAMES.


The boat that followed Todd did not, after a time, keep quite in the
wake of the one containing him and Mrs. Lovett. It rather went on a line
parallel to it, but it kept at a convenient distance; and there were
those in that boat, who never took an eye off Todd and his female
accomplice.

It must not be for one moment supposed that Mrs. Lovett was quite
deceived by Todd's representations concerning the money; but then it
must be considered that, with all her cunning, that lady was in a very
difficult position indeed--one that it was impossible to change for the
better.

If she had boldly told Todd that she doubted--nay, that she absolutely
disbelieved all that he said about the money being lodged with a firm in
the city, she gained nothing, but simply placed herself in a position
that forced upon her some violent action.

What that action could be would have been Mrs. Lovett's great
difficulty. Of course she would have had no trouble in the world in
going at once to a police-office, and denouncing Todd. That, to be sure,
would have been a great revenge; but then, in the midst of all her
anger, she did not forget that by so doing she had to criminate herself,
and from that moment put an end to all her dreams of revelling in some
foreign land upon the produce of her crimes.

Situated, then, as she was, Mrs. Lovett felt that she had no sort of
resource but to follow Todd up, as it were--to keep close to him, and
partly to worry him, and partly to shame him into doing her justice.
Well she knew that he was upon the point of fleeing from the scene of
his iniquities; and well she knew what a hindrance it would be to his
arrangements to have her at his elbow continually.

And so she thought that he would see it was better to pay her, and be
rid of her, and so every one would have thought; but Todd's nature was
of that mad implacable character, that anything in the shape of
opposition only made a wish a passion.

"I will not pay her," he muttered to himself, "if my refusal so to do
brings us both to the gallows!"

If Mrs. Lovett could have dived sufficiently deep into Todd's mind to be
aware of this sentiment, she might have changed her tactics; but who
could have thought it? Who could have supposed that any passion but
self-preservation could master all others in his mind?

The two boats sped on towards London Bridge--not the elegant structure
that now spans the Thames, but the previous one, with its narrow arches,
and its dangerous fall of water when the tide was ebbing, which was the
case upon this occasion.

The watermen looked uneasily at the arch through which it would be
necessary to go, and where the tide was raging with unexampled fury, and
lashing the sides of the arch like a mill-stream, bearing upon its
surface millions of bubbles, and making such a seething roaring sound,
that it was a point of attraction to some idle chance passengers upon
the bridge to watch any adventurous wherry as it shot through the
dangerous passage.

"A rough tide, Bill," growled one of the watermen.

"Ay," said the other. "Do you want to go through the bridge, master?"

Todd smiled grimly as he replied by asking a question.

"Is it dangerous?"

"Why, you see, master, it may be or it may not. But we are not the sort
to say no, if a fare says as he wants to go through the bridge. To be
sure there be times when there is a squall upon the river, and then any
man may say no."

"But that is not now," said Todd.

"No, master, that is not now, so if you must go through the bridge, only
say so, and through we go. We have been lots o' times when it's as bad,
ay, and perhaps a trifle waser than it is now. Haven't we, Bill?"

"Ay, ay."

"If," said Todd, "the lady has no particular objection."

"Can we not land upon this side of the bridge?" said Mrs. Lovett.

"In course, ma'am," said one of the boatmen. "In course, ma'am."

"But," added Todd hastily, "we must, then, until to-morrow, abandon the
business upon which we came, as landing upon this side of the bridge
will not suit me by any means."

"Pass through," cried Mrs. Lovett sternly. "I for one will not abandon
the business upon which I came, except with my life. It is more than
life to me, and I will go upon it, let it lead me where it may."

"And I," said Todd, in a voice of great indifference, "I, too, am of
precisely that opinion. So through the bridge we must go at any risk, if
you, my men, will take us."

"Pull away. Bill," was the only reply of the waterman. "Pull away, Bill,
and keep her steady. On we go."

By this time a curious throng of persons had assembled on the bridge to
watch the wherry, for previous to its approach two others had declined
the dangerous passage of the arch, and had landed their passengers at a
small stairs some distance from the strong eddying current that leaped
and bubbled through the arch. It was therefore something of a treat for
the crowd to see their boat make for the dreaded spot, an evident
determination on the part of the rowers to shoot through the arch of the
bridge if it were possible so to do.

No one spoke on board the boat. The watermen pulled very steady into the
current, keeping over their shoulders a wary eye upon the head of the
boat. Todd's eyes gleamed like two coals of fire, and Mrs. Lovett was as
pale as death itself.

Perhaps at that moment she reflected that she had trusted herself with
all her sins on board that little boat amid the wild rush of waters; but
if she did, she said nothing. Neither by word nor by action did she give
indication of the fear that was tugging at her heart.

And now the little wherry was floating in the boiling surge that flew
towards the arch, and made when it got there such a battle to get
through. There was no occasion for pulling. The only good they could now
do with their oars was to steady the little craft, and so far as was
possible to keep her head to the current.

That this was done by the two watermen with admirable and practised
skill, every one who watched the progress of the party from the bridge
or elsewhere could perceive; and now the critical moment was at hand,
and the boat being caught like a reed, was swept under the bridge by the
rapid current.

"Easy, Bill," cried one of the men.

"Easy it is," said the other.

"You will upset us, my dear madam," said Todd, "if you move;" and then,
while the two men were fully engaged with the boat, and by far too much
occupied with the necessary movements for the preservation of themselves
and their little craft, Todd, with one blow upon the head, struck Mrs.
Lovett overboard.

She uttered a piercing shriek.

"What's that?--what's that?" cried the boatmen.

The boat scraped against the side of the arch for a moment, and then
shot through it with a terrific bound into the comparatively still water
on the other side of the bridge.

"I'm afraid," said Todd, "that the lady has fallen overboard."

"Afraid!" cried one of the watermen. "Why, good God! don't you see she
has; and there she goes, along with the stream. Pull away, Bill; don't
you see her? There she goes!"

"Alas, poor thing!" said Todd.

[Illustration: Old London Bridge.--Todd Tries His Murderous Hand On Mrs.
Lovett.]

He affected to be overcome by his feelings, and to be compelled to rest
his head upon his hands, while he kept his hot-looking blood-shot eyes
fixed upon the form of Mrs. Lovett in the water.

And now a scene ensued of deep interest to Todd--a scene which he
watched with the greatest attention. It was a scene upon the issue of
which he felt that his life depended.

If Mrs. Lovett were saved, his life would not be worth an hour's
purchase. If she were drowned, he was, so he fancied, a free man; and he
saw that from the shore several boats put off after her, while the two
men in his wherry pulled as though their lives depended upon hers.

Todd could have struck them for the exertions that they were making, but
he dared not even speak one deprecating word to make them pause. He was
condemned only to watch what was going on; and truly a most interesting
scene it was.

Mrs. Lovett had on a large cloak, and it was by the aid of that, as well
as by the strength of the current, that she floated so long as to make
it quite remarkable, and to induce the opinion in the minds of some of
the spectators that she was swimming.

Suddenly, just as a boat that had put off from the stairs by the Custom
House reached her, down she went.

"Gone!" said Todd.

"Yes, she's gone," said one of the watermen. "She's gone, poor thing,
whoever she was, and no one will get her now."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Ah, master, as sure as may be; but you are a witness that it was no
fault of ours, master."

"Certainly," said Todd. "The fact is, that she got alarmed the moment
the boat shot under the arch, and rose up. I tried to catch her, but she
toppled over into the water."

"Natural enough, sir. If she did get up, over she was sure to go. Did
you hear what a shriek she gave, Bill? My eye, if I don't dream of that,
I'm a Dutchman! I fancy it is ringing in my ears. Yet I have heard a few
odd sounds on the river in my time, but that was the very worst."

"And she is gone," said Todd. "Why does that boat linger there upon the
spot where she went down? Stay--stay, I cannot see if you pull into
shore so quick. Now that barge is between me and the boat."

"There's nothing to see now, sir."

"Well--well. That will do--that will do. Poor creature! Viewing it in
one way, my friends, it's a happy release, for she was a little touched
in her intellect, poor thing; but it's dreadful to lose one to whom you
are much attached; notwithstanding, I shall shed many a tear over her
loss, and of the two I had really much rather it had been myself. Alas!
alas! you see how deeply affected I am!"

"It's no use grieving, sir."

"Not a whit--not a whit. I know that, but I can't help it. Take that and
divide it between you. I give it to you as a kind of assurance that it
is not your fault the poor thing fell overboard."

"Thank your honour," said the man in whose huge palm Todd had placed a
guinea. "We may be asked who you are possibly, sir, if the body should
be found."

"Oh, certainly--certainly," said Todd, "that is well thought of. I am
the Rev. Silas Mugginthorpe, preacher at the new chapel in Little
Britain. Will you remember?"

"Oh, yes sir. All's right."

Todd ascended the slippery steps of the little landing-place with an
awfully demoniac chuckle upon his face, and when he reached the top of
them he struck his breast with his clenched hand, as he said in a voice
of fierce glee--

"'Tis done--'tis done. Ha, ha, ha! 'Tis done. Why, Mrs. Lovett, you have
surely been singularly indiscreet to-day. Ha, ha! Food for fishes, if
fishes can live in the Thames. Ha, ha! Farewell, Mrs. Lovett, a long
farewell to you. So--so you thought, did you, to get the better of
Sweeney Todd? To stick to him like a bear until he should be compelled
to, what you called, settle with you? Well, he has settled with you--he
has! Ha, ha!"

Thus in wild ferocious glee did Todd walk through the city back to his
own house after perpetrating this the worst murder, if there can be at
all degrees in murder, that he had ever done. People got out of his way
as they heard his wild demoniac laugh, and many, after one glance at his
awful face, crossed over to the other side of the street with
precipitation.

"Good-day, Mrs. Lovett," he kept muttering. "A charming day, Mrs.
Lovett, and charmingly you look to-day, only a little swelled and
bloated with the water. You wish me to settle with you? Oh, of course, I
will settle with you before we part. Ha, ha!"

Todd had never been so thoroughly pleased in all his life. More than
once he stopped in the street to laugh, and twice on his route he called
at noted hostels in the city to refresh himself with a glass of
something strong and hot. He fancied that he wore upon his countenance
quite an amiable aspect, and if one can fancy the devil himself looking
sentimental, or an ogre looking religious and humane, we may have some
sort of mixed idea of how Todd looked when he was amiable.

In this blissful condition he reached Fleet Street, and just as he
crossed the way from Ludgate Hill to the top of Fleet Market he was
accosted by a miserable-looking woman in widow's weeds, with a girl in
one hand and a boy in the other. They were begging, that was evident,
for each of the children, and genteel pleasant-looking children they
were, although now dejected by destitution, had upon its breast a little
written paper with the one word, "Want" upon it. That word ought to have
been sufficient to unlock the hearts of the passers by, and yet how the
crowd hurried on!

[Illustration: The Widow Asks For Charity Of Her Husband's
Murderer--Todd.]

"Oh, Mr. Todd," said the woman, "can you spare a trifle for the little
ones?"

"Who are you," he said, "that you address me by my name, woman?"

"My name is Cummins, sir. Don't you recollect how my poor husband, John
Cummins, went out one day about a month ago, to carry the watch-cases he
had to polish to his employers, saying that he would call at your shop
and be shaved before he went into the city, and didn't call, sir, as you
kindly told me, but has never been heard of since? The city people will
have it that he ran away; but ah, sir, I know him better. Would he run
away from me and from those that he loved so well? Oh, no--no--no, I
know John better."




                            CHAPTER XCVIII.
        JOHANNA HAS A VISITOR WHILE TODD IS GONE UPON THE RIVER.


"Well?" said Todd.

"Well, sir, I was thinking that--that you might spare a trifle for the
children, sir. They are starving--do you hear, Mr. Todd?--they are
starving, and have no father now."

"What was the value of the watch-cases your husband had with him, Mrs.
Cummins, when he disappeared?"

"About a hundred pounds, sir, they tell me. But don't you believe, sir,
for one moment that John deserted me and these--ah no, sir."

"You really think so?"

"I am sure of it, sir, quite--quite sure of it. He loved me, sir, and
these--he did indeed, sir. You will help us, Mr. Todd--oh, say that you
will do what you can for us."

"Certainly, my good woman--certainly. What is this little fellow's name,
Mrs. Cummins?"

"William--William is his name," said the poor woman, in such a flurry
from the idea of what Todd was going to do for the children that she
could hardly speak, but caught her breath hysterically. "His name is
William, Mr. Todd."

"And this little girl, ma'am?"

"Ann, sir--Ann. That is her name, Mr. Todd. The same, if you please,
sir, as her poor mother's. Look up, Ann, my dear, and courtesy to the
gentleman. God bless you, Mr. Todd, for thinking of me and mine. God
bless you, sir!"

"Ann and William," said Todd, "Ann and William; and very nice children
they are, too, in my opinion, Mrs. Cummins."

"They are good children, sir." Mrs. Cummins burst into tears at the idea
of what Todd was going to do for the children, for the whole of the
parish was impressed with the idea that he was well to do. "They are
very good children Mr. Todd; and although a charge to me, are still a
blessing; for now that John is gone, they seem to hold me to the world,
sir."

"Well, Mrs. Cummins, I am glad you have applied to me, for if you had
not, I certainly should not have known the names of your children. As it
is, however, whenever I pray, I will think of them, and of you; and in
the meantime, I commend you to the care of that Providence which, of
course, cannot permit the widow and the fatherless to want anything in
this world, or the next either."

Todd walked leisurely on.

"Ha! ha!" he laughed. "Good again. What have I to do with charity, or
charity with me? I am at war with all the world, and at war with Heaven,
too, if there be one, which I will not admit! No, no--I will not admit
that."

                  *       *       *       *       *

While Todd was away upon this errand of getting rid of Mrs. Lovett,
which we have seen he has accomplished so much to his satisfaction,
Johanna was not entirely without visitors. The excellent watch that was
kept upon the movements of Todd, in their minutest particular, by Sir
Richard Blunt and his officers, let them know perfectly well that Todd
was from home; but it was not from them that Johanna had her first visit
after Todd was gone.

He had not left the shop above ten minutes when Johanna heard a
mysterious noise outside the door of it. It sounded as if someone were
scraping it with something. At first she felt a little uneasy at the
sound, but as it increased she calmed herself, and resolved upon
ascertaining what it was.

Turning to the door, cautiously she opened it a little way. That was
quite sufficient to dispel any fears that she might have, for the paw of
a dog was immediately thrust through the opening; and when upon this
Johanna opened the door freely, Hector, with a loud bark, dashed into
the shop.

So fierce was the dog's demeanour, that Johanna shrank aside, but master
Hector saw with half an eye that he had frightened her, so he went up to
her, and licked her hand in token of amity, after which he barked loudly
at the shop, as though he would have said, "Mind though I am friends
with you, I am still the uncompromising foe of all else in this place."

"Alas poor dog," said Johanna as the tears rushed to her eyes, "you will
never see your master again."

The young girl's grief for the loss of her lover seemed all to be roused
up freshly from the depths of her heart at this appearance of the dog,
which she had some reason to believe had been the companion of Mark
Ingestrie. She sat down upon the little stool by the fire, and covering
face with her hands, she wept bitterly.

In the meantime, Hector, finding that Todd was not there to do battle
with him, made up his mind for a grand rummage in the shop; and truly he
conducted it with a perseverance and a recklessness of consequences that
was wonderful. He was on the counter that ran along under the window--he
was under it--he was on every shelf, and he tore open every cupboard;
but alas! poor Hector could find no token of his lost master. At length
the howling and the scratching that he made induced Johanna to look up
to see what he wanted. She was rather appalled at the confusion he had
created, and she could not think what he wanted until she found that
there was a shelf at the top of the cupboard, that was equally out of
her reach as it was out of his.

"I cannot help you, my poor friend," she said. "There seems to be
nothing on that shelf."

Hector, however, having retired to a remote corner of the shop, and got
on a chair in order that he might get a good look at the shelf, was of a
different opinion; and, finding that he was not to calculate upon any
help from Johanna, he made various springs up to the shelf with his
mouth open, until at last he caught hold of a little bit of tape that
seemed to be hanging over the edge of it.

The tape was attached to something, which Hector immediately, with a
loud bark of defiance, took possession of, partly by standing upon it,
and partly by holding it in his mouth. Upon stooping to see what this
was, Johanna discovered that it was a waistcoat of blue cloth.

At first Hector did not seem much to fancy even letting her look at it;
but after looking intently in her face for a few moments, he very
quietly resigned it to her, only he kept very close to it while she
turned it round and round and looked at it. It might have been Mark
Ingestrie's. It looked something like the sort of garment that a master
mariner might be supposed to wear, and the evident recognition of it by
the dog spoke wonders in favour of the supposition that it had belonged
to his master at one time or another.

Johanna thought that in one of the pockets there seemed something, and
upon putting in her hand she found a small piece of paper folded in
four. To undo it was the work of a moment, and then she saw upon it the
following words:--

"Mr. Oakley, Spectacle-maker, 33, Fore Street, City."

Her senses seemed upon the point of deserting her. Every object for a
moment appeared to whirl round her in a mad dance. Who should know
better--ah, who should know half so well as she--the handwriting which
conveyed those few words to her senses? It was the handwriting of her
lost lover, Mark Ingestrie!

"Hilloa! Pison, is you here?" cried a voice at the shop door at this
moment.

Johanna started to her feet.

"Who are you?--what do you want?" she cried. "Murder!--murder! He has
been foully murdered, I say; I will swear it--I--I--God help me!"

With the little scrap of paper in her hand, she staggered back until she
came to the huge shaving-chair, into which she sank with a long-drawn
sigh.

"Why, what's the row?" said the man, who was no other than Hector's
friend, the ostler, from the inn opposite. "What's the row? Now what an
out-and-out willain of a dog you is, Pison, to cut over here like bricks
as soon as you can git loose to do so. Don't you know that old Todd is a
busting to do you an ill turn some o' these days? and yet you will come,
you hidiot."

"Mr. Todd is out," said Johanna.

"Oh, is he, my little man? Well, the devil go with him, that's all I
say. Come along, that's a good dog."

Pison only wagged his tail in recognition of the friendly feeling
between him and the ostler, and then he kept quite close to Johanna and
the waistcoat, which the moment he saw her drop, he laid hold of, and
held tight with such an expression as was quite enough to convince the
ostler he would not readily give it up again.

"Now what a hanimal you is," cried the ostler. "Whose blessed veskut is
that you as got?"

"He found it here," said Johanna. "Did you see his master on the day
when he came here?"

"No, my little chap, I didn't; but I don't care who knows it--it's my
'pinion that whosomedever his master was, old Sweeney Todd, your master,
knows more on him than most folks. Come away, Pison, will you?"

The dog did not now show much disinclination to follow the ostler, but
he kept the waistcoat firmly in his grasp, as he left the shop after
him. Johanna still held that little scrap of paper in her hand, and oh!
what a world of food for reflection did it present her with. Was it, or
was it not, an establishment of the fact of Mark Ingestrie having been
Todd's victim? That was the question that Johanna put to herself, as
through her tears, that fell like rain, she gazed upon that paper, with
those few words upon it, in the well-known hand of her lover.

The more Johanna reflected upon this question, the more difficult a one
did she find it to answer in any way that was at all satisfactory to her
feelings. The strong presumption that Mark Ingestrie had fallen a victim
to Todd had not been sufficiently obliterated by all that Sir Richard
Blunt had said to her to free her mind from a strong bias to fancy
anything that transpired at Todd's a corroboration of that fact.

"Yes," she said, mournfully, "yes, poor--poor Mark. Each day only adds
to my conviction that you became this man's victim, and that that fatal
String of Pearls, which you fondly thought would be a means of uniting
us together by removing the disabilities of want of fortune, has been
your death. That waistcoat, which your faithful dog has carried with
him, is another relic of you, and this scrap of paper is but another
link in the chain of circumstances that convinces me we shall never meet
again in this world."

Poor Johanna was absolutely reasoning herself into an agony of grief,
when the door of the shop opened, and an old man with white hair made
his appearance.

"Is Mr. Todd within?" he said.

"No, sir," replied Johanna.

"And is it possible," added the old man, straightening himself up, "that
I am disguised so well that even you do not know me, Johanna?"

In a moment now she recognised the voice. It was that of Sir Richard
Blunt.

"Oh, sir," she said, "I do indeed know you now, and I am very--very
wretched."

"Has anything new occurred, Johanna, to produce this feeling?"

"Yes, sir. The dog, that my heart tells me belonged to poor Mark, has
been over here, and with a rare instinct he found a piece of apparel, in
the pocket of which was this paper. It is in _his_ writing. I know it
too--too well to be denied. Ah, sir, you, even you, will no longer now
seek to delude me with false hopes. But do not tarry here, sir; Todd has
been long gone, and may at any chance moment come back again."

"Be at rest upon that point, Johanna. He cannot come back without my
being made aware of it by my friends without. But tell me in what way
you attach such serious importance to this piece of paper, Johanna?"

"In what way, my dear friend? Do I not say that it is in poor Mark's own
handwriting? How could it come here unless he brought it? Oh, sir, do
not ask me in what way I attach importance to it. Rather let me ask you
how, otherwise than upon the supposition of his having become one of
Todd's victims, can you account for its being here at all?"

"Really," said Sir Richard, "this Mark Ingestrie must have been a very
forgetful young man."

"Forgetful?"

"Yes. It seems that it was necessary for him to carry your name and
address in his pocket. Now if he had given such a slip of paper as this
to another person for fear he should forget what was not so deeply
imprinted in his memory I should not have wondered at it for a moment."

Johanna clasped her hands and looked the magistrate in the face, as she
said--

"Then, sir, you think--that is, you believe--that--that this is no proof
of poor Mark having been here?"

"As I hope for mercy in Heaven, it is to my mind a proof the other way,
Johanna."

She burst into a passion of hysterical weeping. Sir Richard Blunt knew
too much of human nature to interfere by word or gesture, with this
effort of nature to relieve the overchanged heart, and he waited
patiently, affecting to be looking upon some old prints upon the wall
until he heard the sobs decrease to sighs. Then he turned with a smile
to Johanna, and said--

"My dear girl, gather hope from that scrap of paper, not despair. Depend
upon it the address of your father held too conspicuous a place in the
heart of him who loved you to require that it should have been written
upon a piece of paper. You know that my theory on the subject is that
Mr. Thornhill was actually sent to you by Mark Ingestrie, and that it
was he who perished here."

"And Mark himself--if that were so?"

"His fate has still to be elucidated; but that he perished here I do not
believe, as I have often told you."

"This is an exquisite relief," said Johanna, as she laid her hand upon
her heart.

"Make much of it," said Sir Richard; "something even yet seems to tell
me that you will be happy. I cannot think it possible that Heaven would
permit such a man as Todd to destroy your earthly felicity. But how
comes the shop in such confusion?"

"It was the dog. He would look everywhere, and I had not the heart nor
the strength to prevent him. Todd has a horror of him; and fright will
keep him quiet when I tell him the cause of the mischief that is done
here."

"Perhaps then it will be better to leave it as it is," said Sir Richard,
"than awaken his suspicions by attempting to put the place to rights, in
which you might fail in some particulars known to him. And now tell me,
Johanna, what passed between him and this Mrs. Lovett?"

"But a few words, sir, before I was sent out. There is one thing though
that I suspect, and that is that Mrs. Lovett has found out my secret."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, she regarded me with a strange gaze that made me feel that she
penetrated my disguise. I know not if she will say as much to Todd, but
one glance of his eye upon me when he returns will satisfy me upon that,
I think."

At this moment a bugle sounded in Fleet Street.

"That is my signal," said Sir Richard. "Todd is coming. I will be close
at hand, Johanna, lest Mrs. Lovett has told him your secret, and you
should find yourself in any danger. Farewell! Heaven hold you in its
keeping."




                             CHAPTER XCIX.
   THE COOK FEELS THAT ALL THE WORLD NEGLECTS HIM, AND THEN HE GETS A
                                LETTER.


Sir Richard Blunt left the shop, and Johanna had just time to conceal
the scrap of paper which she had found in the waistcoat, and to seem to
be busy at the fire, when Todd made his appearance. She had never seen
such a grim smile upon Todd's face as it now wore. He was for once in
his life fairly pleased. When had he made such a morning's work as that?
Not even in his acquisition of those fatal Pearls had he gained so much
as by that one slight push that had sent Mrs. Lovett and her claims into
the river so neatly.

No wonder Sweeney Todd was elated and delighted. He had all the money
now to himself. There was no one now to say to him "Where is my share?"
He had all the produce of another's awful criminality to add to his own.
Was he not thus a very happy man for a little while?

The sunshine of the heart was not a thing to last long in such a bosom
as Sweeney Todd's. His was not that sweet and lasting hilarity of soul
that can alone arise from a deep and sincere consciousness of right. No!
The fierce delight of a successful stroke of villany may for a time
resemble happiness, but it is a resemblance as weak as that between the
faint watery ray of a winter's sun and the full blaze of the god-like
luminary in all the beauty of the vernal season.

But for the time, we say, Todd was pleased, and the demoniac triumph of
his soul beamed forth from his eyes and played around the puckered
corners of his huge mouth.

"Well, Charley," he said, "how goes it with you, my lad?"

Johanna stared as well she might to hear Todd speak in such a mild
pacific sort of way.

"Sir?" she said.

"I say, how goes it with you, my good boy. How have you passed the time
in my unavoidable absence upon a little business?"

"Quite tolerable, sir, thank you, with the exception that a dog pushed
his way into the shop, and, as you see, sir, has made some confusion."

"A dog?"

"Yes, sir. A large one, black and white. I had no strength to turn him
out, so he had his will in the shop, and tossed the things about as you
see, sir."

"My malediction upon that confounded dog. He is mad, Charley, I tell
you, he is stark, staring mad. Why did you not throw open razors at him
until one had transfixed him?"

"I don't like touching the razors, sir."

"You don't--you don't? He! he! What will he think when one touches him?"
muttered Todd to himself as he turned aside and made a movement as
though cutting a throat. "You don't like touching the razors, Charley?"

"No, sir, I thought you would be angry if I had, so the dog had all his
own way here. I would have put the place to rights, but I thought you
aught to see it as it is."

"Right, my boy--right. To-morrow will be quite time enough to put it to
rights. Yes, to-morrow. Has any one called, Charley?"

"No, sir."

"Well I am glad of that, for when one is off upon an action of charity
one don't like one's business to suffer as well. It's quite unknown what
I give away, and I always like to see the object myself, you know,
Charley, as I find I can then better adapt my benevolence to their real
wants, which is a great--a very great object."

"I should think it was, sir."

"You are a clever observant lad, Charley, and you will, when you leave
me, I feel convinced, drop into a genteel independence. You will want
for nothing then, I feel quite assured, Charley."

"You are very good, sir."

"I strive to be good, Charley, and by the help of the gospel we may all
be good to some extent--sinners that we are. Now, simple as is, it's
really a great thing to be supplied in an unlimited manner with cold
water."

"No doubt of it, sir."

"Well, I have supplied the person to whom my benevolence has extended
this morning, with, I hope, an unlimited quantity, and always fresh.
He!"

Todd here executed one of his awful laughs, and then went into his
parlour grinning at his own hideous facetiousness over the murder he had
committed. Johanna had managed to say, from time to time, what was
expected by way of answer to him, but it was with a shuddering
consciousness that he had been about some great crime that she did so;
and when he had left the shop, she said faintly to herself--

"He has murdered Mrs. Lovett."

It was sufficient, if Todd went out with an enemy and came home jocular,
to conclude what had happened. That person then might be fairly presumed
to be no more, and hence, with a shudder of horror pervading her frame,
did Johanna whisper to herself--

"He has surely murdered Mrs. Lovett."

The first thing that Todd did when he was alone in his parlour, and the
door fast, was to produce the memoranda he had made of all that he had
to do previous to leaving England. One item ran thus:--

"Mem. To pay Mrs. Lovet in full."

After that item he wrote _paid_, and then he laughed again in his
hideous way, and leaning his head upon his hand, or rather his chin upon
it, he spoke in a chuckling tone.

"She will turn up some day--yes, she will turn up some day, and the
swollen disgusting mass, that was once the bold and glittering Mrs.
Lovett, will be pulled through the river mud by a boat-hook, and then
there will be an inquest, and a verdict of found drowned, with a
statement that the body was in too advanced a state of decomposition to
be identified. Ha!"

Todd actually rubbed his hands together, and then he took a good drop of
brandy, and felt himself quite a pleasant sort of character, and one
upon whom the fickle goddess, Fortune, had taken to smiling in her most
bland and pleasant way.

"When I am snug and comfortable at Hamburgh," he said, "how eagerly I
shall look for the London papers, to let me know how far the fire in
Fleet Street, that is to happen to-night, has extended. How I shall
laugh if it travel to the old church, and burns that down likewise. Ha!
I think I shall take to laughing as a regular thing when I am fairly
abroad with all my money, and safe--so safe as I shall be, so very--very
safe."

Yes, there sat Sweeney Todd rejoicing. He might have said with Romeo in
Mantua--

    "My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
    And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
    Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts."

But as it was with the young husband of the sainted Juliet, the day of
reckoning was coming to Todd, and the spirit that spoke of comfort, joy,
and security to his heart and brain, was after all a false one.

But we must leave Todd to his self-felicitations, while we request the
reader's kind company to Bell Yard, for certain things had taken place
in the establishment of Mrs. Lovett which it is highly necessary should
find a place in this veracious and carefully collected narrative.

When Mrs. Lovett, with a full notion of the projected perfidy of Todd,
left home for the purpose of bringing that individual to a sense of his
wrong doings, and insisting upon a settlement, she did not awaken
popular remark or popular interest by shutting up her shop, but she took
such measures as she believed would last very well until she got back
again.

She was not sanguine upon the subject of getting back very soon, for she
had made up her mind that back she would not come without the money.

Previously, then, to leaving, she sought the narrow opening in the
strong iron-door through which she was accustomed to speak to the
discontented cook, and fastening a bottle of wine by the neck to a piece
of cord, she let it down into the prison-house of pie-manufactory,
saying as she did so--

"I keep my word with you. Here is wine. I trust that you will keep your
word with me. A batch is wanted at twelve to-day, as you know."

"Very well," said the cook. "Very well. They shall be ready. But you
promised me freedom, Mrs. Lovett."

"I did, and freedom you shall have shortly. All you have to do now is to
attend to business for a little while. When I ring at twelve, send up
the batch."

"I will--I will. But yet--"

"What is it now?"

"If you only could fancy, Mrs. Lovett, what it was to pass one's time in
this place, you would have some feeling for me. Will you send or bring
me some real butcher's meat?"

Bang went the wicket-door, and the cook found himself once again shut
out from the world in those dismal vaults of Mrs. Lovett's house.

"Twelve o'clock," muttered Mrs. Lovett, as she proceeded to her parlour.
"I shall surely be home by twelve. Todd will find out that I am too
persevering for him. His fears will force him to pay me, although his
justice never would. I will threaten him into payment. The odious
villain! to attempt yet to deprive me of all that I have toiled for,
with the exception of what of late I have had the prudence to keep in
the house!"

The next thing that Mrs. Lovett had to do was to get some one to
effectually mind the shop in her absence, and for that purpose she
pitched upon a Mrs. Stag, a tall, gaunt-looking female, who acted as a
kind of supernumerary laundress in Lincoln's Inn. With this person Mrs.
Lovett felt that she need have no delicacy as regards locking-up and so
forth; and as Mrs. Stag laboured under a defect of hearing, she would
not be likely to pay any attention to what might take place below; but
still Mrs. Lovett was determined to leave nothing to chance, and she
left Mrs. Stag a note which was to go down on the movable platform to
the cook in case she, Mrs. Lovett, was not at home at the twelve o'clock
batch. This note contained the following words, which, as Mrs. Stag's
parents and guardians had omitted to include reading in her education,
were perfectly safe from her scrutiny--

"Send up the four o'clock batch, and you will be free within twenty-four
hours from then."

This she concluded would keep him quiet; and within twenty-four hours
Mrs. Lovett felt that her affairs must be settled in some way or
another; so that it was a very safe promise, even if she had not still
retained in her own hands the means of breaking it if there should be
occasion so to do.

Truly, Mrs. Lovett was, in the full acceptation of the term, a woman of
business.

Mrs. Stag was sure to look in the first thing in the morning upon Mrs.
Lovett; so that as soon as that useful and submissive personage made her
appearance in Bell Yard, she was duly installed in authority in the
shop--the parlour being properly fastened up against Mrs. Stag and all
intruders.

"You will be so good as to sit here until I come back, Mrs. Stag?" said
Mrs. Lovett; "and sell as many pies as you can. I am going to the
christening of a friend's child, who is anxious that I should be its
godmother."

What a delightful godmother Mrs. Lovett would have made!

"Yes, ma'am," said Mrs. Stag.

"I think I shall be back at twelve o' clock; but if I am not, you can
let this note go down with the empty tray on the trap-door after you
have slid off it the twelve o' clock batch of pies."

"Yes, ma'am."

"You will answer no questions to any one. All you have to say is, that I
am out in the neighbourhood, and may come home at any minute, as indeed
I may. I shall, of course, pay you, Mrs. Stag, for your whole day. Pray
help yourself to a pie or two, as you feel inclined. Good morning."

"Good mornin', ma'am, good mornin'. She's a very pleasant woman," said
Mrs. Stag, after Mrs. Lovett had left; "she's a remarkably pleasant
woman. What a delicious pie, to be sure!"

Mrs. Stag was deep in the mysteries of a yesterday's veal.

"It's very odd," added the laundress, as she wiped the gravy from the
sides of her mouth; "it's very odd that Mrs. Lovett is so very
particular in shutting up her parlour always, when she might know what a
likely thing it is that anybody may want to look at the drawers and
cupboards. It's a most remarkable thing to think what she can have there
that she will lock up in such a way."

Upon this, just with a faint forlorn sort of hope that the door might be
left open, Mrs. Stag tried it, but it was fast; and, with a sigh of
disappointment, she returned to her seat again.

In another moment a yesterday's pork yielded up its fascinations to the
appetite of Mrs. Stag.

This, then, was the sort of life that Mrs. Stag passed in the shop.
Lamentations and gravy--gravy and lamentations; and while she was thus
occupied, the cook was pacing the cellars in rather a discontented mood,
with his hands behind his back, reflecting upon things past, present,
and to come, and upon his own dismal situation in particular.

"I cannot stand this," he said, "I really cannot stand this. I have had
promises from Mrs. Lovett of freedom, and I have had similar promises
from he who came to the grating in the door, but none of the promises
have been fulfilled. I cannot stand this any longer, it is impossible. I
am driven mad as it is already. I must do something. I can no longer
exist in this way."

The cook looked about him, as many people are in the habit of doing when
they say they must do something, without having a very clear notion of
what it is to be; but as he at length fixed his eye upon that piece of
machinery, far up to the roof, by which the batches of pies went up to
the shop, and by which flour and butter and other matters, always
excepting meat, found their way down to him, an idea took possession of
him.

What that idea was will show itself in another place.




                               CHAPTER C.
       TODD TAKES HIS LAST WALK UP FLEET STREET AND TO BELL YARD.


The twelve o'clock batch of pies went up, and down came the little
missive of Mrs. Lovett respecting the four o'clock lot to the cook; but
no Mrs. Lovett made her appearance, to relieve Mrs. Stag from her duties
in the shop.

"Ah," said that elongated lady, "it's all very well of Mrs. L. to say
she would pay me for the day. I suppose she means to make a day of it,
and that's the reason. Now, young man, what's for you?"

"A pork with a nob of veal in it to give it a relish," was the reply of
the young scion of the law, to whom Stag had addressed herself.

"Go along with you, I don't want none o' your impertinence."

"Now, ma'am, look alive. Two veals if you please. One pork--five
porks--four veals. Do you make half a veal?"

"No we don't."

"A hot pork--three porks--two porks--eight veals. Don't be pushing in
that way--four porks--smash. There, now, I've dropped mine, and it's all
along of you."

"Do be quiet," said Stag, "gentlemen do be quiet; 'patience,' says Paul,
'and I'll soon serve you all.' What are you laughing at, you little
jackanapes? You ought to be ashamed of yourself to be making faces at a
female twice you age."

"And three times your size," said a voice.

There was a great roar of laughter at this, but by degrees poor Stag got
through the business of the twelve o'clock batch, and sat down with a
sigh, to console herself, by eating two or three of the most
luscious-looking that remained.

"It ain't to be denied," said Stag, "but they are good. I never met with
such gravy in all my life as is in 'em. Yes, they are first-rate. I'll
just put one in the crown of my bonnet, for there's no knowing a minute
now when Mrs. L. may pop in upon one at unawares-like. It's a comfort to
have one of these pies, promiscous like, at one's hand, to lay hold of
just in this sort of way, and pass in one's mouth in this kind of way.
Oh, heart alive, but this is a good one. I declare the gravy is running
out of it like water from a plug, when there's no house on fire, and it
ain't wanted."

Mrs. Stag would have done very well indeed if she could but have got
something to drink. That certainly was a drawback, that at first the
lady's ingenuity did not present any means of speedily overcoming; but
as necessity is the mother of invention, Mrs. Stag at last hit upon a
plan.

"There's plenty of money in the till, of course," she said, "and suppose
I stand at the door, and wait, till some wretch of a boy passes, and
then give him a halfpenny for himself, just to run to the corner and get
me a drop of something warm and comfortable."

Mrs. Stag had no sooner started this "suppose," than she felt a burning
desire to carry it out; and accordingly, history says, that at a quarter
to one she might have been seen at the door of Mrs. Lovett's pie-shop,
with a shilling in one hand, a halfpenny in another, and a bottle
concealed in her pocket, looking like an ogress at every boy who passed,
and who looked as though he wanted a halfpenny, and consequently would
go upon the secret message, for the purpose of earning one there and
then.

Presently one came along the centre of Bell Yard, who seemed just the
sort of person.

"Boy, boy!" cried Mrs. Stag.

"Well, old 'un," he replied, "what do you bring it in--Wilful Murder
with the chill off, or what?"

"Don't be owdacious. If you want to earn a penny--I mean a
halfpenny--honestly, take this shilling and this bottle, and go to the
corner, and get a quartern of the best."

"The best what?"

"Oh, you foolish boy. Gin, of course; but remember that my eye is upon
you."

It was well that Mrs. Stag spoke in the singular regarding her optical
organ, for she had but one. The boy professed a ready acquiescence, and
away he went, with the bottle and the shilling. Alas! Mrs. Stag was left
lamenting. He came not back again, and from thenceforward Mrs. Stag lost
the small amount of faith she had had in boyhood. The well-concocted
scheme had failed, and there she was, with countless halfpence in the
till, and so thirsting for strong water, that she was half inclined to
make a grand rush herself to the nearest public-house, and chance any
one in the interim helping themselves to the pies _ad lib_.

But she was not reduced to that extremity. Suddenly the window was
darkened by a shadow, and through one of the topmost panes an immense
hideous face, with an awful grin upon it, confronted Mrs. Stag.

The good lady was fascinated--not in an agreeable sense, but in quite
the reverse--she could not take her eyes from off the hideous gigantic
face, as it placed itself close to the frame of ill-made greenish glass,
in order to get a good view into the shop.

"Goodness gracious, it's _Luficer_ himself!" said Mrs. Stag. "I'm a lost
woman. Quite a lost woman. I'm undone. It's _Luficer_ himself, I'm sure
and certain!"

Probably the hideous eyes that belonged to the hideous face, conveyed
the impression to the brain behind them that Mrs. Stag was in a state of
apprehension; for suddenly the face was withdrawn, and Todd--yes, Todd
himself, for to whom else could such a face belong?--made his way into
the shop.

Mrs. Stag groaned again, and in a stammering voice, said--

"If you please, sir. I--I ain't ready yet."

"Ready for what?" said Todd.

"To go to--to--the brimstone beds, if you please, sir. I haven't done
half enough yet."

"Pho!" said Todd. "My good woman, you don't surely take me for the
devil? I am an old friend of Mrs. Lovett's, and a neighbour. I have just
stepped in to ask her how she does to day."

Mrs. Stag drew a long breath of relief as she said--

"Well, really, sir, I begs your parding. It must have been the pane of
glass that--that--that--"

"Threw my face out of shape a little," said Todd, making one of his most
hideous contortions, and finishing it off with a loud "Ha!"

Mrs. Stag nearly fell off her chair. But it was not Todd's wish to
frighten her, although he had, in the hilarity of his heart, yielded,
like Lord Brougham, to the speculative fun of the moment. He now tried
to reassure her.

"Don't be at all alarmed at me, madam," he said. "Mrs. Lovett laughs
often at my little funny ways. Is she at home?"

Todd knew what sort of home he had provided Mrs. Lovett with, and this
visit to Bell Yard was one partly of curiosity and partly of triumph, to
ascertain how she had left things in her absence from her establishment.

"No, sir," said Mrs. Stag, replying to the question of Todd; "she is not
at home, sir."

"Dear me, I thought she was always in at this time of the day. When,
madam, do you expect her?"

"Leastways," said Mrs. Stag, "I don't know, sir."

"Were you here, madam, when she left home?"

"Yes, I _were_."

"Oh, and did she leave any message, madam, in case Mr. Todd from Fleet
Street should call? Pray recollect yourself, my dear madam, as it may
possibly be important. I do not say that it is, but it may be."

"No, sir," replied Mrs. Stag; "oh dear, no. All she said was, that she
was going to a christening."

"A christening? Ha! She has been christened!"

"Sir!"

"I only said she had been christened, and no stint of the water, that
was all, madam; but I perfectly understand you. Mrs. Lovett has gone to
the christening of some one of those sweet little innocents, all perfume
and flabbiness, that take one's heart completely by storm. Ah, my dear
madam, when one looks at the slumbering infant, how one feels an
irresistible desire to smother it."

"Lor, sir!"

"With soft kisses, my dear madam. Only fancy me now a baby!"

Todd made so awful a contortion of visage contingent upon this
supposition that poor Mrs. Stag, in the nervous condition which the
whole adventure had thrown her into, nearly fainted right away. Indeed,
the only thing that recovered her was hearing her visitor say--

"I am really very thirsty to-day. How do you feel, madam?"

These were delightful words.

"Oh, sir," she said, "how very odd. I am thirsty likewise."

"Well, that is remarkable," said Todd. "Now, my dear madam, I don't make
a common thing of saying as much to anybody, but you, who are a lady
evidently of refined taste and intellectual capabilities, I am sure,
will understand me, and make allowances for my feelings when I say that
I prefer to anything else--gin!"

"You don't mean it, sir?"

"Indeed, but I do."

"Oh, how could I mistake you for anything but a very nice man indeed,
and a perfect gentleman. It's one of the most singular things in all the
world, but I never do hardly take anything, yet what I do take is--is--"

"Gin."

Mrs. Stag nodded and smiled faintly.

"Well, my dear madam, I don't see why we should not have a drop while I
wait for Mrs. Lovett. Don't you trouble yourself, my dear madam. Now
really do not. I know that you will like to have to say to that good,
delightful, Mrs. Lovett, that you have not left the shop since she was
absent; I will get it. They will lend me a bottle, and I have capacious
pockets."

"But for you, sir, to--"

Todd was gone.

"Well, really, he is a very nice sort of conversable man," said Mrs.
Stag to herself, "when you come to know him, and he ain't near so ugly
as he looks after all. I do hope Mrs. Lovett won't trouble herself to
come home for the next half hour, since Mr. Todd has been so good as to
call and to make himself so very agreeable about the--the gin."

Todd went into Fleet Street for the gin, and he returned by the dark
archway leading into Bell Yard. It was darker then than it is now, and
in the deepness of an ancient doorway, he paused to drop into the
gin--not a deadly poison--but such a potion as he knew would soon wrap
up the senses of Mrs. Lovett's substitute in oblivion.

This narcotic he took from a small phial he had in his breast-pocket.

He did not say anything, but he gave one laugh, and then he walked on to
the pie-shop, where he was eagerly and warmly welcomed by Mrs. Stag, who
very assiduously placed a chair for him, saying, as she did so, that
"Mrs. Lovett would quite stare if she were to pop in just then, and see
them enjoying themselves, in a manner of speaking, in so delightful a
manner."

"I should stare!" said Todd.

"You would, sir?"

"Yes; I rather am inclined to think that that christening business will
detain her. By this time she has got into the thick of it, my dear
madam, you may depend, although I am quite certain she will be strictly
temporate, and take nothing but water."

"Do you think so, sir?"

"I am sure of it. Can you find a glass, madam? I have not the happiness
of knowing your name."

"Stay, if you please, sir. I have one glass here without a foot. It's an
odd thing, but Mrs. Lovett shuts up the place when she goes out, as if
we were all thieves and murderers."

"Does she really? Well--well, we will manage with one glass, my dear
Mrs. Stag. It is the first time we have had a drop together, and I have
only to hope that it will not be the last. I ought not, perhaps, to say
it before your face, but you are the most entertaining company that I
have met with for a long time.--Drink, madam."

"After you, sir."

"No--no, I insist."

Mrs. Stag drank off the full glass that Todd presented her with, and
then affecting to pour one out for himself, but dexterously keeping the
bottle between him and the lady, he only carried the empty glass to his
lips. Now, Mrs. Stag was a decided connoisseur in gin, and she suddenly
assumed a thoughtful air, and looked up to the ceiling as she slightly
moved her lips.

"Rather an unusual taste after it's down, don't you think, sir?" she
said.

"Has it? Well, I don't know. Perhaps you have been tasting a pie, madam,
and that may have influenced the flavour. Try it again. You never can
tell the taste of a glass of gin, in my opinion, until you have taken
two at least. Try this, Mrs. Stag."

"Really I--I. Thank you, sir."

Off went a second glass, and then Todd glared at her with the eyes of a
fiend, as he said, placing the bottle upon the counter, "That ought to
be a dose, I think."

"Sir?" stammered Mrs. Stag. "I--I--God bless me--I--sir--gin--I--that is
lots of pies--gin--gravy. Mrs. Lovett--in the crown of a bonnet--I--my
dear, my dear--Bless us all. Lock it all up--no--no--no. Gin--I--good
again--Pies--gravy."

Todd caught her by the throat or she would have fallen; and then, as she
became quite insensible, he thrust her under the counter.

[Illustration: Todd Performs An Operation On Mrs. Stag.]




                              CHAPTER CI.
             TODD MAKES HIMSELF QUITE AT HOME IN BELL-YARD.


"Idiot!" said Todd, as he spurned the insensible form of Mrs. Stag with
his foot. "Idiot! I would kill you, but that it would not do me any
good. The narcotic you have taken in the gin may or may not carry you
off for all I care. It don't matter to me one straw."

He glared around him for a few moments with the fierceness of an ogre,
and then walking to the shop-door, he deliberately locked and bolted it,
so that no one could get in, even if they were expiring for a pie.

"Humph," he said. "This is a time of day when it is not likely the shop
will be troubled with many customers. It is between the batches, I know,
so I am safe for an hour; and during that time if I do not make some
discoveries here, it will surely be my own fault."

Again he glared around him with the ogre-like aspect, and he ran his
eyes carefully over the whole shop, from corner to corner--from floor to
roof, and from roof to floor. At length he said--

"Where now, if I were hiding anything, would I select a place in this
shop?"

After putting this question to himself Todd again ran his eyes over the
shop, and at length he came to the conclusion that it was not there he
should seek for any hiding place at all, and he certainly paid the
sagacity of Mrs. Lovett one of the highest compliments he possibly could
by concluding that she would do as he would under like circumstances.

"No," he said. "The shop is no hiding place for the secret store of my
late friend Mrs. Lovett. No--no. I must seek in the very centre of her
home, for that which I would find. Let me think--let me think."

Todd felt himself quite at home in Bell Yard. He was in truth the
landlord of the house. It had not been safe to make the extensive
under-ground alterations in the place if Mrs. Lovett had been the tenant
of a stranger merely; so Todd had purchased the freehold, and such being
the case, and his tenant, the charming Mrs. Lovett, being as he firmly
believed, at the bottom of the Thames, who should feel at home in the
place if he, Sweeney Todd, did not?

He felt that he had time, too. There was no hurry in life, and he quite
smiled to himself, as he said--

"How often I have longed for a rummage among my dear departed friend
Mrs. Lovett's goods and chattels, and now how many happily and singly
circumstances have changed about to enable me to gratify my inclination.
Ha!"

Todd, in the security of his bad heart, uttered one of his old
laughs--but then for the whole of that day he had been unusually happy.
His good terms with himself shone out even of his eyes, horrible eyes.

"Yes," he said, "yes, she is dead--dead--dead. Ha! ha! Mrs.
Lovett--clever, fascinating creature--how muddy you lie to-night. Ha!"

It was not prudent, however, to waste time, although he had plenty of
it--it never is; so up rose Todd, and proceeded to the parlour. How
fast-locked the door was!

"Now really," he said, "it is a thousand pities that poor dear Mrs. L.
has gone down to the bottom of the Thames with her keys in her pocket.
It would have made no manner of difference in the world to her to have
let me have them. It would have saved me some little trouble, and the
doors some little damage."

With a malicious grin, as though he delighted in the mischief he had
made, he dashed himself bodily against the parlour door, and burst it
open with a crash.

"That will do," he said. "To be sure, the party who, when my absence
gets noised about, comes to take possession of this house, would rather
that the doors were whole; but what of that? Ha! I have mortgaged it
twice over for its full value, and they may fight about it if they like.
Ha! ha! How they will litigate, and I shall read the pleasant account of
it in the papers."

By this time Todd was in Mrs. Lovett's parlour, and folding his arms
across his breast, he gazed about him with a feeling of marked
satisfaction, as he said--

"For five years she has been making, of course, a private purse for
herself, the dear creature, as well as looking to the share of the money
in the bank; and for the last few weeks, since our agreement together
has not been quite so perfect, she has kept all her takings herself; so
reasoning upon that, she must, bless her provident spirit, have a
tolerable sum laid by somewhere, which I, as her executor, will most
assuredly pounce upon."

At this moment some one clamoured for admission at the shop-door,
rapping at it with a penny-piece in a manner that sounded very
persevering.

"Curses on you," muttered Todd, "who are you?"

"A twopenny--a twopenny--a twopenny!" cried a boy, who was at the door,
in a sing-song sort of voice--"I want a twopenny--a twopenny."

Rap, rap, rap! went one of the penny-pieces against the upper half of
the shop-door, which was of glass. Rap, rap, rap! Todd felt quite
convinced that that boy would not go without some sort of answer being
given to his demand, so he slunk round the shop, crouching down, until
he came close to the door, and then assuming one of his most hideous
faces, he suddenly rose up, and from within half an inch of the boy's
face upon the other side of the glass, he confronted him.

So horrible and so completely unexpected was this face to the boy, that
for a moment or two he seemed to be absolutely paralysed by it, and
then, with a cry of terror, he dropped the penny-piece with which he had
been rapping the window, and fled up Bell Yard as though the evil one
himself were at his heels.

"That will do," said Todd.

He went back to the parlour and glared round him again in the hope of
finding something there, but the only cupboard which he observed was
fast locked. One blow with the poker, using it javelin-like, forced it
open, and Todd began flinging out upon the floor the glass and china,
with which it was well enough filled, without any mercy. What cared he
for such matters? Would he not before twelve hours now be miles and
miles away? What, then, was glass and china to him? Nothing--absolutely
nothing.

He was disappointed, though, for he did not find the supposed concealed
hoard of Mrs. Lovett behind the other things in this cupboard.

"Be it so," he said. "No doubt she fancies her bed-room is the safest
place, after all, for her money--that is easily sought. Bless you, Mrs.
Lovett, I will find your gold yet!"

With this view, Todd, by the aid of the poker, broke open another door,
namely, the one which led from the parlour to the staircase, that would
enable him to ascend to the upper part of the house. Truly, Mrs. Lovett
was great in the locking-up way--very great indeed.

Todd was now getting out of patience just a little, but only a little,
that was all. He naturally enough in his own house wanted to make
discoveries a little quicker than he was making them, that was all; and
so he felt put out of his way a little, as any gentleman might under
such circumstances. He swore a little, and was not so polite in his
mention of the deceased Mrs. Lovett as he might have been.

He ascended the stairs three at a time.

"I wonder," he said, when he reached the top of the first flight; "I
wonder where the wily wretch slept. She never would let me up stairs
since she occupied the house."

The locking-up propensities of Mrs. Lovett did not continue past the
ground-floor; and Todd found all the doors upon the floor he was now on
readily enough yield to his touch. The second one he went into was
undoubtedly the room he sought. It was rather elegantly furnished as a
bed chamber; and as Todd stood in the centre of the floor, he chuckled
to himself, and muttered--

"Ha! when she rose this morning, she did not quite fancy she was taking
her last look at this chamber. Ha! ha! Well, my dear Mrs. L., you had
some taste, I will admit, for this room is very nicely got up. It is a
world of pities you had not sense enough to be my slave, but you must
try to be my equal, which in your poor vanity you thought I could
permit. No--no--no!--that was impossible. Why should I single you out of
all the world, Mrs. Lovett, to be just to?"

This, in Todd's estimation, was a very conclusive argument, indeed.
Whether it would have been so to Mrs. Lovett is another thing.

And now the arch villain commenced a search in the chamber of his victim
of the most extraordinary character for minuteness that could possibly
be conceived. It was quite clear that there he expected to find
something worth looking for, and that if he were foiled, it should not
be for want of due diligence in the investigation.

[Illustration: Todd Destroys Mrs. Lovett's Furniture.]

In the course of ten minutes, the trim and well-kept bedroom was one
scene of confusion and disorder. The dressing-glass was thrown down,
and, being in his way once, was kicked to the other end of the room, and
smashed to fragments. The bed-clothes were tossed hither and thither in
the most reckless manner. Boxes were burst open and ransacked, but all
in vain. Not one penny-piece could Todd discover.

"Confound her!" he said, as he wiped his brow with a lace cap he picked
off the dressing-table; "confound her! I begin to suspect that what she
had of her own she put in her pocket this morning, and it has gone down
to the bottom of the river with her! How infernally provoking!"

He peeped up the chimney, and got nothing by that motion but a flop of
soot in his eye.

He stamped and swore and cursed in the most horrible manner that can
possibly be conceived.

Feeling that Mrs. Lovett in the matter of her little private savings had
been one too many for him, he looked rather hopelessly through the other
rooms of the house. They were all completely vacant, and from the
appearance of the dust upon the floors of them did not seem to have been
entered for years past. He gave up the search in despair, and gloomily
walked down stairs to the parlour again.

"It is lost," he said. "It is lost. Well, I must even be content with
that which I have: I don't think any one will be the richer for what is
here. No, no. It could not have escaped my search, and if it has done so
by a miracle, or next thing to one, it will remain until the house falls
to pieces years hence, perhaps, and fall into the hands of some one when
I am de--No--no--what puts that word _dead_ into my mouth? I hate to
think of it! I am young in constitution, and shall live many--many years
yet; oh, yes, I--I need have no fear of death."

Todd glared round him as though he expected that the very
impersonification of the grim King of Terrors would rise up before him
to take vengeance for being treated so slightingly; but all was still.

He wiped his brow again with the lace cap of Mrs. Lovett, which he had
mechanically retained when he left the bed-room, and then he began to
ask himself what should be done with the shop.

"For a few hours yet," he said, "a few short hours, there must be no
disturbance and no commotion in this neighbourhood with which my name
may possibly be connected. After that, they may do what they like and
say what they like, but now all must be peace and silence. What shall I
do with this confounded shop, now? I wish I had not given so strong a
dose of the narcotic to you, old woman, left in charge by Mrs. Lovett.
Ah, what is that?"

The sound from the shop as of some one being violently sick, came upon
Todd's ears.

"Ah," he said, "so the narcotic has taken that effect, has it, upon Mrs.
Lovett's representative? Well, well, she will recover from it much
sooner than I thought she would, and that will now be all the better,
for it absolves me of my difficulty about the shop for the next few
hours."

He walked into the shop and found Mrs. Stag sitting up behind the
counter, and in rather a dubious condition as regarded the peace of her
stomach.

"Well, ma'am," said Todd. "How are you now?"

"The Lord have mercy upon us!"

"Amen! But how came you in this state, ma'am?"

"The pies, sir. The pies. You really have no idea of how very rich they
are, sir. It's all along of the pies, that's all, sir; but I am getting
better, though my head is none of the best."

"Yes," said Todd. "Of course it was the very rich pies. It could not
have been what you drank."

"Oh, no, no. Oh, dear no. That wasn't enough to hurt an infant, sir, as
you ought to know. What a mercy it is that Mrs. Lovett has not come
home, for she is rather a violent woman at times. It's really quite a
mercy."

"She won't be home just yet, I think," said Todd. "You will have time to
get completely to rights before you see her, and when you do see her I
would advise you to make your peace with the other world as quickly as
you can!"

Todd closed the parlour door; and as it was only the lock that had
given, it did not show much symptoms of what had happened to it; as that
in all likelihood Mrs. Stag, supposing that it was fast as she had first
found it, would not pay any attention to it or scrutinise it
sufficiently to be aware that it had been at all tampered with by any
one.

"Only a few hours after all," muttered Todd, "and then I don't care what
anybody thinks or says about this shop and its affairs, or about me in
connection with them. Ah, I had quite forgotten. I wonder what Mrs.
Lovett's cook is about?"

Todd paused, and gave some few moments' thought to the cook. He had an
idea of going down to the oven cellar, and killing him, so that he might
feel quite certain he was out of the way of perpetrating any mischief;
but a second thought determined him in the other way.

"No--no," he said. "What can he do? No doubt the house will be shut
after a time, and then he will starve to death. Ha!"




                              CHAPTER CII.
           TAKES A SLIGHT GLANCE AT TOBIAS AND HIS INTENDED.


The idea of the cook being starved to death, had quite reconciled Todd
to the notion of leaving him alone; so he left the shop, and proceeded
to his own domicile in Fleet Street, and as nothing of great moment has
occurred during his absence, we will take the liberty of conducting the
reader to the house of Colonel Jeffery, and taking a slight peep at our
old friend Tobias, whom we left in rather a critical position.

Tobias had been in so delicate a condition, prior to the last outrage of
Todd at the colonel's house, that one might suppose such a thing would
go far towards terminating his mortal career, and so indeed it did; but
in youth there is such a tenacity to life that we may fairly look for
the most extraordinary things in the shape of clinging to the vital
principle, and in the way of getting over injuries. Poor Tobias was, to
be sure, thrown back by Todd's attack, but he was not destroyed. The
medical man gave it as his opinion, that the mental shock was by far
worse than the physical injury, and he said to the colonel--

"Some means must be devised to make him believe that he is quite free
from any further attack upon the part of Todd, or he will never recover.
He will awaken, it is true, from the trance he is now in, but it will be
to all the horrors and dread of some expected fresh attack from Todd."

"But I will assure him of my protection," said the colonel. "I will in
the most positive manner tell him that he shall here be perfectly safe
from that man."

"Excuse me, colonel," replied the surgeon, "but all that was done
before, and yet Tobias has found that Todd reached him, even in one of
the rooms of this house. You will find that he will be very sceptical
regarding your powers to protect him now from that bold and infamous
man. I hope I am not offending you, colonel, by my plain speaking?"

"Not at all my dear sir, not at all. Do not think of such a thing. Plain
speaking, when it is dictated by friendly feeling, is one of the most
admirable things in all the world, and no one can possibly admire it
more than I do. I feel, too, the full force of what you have said, and
that to the ears of Tobias it would sound like a farce for me to offer
to protect him from the further assaults of Sweeney Todd."

"But something may be done that is quite of a decisive character upon
the subject, colonel."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean, that to sick folks I say anything that I think will tend to
their recovery, even although I may feel that I am a little
transgressing the bounds of truth. We must consider what we say to
people in the position of Tobias, as so much medicine artfully
administered to him."

"I quite agree with you, and I feel that you have some important
suggestion to make to me regarding Tobias. What is it?"

"Then, colonel, if I were you, I should not hesitate for one moment to
tell him that Todd was dead."

"Dead?"

"Yes, that is the only thing that will thoroughly convince Tobias he has
nothing further to fear from him. I think it not only one of those
delusions that are in themselves harmless, but I think it a justifiable
dose of moral medicine."

"It shall be done," said the colonel. "It shall be done. I do not
hesitate about it for a moment. I thank you for the idea, and if that
will do Tobias any good, he shall have the full benefit of it at my
hands. Shall we seek him now?"

"Yes, I hope that he is in a state to fully comprehend what is said to
him, and in that case the sooner we say this from which we expect such
good results, the better it will be. I am most anxious to witness the
effect it will have upon his mind, colonel. If I mistake not, it will be
one far exceeding anything you can suppose."

Upon this they both went up stairs to the chamber in which poor Tobias
lay. The boy was upon a bed, lying to all appearance bereft of sense.
His breathing was rather laborious, and every now and then there was a
nervous twitching of the muscles of the face, which bespoke how ill at
ease the whole system was. At times too he would mutter some incoherent
words, during which both the medical man and the colonel thought they
could distinguish the name of Todd.

"Yes," said the surgeon, "that is the spectre that is ever present to
the imagination of this poor boy and we must speedily get rid of it from
him, or it will assuredly kill him. I would not answer for his life
another twenty-four hours, if his fancy were still to continue to be
tortured by an expectation of the appearance of Todd."

"Will you, or shall I, speak to him?"

"You, if you please, colonel; he knows your voice better no doubt than
he does mine."

Colonel Jeffery bent his head close down to Tobias's ear, and in a clear
correct voice spoke to him.

"Tobias, I have come to say something very important to you. It is
something which I hope will do you good to hear. Do you comprehend me,
Tobias?"

The sufferer uttered a faint groan, as he tossed one of his arms
uneasily about upon the coverlet.

"You quite understand me, Tobias? Only say that you do so, and I shall
be satisfied to go on, and say to you what I have to say."

"Todd, Todd!" gasped Tobias. "Oh, God! coming--he is coming."

"You hear," said the surgeon. "That is what his imagination runs upon.
That is proof conclusive."

"It is, poor boy," said the colonel. "But I wish I could get him to say
that he fully comprehends my words."

"Never mind that. I would recommend that you make the communication to
him at once, and abruptly. It will, in all likelihood, thus have more
effect than if you dilute it by any great note of preparation before it
reaches his ears."

The Colonel nodded his acquiescence; and then, once more inclining his
mouth to Tobias's ear, he said, in clear and moderately loud accents--

"Sweeney Todd is dead!"

Tobias at once sprang up to a sitting posture in the bed, and cried--

"No, no! Is it really so?"

"Yes," added the colonel. "Sweeney Todd is dead."

For a moment or two Tobias looked from the colonel to the surgeon, and
from the surgeon to the colonel, with a bewildered expression of
countenance, and then burst into tears.

"That will do," said the surgeon.

"It has succeeded?" whispered the colonel.

"Fully. It could not do better. He will recover full consciousness now
when those tears are over. All will go well with him; but do not, by
word or look, insinuate the remotest doubt of the truth of what you have
told him. It would be better to say the same thing to any of the
servants that may come about him."

"I will--I will; and particularly to his master, whom I would as soon
trust with a secret as I would with the command of a regiment of
cavalry."

Tobias wept for the space of about ten minutes, and then he looked up
with a face in which there was a totally different expression to what it
had borne but a short time previously, and with a faltering voice he
spoke--

"And so Todd is gone at last?"

"He has," replied the colonel; "and, therefore, you may now, Tobias,
make your mind quite easy about him."

"Oh, quite--quite!"

By the long breath that Tobias drew, it was evident what an exquisite
relief it was to him to be able to feel that the man who had been the
bane of his young life was no more. No assurance of protection from him
could have come near the feeling of satisfaction that he now felt in the
consciousness of such a release. But Todd being dead, settled the affair
at once. There was no drawback upon his satisfaction.

"Oh!" he said, "I do indeed feel that life is with me again, and that I
can be happy. Where is Minna?"

"She cannot remain here always," replied the colonel; "but she will be
in the house shortly, upon a visit to your mother, and you shall
yourself have the pleasure of communicating the welcome news of Todd's
death to her--news which to her bears as great a significance as it does
to you."

"Oh, yes," replied Tobias. "Minna will be pleased. We ought not to
rejoice at the death of any one; but then Todd was so very, very bad a
man, that his dying is a good thing, as it keeps him from loading his
soul with more wickedness."

"That," said the medical man, "is the proper view to take of the matter,
Tobias; but now you will permit me to say to you that you should not
talk too much, nor overtax your young strength. I will darken the room,
by closing the shutters; and it is highly desirable that you should
enjoy a few hours calm sleep, which now, with the conviction that Todd
is dead, I do not see any difficulty in your doing."

"Oh, no--no," said Tobias, with quite a bright expression upon his face.
"Oh, no. I shall sleep well now. Quite well, for what have I to fear
now?" These few words were spoken in such a tone of calm composure, that
the colonel had every reason to rejoice in the experiment he had tried,
upon the advice of the medical man. The latter closed the shutters of
the room all but one, so that there was but a soft and chastened light
in the room; and then, with a smile upon his face, Tobias--after hoping
that they would arouse him when Minna should come, and receiving a
promise that way--turned his face to his pillow, and composed himself to
the first pure rest he had had since the attack that the villain Todd
had made upon him in the colonel's house.

"It is not much of a deception," said Colonel Jeffery to the surgeon,
when the latter was leaving the house, "for I believe now that Todd's
hours are indeed numbered. He will be arrested to-night."

"I am glad to hear it," replied the surgeon. "Such a notable villain
ought to be as quickly as possible put out of the world."

"He ought, indeed; and from what I hear from Sir Richard Blunt, I
believe that before twenty-four hours are gone over my head, the whole
of London will ring with the name of Todd, and the story of his
frightful criminality."

Tobias slept quietly, and securely for four hours, during which space of
time he was twice visited by Minna Gray, who had arrived while he was in
that state of repose. The colonel, although he felt the danger of
letting Mrs. Ragg know that the report to Tobias of the death of Todd
was premature, felt no such scruple with regard to Minna. Indeed he
considered that it would have been an insult to her judgment not to have
told her exactly how the case stood.

When she heard it all, and upon visiting Tobias's bed-room, found what a
sweet sleep he was in, and what a quiet gentle smile was upon his face,
she tearfully acknowledged what a good thing the innocent deception was
which had produced such a result.

"It will save him," she said.

"It will," replied the colonel; "and be sure that you keep sufficient
guard over yourself to keep from betraying the secret."

"Oh, sir, trust me, I will."

"And remember that in this house, Minna, it is known only to you and to
me. If Tobias should ask you anything about it, you had better know
nothing, for I promised him that he should have the pleasure of making
the communication to you himself, therefore you cannot be puzzled by any
questions regarding particulars when he is your informant."

Minna joyfully concurred with all that the colonel said upon this head;
and then, after a long talk with Mrs. Ragg in the kitchen--that good
lady having the most implicit faith in the story of the death of Todd,
and the profoundest hope that she should soon hear the full particulars
of that event--she betook herself to the bedside of Tobias, there to
await his awakening.

When he did open his eyes, they were clear and bright, and the fever had
left his brow and cheeks. The first object his eye rested upon was
Minna, and the first words he said were--

"Todd is dead!"

"Ah, then, Tobias, you have nothing now to fear, for you have not an
enemy in the world."

"No," he cried, "I have now nothing to fear--but, my Minna, my own, my
beautiful! how much I have to love! We shall be now, Minna, very, very
happy, indeed, and God will bless me for your dear sake!"




                             CHAPTER CIII.
          MR. LUPIN HAS A SINGULAR INTERVIEW WITH MRS. OAKLEY.


Amid all the exciting circumstances that it has been our duty to
relate--amid the turmoil of events consequent upon the wild villainy of
Todd, and the urgent attempts of Mrs. Lovett to get her accounts
audited--we have very much lost sight of Mrs. Oakley.

Perhaps the reader has not been altogether unwilling to lose sight of a
lady who, we will admit, was not calculated to make great advances in
his esteem.

But yet one thing must be recollected, and that is that Mrs. Oakley is
Johanna's mother! That we opine is a fact which she should be given some
degree of attention for; and insomuch as the bright eyes of the fair and
noble-minded Johanna might be dimmed by an additional tear if anything
very serious was to become of Mrs. Oakley, we will go a little out of
our way just now to see what that deluded parson-ridden woman is about.

The outgoings and the incomings of Mrs. Oakley for a long time past had
been so various and discursive, that the poor spectacle-maker had long
since left off considering that he had anything in the shape of a
domestic establishment. Certainly, Johanna was always at hand, until
lately, to attend to her father's comforts--but the wife never. There
was either a prayer-meeting, or a love-feast, or some congregation or
another assembled to hear or to see Mr. Lupin; so that if the wife and
the mother went to such places to learn her duties, it was pretty
evident that the lesson occupied the whole of her time.

But still at times she did come home. At odd seasons she was to be found
groaning and snuffling at the fireside in the little dark parlour at the
back of the shop; but now for some few days she had totally disappeared.

Mr. Oakley was alone.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Up a dingy court in the City, not a hundred miles from the dingy
purlieus of Monkwell Street, there was a dingy conventicle, upon the
front of which the word "Ebenezer" announced its character, or its
would-be character. The upper part of this chapel was converted into a
dwelling-place, and there luxuriated Mr. Lupin.

The flock (geese, of course!) of the reverend gent rented the edifice,
so that there he was rent free, and there he was in the habit of
inviting to tea such of the females of his congregation who either had
money of their own, or whose husbands had tills easily accessible, or
pockets into which the wife's hand could be dipped at discretion; and
dipped it generally was at in-discretion;--for folks, whether they be
wives or not, when they can dip into other folks' pockets, do not always
know how much to take just and no more.

Now Mr. Lupin had established a Three-days-two-hours
and-general-subscription-saving grace-prayer, which consisted of praying
every two hours for three days and three nights, and at each prayer
making an offering in hard cash for the use of the church and the
gospel, he (Mr. Lupin) being both the church and the gospel.

Alas! what will not human folly in the name of religion stoop to! There
were women--mothers of families, who came to Mr. Lupin's house above the
chapel with what plunder they could get together, and there actually
stand the three days and three nights, the reverend gent making it is
duty to keep them awake at the end of every two hours at least, as he
pretended to pray, and sending them away completely placid, but with the
comfortable conviction, as they themselves expressed it, that their
"souls were saved alive."

Mrs. Oakley was one of these dupes.

Now, although these proceedings were very profitable to Mr. Lupin, he
found that it was very irksome to get up himself in the middle of the
night to awaken the sinners to prayer, so he used to introduce
brandy-and-water after he had pretty well tired out his devotee, and
ascertained the amount of money he was likely to get, and in the
confusion of mind consequent upon that gentle stimulant, the time went
on very glibly.

"Sister Oakley," said Lupin, on the evening of the first day of Mrs.
Oakley's residence beneath his highly-spiritual roof. "Sister Oakley,
truly you will be a great brand snatched from the burning--How much
money have you got?"

"Alas!" said Mrs. Oakley, "business must be bad, for I only found in the
till three pounds eleven-and-sixpence."

Mr. Lupin groaned.

"But I will from time to time take what I can, and let you have it, for
the welfare of one's precious soul is above all price."

"Truly, Sister Oakley, it is, and you may as well give me the small
instalment now if it shall seem right unto thee, sister. I thank you in
the name of the Lord! Humph--only three pounds eleven-and-sixpence.
Well, well, we shall do better another time, perhaps, sister. Rest in
peace, and I will from time to time come in and awaken thee to prayer.
Truly and verily I have a hard time of it always."

It was on the second night that fatigue had had a great effect upon Mrs.
Oakley, and upon the reverend gent likewise that he brought her a
tumbler of hot brandy-and-water, saying as he placed it by her--

"Truly I have had a dream, and the Lord told me to give you this. I pray
you take it, Mrs. O., and may it put you in mind of the glory of the
world that is to come--Amen!"

Mr. Lupin retired, and as the stimulant was not at all an ungrateful
thing to Mrs. Oakley, she was about to raise it to her lips, when a
stunning knock at the chapel door made her give such a start, that she
dropped glass, and spirit, and spoon to the ground. No doubt, a
repetition of the knock at the moment, prevented Lupin from hearing the
crash, which the fall in spirits produced. Mrs. Oakley heard him open
the window of his room, and in a voice of stifled anger cry--

"Who is there? Who is there?"

"It's me, Groggs, and you know it," said a female voice. "Come down and
open the door, or I will rouse the whole neighbourhood."

"Come, you be off. I have some one here."

"What, another idiot? Ho!--ho!--ho! Why, Groggs, they will find you out
some day, and limb you. If they only knew that you were Groggs the
returned transport, how they would mob you to be sure. But I have come
for money, old fellow, and I will have it. I ain't drunk, but I have had
enough--just enough, mark me old boy, and you know what I am capable of
when that's the case. I am your wife and you know it. Ho! ho!"

Dab came the knocker again upon the chapel door.

"Do you want to be my ruin?" said Lupin. "Stay a moment and I will throw
you out five shillings; but if you make any noise you shall not have one
farthing from me."

"Shall I not? Ha!--ha! Shall I not? Five shillings indeed!"

The lady upon this, feeling no doubt that both her wants and his powers
of persuasion were made very light of, commenced such a tremendous
knocking at the door, that the terrified Lupin at once descended to let
her in, uttering such terrible curses as he went that Mrs. Oakley was
petrified with dismay.

Foolish woman! Did she expect that her idol would turn out to be
anything but a common brazen image?

In the course of a few moments she heard the couple coming up stairs
again, and when they reached the top, she heard Lupin say, "Confound
you, you always will come with your infernal demands at the very worst
and most awkward times and seasons to me. Did you not take ten pounds
some time ago, and promise to come near me no more?"

"Ha!--ha! Yes, I did. But I am here again you see. You thought I would
drink myself to death with that amount of money, and that you would get
rid of me, but it did me good. Ho!--ho!--ho! The good stuff did me
good."

"You are a fool," said Lupin. "I tell you, woman, you will be my ruin,
my absolute ruin; and then where will your supplies come from I should
like to know? Why I have an idiot only in the next room, of whom I hope
to make a good thing; and if you had only come in five minutes sooner
you would have been heard by her, and I should have been done up here."

"And why don't she hear you now? Have you cut her throat like you did
the woman's by Wapping?"

"Hush!--hush! you devil! Why do you allude to that?"

"Because I like, my beauty. Because I know you did it. And whenever I do
mention it, the gallows shines out in your face as plain--ay, as plain
as this hand; and I like to see you quake and change colour, and be
ready almost to fall down with your fears. Ho!--ho! I like that. Yes,
it's as good to me as a drop of drink, that it is."

"I only wish your throat was cut, that is all."

"I know you do. But you won't try that on upon me. No--no. You won't try
that on. Look at this, my beauty. Do you think I would step into a place
of yours without something in the shape of a friend with me?
Oh--no--no--"

The lady exhibited the handle and point of the blade of a knife, as she
spoke, at which Mr. Lupin staggered back, and then in a faltering voice
he said--

"I will go and see how my portion has worked with the idiot I mentioned.
I gave her a good dose of laudanum in a glass of brandy and water."

It may be imagined with what feelings Mrs. Oakley heard this interesting
little dialogue. It may be imagined, if she had at the bottom of her
heart any lingering feelings of right or wrong, how they were likely to
be roused up by all this--how her thoughts were likely to fly back to
the house she had made wretched, and virtually deserted for so long a
period of time. And now what was to become of her? Had she not heard
Lupin denounced by one who knew him well as a murderer--an allegation
which he had not even in the faintest manner denied?

Mrs. Oakley went down upon her knees in earnest, and wringing her hands,
she cried--

"God save me for my poor husband and my child's sake!"

We will suppose that if any appeals at all reach Heaven, that this was
one of those that would be sure to get there. Hastily pushing aside with
her hands the fragments of the broken glass, Mrs. Oakley flung herself
upon the floor, at the moment that Lupin with a light in his hand
entered the room.

"Hilloa!" he said.

All was still. Mrs. Oakley did not move hand nor foot. She scarcely
dared to breathe, for she felt that upon his belief that she had
swallowed the narcotic her life rested. When he saw her lying upon the
floor, he gave a short laugh, as he said--

"I thought she could not resist the brandy and water. The laudanum has
done its work quickly indeed. It's well that it has, for if it had not--
Well, well! If I only now had the courage to take a knife to my wife,
and get rid of her once and for all, I should do well. Sister Oakley,
you will not awaken for many hours, and when you do, you will be by far
too much confused to know if you have said all your prayers or not. I
shall make a fortune out of these women."

Mrs. Oakley felt upon the point of fainting, and if he had but touched
her, she was certain that she must have gone off; but he felt so
satisfied with the powerful dose of laudanum that he had given her in
the brandy and water, that he did not think it worth while in any way
further to interfere with her.

"Old and ugly too!" he muttered, as he left the room.

Perhaps these last words cut Mrs. Oakley to the soul more quickly than
all he had previously said. If she was not from that moment cured of
what might in her case be called Lupinism, it was a very odd thing
indeed.

The Rev. gent had been gone more than ten minutes before Mrs. Oakley
gathered courage to look up, and to listen to what was taking place in
the next room. Then she found that Lupin was speaking. She was still too
much overcome by terror to rise, but she managed to crawl along the
floor, until she reached the wall between the two rooms.

It was a flimsy wall that, composed only of canvas, for the rooms above
the chapel had been got up in a very extemporaneous kind of way.

Nothing could take place in the way of conversation in the next room,
that might be distinctly enough heard in the one that Mrs. Oakley was
in. As we have said, Lupin was speaking. Mrs. Oakley placed her ear
close to the canvas, and heard every word that he uttered.

"Listen to reason," he said, "listen to reason, Jane. Of course, I will
give you as much money as I can. I do not attempt to deny your claim
upon me, and what is to hinder us working together, and making a good
thing of it? Ah, if I could only persuade you to be a religious woman."

"Gammon!" said Jane.

"I know that very well," said Lupin. "That's the very thing. I know it
is gammon as well as you do. What's that?"

Mrs. Oakley had made a slight noise in the next room.




                              CHAPTER CIV.
  MRS. OAKLEY SEES A STRANGE SIGHT, AND THINKS THERE IS NO PLACE LIKE
                                 HOME.


"What's that, eh?" added Lupin.

Mrs. Oakley sank flat upon the floor in a moment; she thought that now
surely her last hour was come.

"I thought I heard a noise. Did you, Jane?" added Lupin.

"I didn't hear anything," said the woman. "It's your conscience, old
boy, that makes you hear all sorts of things. You know you are a hard
one, and no mistake. You know, there ain't exactly your equal in London
for a vagabond. But come, hand out the cash, for I ain't particularly
fond of your company, nor you of mine, I take it."

"It must have been imagination," muttered Lupin, still alluding to the
noise he had heard or fancied he had heard. "It must have been
imagination, and the wind at night does certainly make odd noises in the
chapel at times, know."

"Bother the noises. Give me the money, and let me go, I say. Come, be
quick about it, or else I shall think of some way of helping myself, and
you know when I begin, that I am apt to be rather troublesome."

"A little," said Lupin. "Just a little. But as I was saying, Jane--you
and I together might make a fortune quite easily. You are a clever
woman."

"Am I really? When did you find that out, you old rogue?"

"Really, Jane, it is difficult to talk with you while you are in such a
humour. Come, will you take something to drink? Say you will, and you
shall have the very best I can get you. Only you must promise to take it
in moderation, and not get much the worse for it, Jane."

"Do you think now that I am such an idiot as to take a drain of anything
in your place? No! I am not quite so green as that. Give me some money
and I'll fetch something, and as long as I have got my hand on the
bottle, where I will take good care to keep it, I shall know that I am
safe from you, but not otherwise. You would like to give me a drop of
the same stuff you have set the woman in the next room to sleep with,
wouldn't you now, my beauty?"

"No, Jane. Not you. You are not such a fool as to be taken in as she is.
Such poor tricks won't do for you, I know well. There is money, and
there is an empty bottle. Go and get what you like for yourself, as you
wish not what I may happen to have in the place. I will let you in
again, so you need not be afraid of that, Jane."

"Afraid? Afraid? That's a likely thing, indeed. I afraid of being kept
out by you? No, old boy, if you did keep me out one minute longer than
my patience lasted, and that would not be very long I think, I would
raise such a racket about your ears, that you would wish yourself
anywhere but where you are. How did I get in before, when you would have
given one of your ears to keep me out? Why, by frightening you, of
course, and I'll do it again. Give me hold of the bottle. I afraid of
you, indeed? A likely thing."

The lady left the room with the bottle and half a guinea in her hand,
while Lupin, with affected solicitude, lighted her to the door of the
chapel, and lingered until he heard her footsteps die away right up the
dismal dingy-looking court.

While Lupin was lighting his wife down the stairs, Mrs. Oakley found a
small slit in the canvas that the division between the two rooms, and
she industriously widened it, so that she was enabled to see into the
adjoining apartment. She then waited in fear and in trembling the return
of Lupin.

The arch hypocrite was not many minutes in making his appearance. He set
the candlestick down upon the table with a force that nearly started the
candle out of it, and then in a fierce voice he cried--

"Done--she is done at last! Ha! ha! Jane, you are done at last! I kept
that bottle for an emergency. It seemed empty, but smeared all around
its inner side is a sufficient quantity of a powerful narcotic to affect
the very devil himself if he were to drink anything that had been poured
into it. You think yourself mighty clever, Jane; but you are done at
last. Now what a capital thing it is that I have sent that old fool,
Mrs. Oakley, to sleep, for otherwise I should certainly be under the
necessity of cutting her throat."

Mrs. Oakley could hardly suppress a groan at this intelligence; but the
exigences of her situation pressed strongly upon her, and she did
succeed in smothering her feelings and keeping herself quiet.

Lupin paced the room anxiously waiting for his wife's return; and in the
course of about five minutes, a heavy dab of a single knock upon the
chapel door announced that fact. He immediately snatched up the candle
and ran down stairs to let her in, lest according to her threat she
should get to the end of her very limited stock of patience. They came
up the stairs together--Jane was speaking--

"Brandy!" she said; "I have got brandy, and I mean to keep my hand on
the bottle, I tell you. Ah, I know you--no one knows you better than I
do. You may impose upon everybody but me. You won't find it so very easy
a thing to get the better of me; I'll keep my hand on the bottle."

"How very suspicious you are," said Lupin, "It's quite distressing."

"Is it? Ho! ho! Well, I'll have my drop and then I will go. If you are
civil to me whenever I choose to come it will be better for you; but I
am not the sort of person to stand any nonsense, I can assure you."

"No, Jane, I never said you were," replied Lupin; "and I hope that
to-night will see the beginning as it were of a kind of reconciliation
and better feeling between us. I am sure I always thought of you with
kindness."

By this time they were in the room, and the lady half drew the knife she
had before exhibited from the bosom of her dress, as she said--

"Look at this--look at this! I distrust you all the more when you talk
as you do now, and I tell you that if I have any of your nonsense, I
will pretty soon settle you. You mean something, I know, by the twinkle
of your eye. I have watched you before, and I know you."

"Now, really, this is too bad," said Lupin, as he wiped his face with a
remarkably old handkerchief; "this is too bad, Jane. If I am kind and
civil to you, that don't suit; and if I am rough and rather stern, you
fly out at that too. What am I to do? Will nothing please you?"

"Bah!" said Jane. "Hold your nonsence. How much money am I to have when
I have finished the brandy? That is the question now."

"Will three guineas be enough, Jane, just for the present occasion?"

"No, I must have five, or if you don't produce them, I'll make you."

"You shall have them, Jane. You see how complying I am to you. But won't
you give me a drop of the brandy? You don't mean to take it all?"

"Yes I do. It's only half a pint, and what's that? You can drink some of
what you said you had in the place. I didn't go out to buy for you.
Besides, I won't trust it a moment out of my hands. You would put
something in it before I could wink."

"Really, really! What a strange woman. But won't you have a glass, Jane,
to drink it out of? Let me get you a glass now?"

"No, you would put something in that too. Oh, I am up to your tricks, I
am, old boy. You won't get the better of me. Very good brandy it is,
too. Ah! strong rather."

Jane took a hearty pull at the bottle, so hearty a one that two thirds
of the mixture vanished, and then with her hand on the neck of it, she
sat glaring at Lupin, who was on the opposite side of the table, with an
awfully satanic grin upon his ugly features.

"It has an odd taste."

"An odd taste?" cried Lupin. "It's a capital thing that you bought it
yourself, and kept your hand over the bottle. I'm very glad of that, old
woman."

"But I feel odd--I--I--ain't the thing. I don't feel very well, Lupin."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"I--I feel as if I were dying. I--I don't see things very clearly. I am
ill--ill. Oh, what is this? Something is amiss. Mercy, mercy!"

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"I--I--shall fall. Help! The room swims round with me. I am poisoned. I
know I am. Mercy! help! murder! Oh, spare me."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

Lupin rose and went round the table. He caught hold of the wretched
woman by the head, and applying his mouth close to her ear, he said--

"Jane! There was something in the bottle, and I intend to cut your
throat. I hope the knife you have got with you has a good edge to it?"

She tried to scream, but an indistinct, strange, stifled cry only came
from her lips. She tried to get up, but her limbs refused their office.
The powerful narcotic had taken effect, and she fell forward, her head
striking the table heavily, and upsetting the bottle with the remainder
of the drugged brandy in it as she did so.

"Done!" said Lupin. "Done at last. Oh, how I have watched for such an
opportunity as this. How often I have pleased myself with the idea of
meeting her in some lonely place when she was off her guard, and killing
her, but I never thought that anything could happen half so lucky as
this. Let me think. I am quite alone in this building, or as good as
alone, for Mrs. Oakley sleeps soundly. I can easily drag the dead body
down stairs, and place it in one of the vaults underneath the chapel, to
which I have the key. I will wrench open some coffin if that be all, and
cram her in on the top of the dead there previously. Ah, that will do,
and then I defy any circumstances to find me out. How safe a--mur--I
mean a death this will be to be sure. How very--very safe."

Mrs. Oakley shook in every limb, but she kept her eyes steadfastly fixed
at the small hole in the canvas, through which she could see into the
room, and by a horrible species of fascination, she felt that if she had
ever so much wished to do so, she could not then have withdrawn it. No!
she was as it were condemned as a fiat of destiny, as a punishment for
her weak and criminal credulity regarding that man, to be a witness to
the dreadful deed he proposed committing, within the sphere of her
observation.

It was dreadful. It was truly horrible. But it was not now by any means
to be avoided.

Lupin disappeared for a few seconds into a room where he usually himself
slept. From thence he returned with a wash-hand basin in his hand, which
he placed upon the floor. He then fumbled about the clothing of his wife
until he found the knife that she had twice so threateningly exhibited
to him. He held it up to the light and narrowly scrutinised it.

"It will do I think," he said.

He tried its keenness upon the edge of the sole of his shoe, and he was
satisfied that it had been well prepared for mischief.

"It will do well," he said. "Well, nothing can be better. From this
night I shall be free from the fears that have haunted me night and day
for so long. This woman is the only person in all London who really
knows me, and who has it in her power to destroy all my prospects. When
she is gone, I shall be perfectly easy and safe, and surely never was
such a deed as this done with so much positive safety."

Mrs. Oakley felt sickened at what she saw, but still she looked upon it
with that same species of horrible fascination which it is said--and
said truly, too--prevents the victim of a serpent's glittering eye from
escaping the jaws of the destroyer. She saw it all. She did not
move--she did not scream--she did not weep--but as if frozen to the
spot, she, with a statuesque calmness, looked upon that most horrible
scene of blood. She was the witness appointed by Heaven to see it done,
and she could not escape her mission.

Lupin twined his left hand in the hair at the back of the head of the
wretched woman, and then he held her head over the wash-hand basin.
There was a bright flash of the knife, and then a gushing, gurgling
sound, and blood poured into the basin, hot, hissing and frothing. The
light fell upon the face of Lupin, and at that time so changed was it,
that Mrs. Oakley could not have recognised it, and, but that she knew
from the antecedents that it was no other than he, she might have
doubted if some devil had not risen up through the floor to do the deed
of blood.

He dropped the knife to the floor.

[Illustration: Lupin Drugs His Wife, And Then Cuts Her Throat.]

The murdered woman made a faint movement with her arms, and then all was
over. The blood still rolled forth and filled the wash-hand basin. Lupin
caught the cover from the table, throwing everything that was upon it to
the floor, and wrapped it many times round the head, face, and neck of
his victim.

"It is done!" he said. "It is done!"

He still held the body by the hair of the head, and dragging it along
the floor, he dropped it near the door opening on to the staircase. He
then went to a cupboard in the room, and finding a bottle, he plunged
the neck of it into his mouth, and drank deeply. The draught was ardent
spirit, but it had no more effect upon him at that moment than as though
it had been so much water from a spring. That is to say, it had no
intoxicating effect. It may have stilled some of the emotions of dread
and horror which his own crime must have called up from the bottom even
of such a heart as his. He was human, and he could not be utterly
callous.

Leaning against the cupboard-door for a few seconds he gasped out--

"Yes, it is done. It is quite done, and now for the worst. Now for the
body, and the vaults, and the dead. Can I do it? can I do it? I must.
Yes, I must. There is no safety for me if I do not. I shall come else to
the scaffold. I think already that I see the hooting crowd--the rope and
the cross-beam. Now they hold my arms. Now they tell me to call upon God
for mercy to my wretched blood-stained soul. Now the mob shouts. The
hangman touches me--I feel the rope about my neck. They draw the cap
over my face, and so shut out the world from me for ever. I die--I
struggle--I writhe--I faint--God--God--God help me!"

He fell heavily to the floor of the room.




                              CHAPTER CV.
 MRS. OAKLEY ESCAPES, AND TAKES A DIFFERENT VIEW OF THINGS IN GENERAL.


Mrs. Oakley nearly fainted herself at this juncture, but she felt that
her life was in jeopardy, and by a strong mental effort, such as she
could hardly have supposed herself capable of making, she sustained
herself, and preserved her senses.

Lupin lay for some minutes quite insensible upon the floor, but he did
not lie long enough for Mrs. Oakley to take advantage of his temporary
swoon and leave the place. Had she perhaps been very prompt and
resolute, and self-possessed, she might have done so, but under the
whole of the circumstances, it was not to be supposed that such could be
her state of mind; so the slight opportunity, for, after all, it was
only a slight one, if one at all, was let slip by her.

She was just beginning to ask herself if there was a chance of getting
away before Lupin should recover, when he uttered a hideous groan, and
moved slightly.

After these indications of recovery, Mrs. Oakley was afraid to move; and
certainly, the slightest indication of her being otherwise than in the
state of insensibility which Lupin believed to be her condition, there
is very little doubt it would have been the signal for her death.

The man who commits a murder for the attainment of any object of
importance to him, will not scruple to commit another to hide the first
deed from the eyes of the world.

And now Lupin slowly rose to a sitting posture, and glared around him
for a few moments in silence. Then he spoke.

"What is this?" he said. "What is all this? What is the meaning of all
this? Blood!--blood! Is this blood upon my hands? No--no--yes, it is--it
is. Ah! I recollect."

He held his blood-stained hands to his eyes for a few moments, and then
as he withdrew them, he slowly turned his eyes to where the body lay.
With a shudder he dragged himself along the floor further off from it,
gasping out as he did so--

"Off--off, horrible object!--off--off!"

His distempered imagination, no doubt, pictured the body as following
him. Is there not, indeed, a prompt retribution in this world?

"Off--off, I say! No further!--Not dead?--not dead yet? How much blood
have you in you now to shed? Off--off!"

He reached the wall. He could get no further, and thus pursued still by
the same wild insane idea, he sprung to his feet, and uttering a loud
cry, he caught up a chair and held it out at arm's length before him,
shouting--

"Keep away--keep away! Keep off, I say--I--I did not do it. Who shall
say I did it? Who saw me do it?"

He slowly dropped the chair, and then in a more composed voice he said--

"Hush! hush! I am mad to raise these cries. They will alarm the court. I
am mad--mad!"

Mrs. Oakley had hoped that his ravings would reach some other ears then
hers, and that his apprehension, with the bleeding witness of his crime
close at hand, would follow as a thing of course, and then how gladly
would she have flown from her place of concealment, and cried out--

"He did it! I saw him! That is the man!"

But such was not the case. Either he really did not call out loud enough
to make himself heard, or the inhabitants of the court were too much
accustomed to all sorts of sounds to pay any attention even to the
ravings of a murderer!

No one came. No one even knocked at the chapel-door to know if anything
was amiss, and when she saw him calm, and in a measure self-possessed
again, her heart died within her.

"Murder! murder!" he said; "I have done murder! Yes, I have steeped my
hands in blood--again--again! It is not the first time, but one does not
become familiar with murder. I did not feel as I feel now when I took a
life before. Oh, horror! horror!"

He shook, but soon again recovered himself.

"The vaults! The vaults!" he said. "They will hide the dead. Who will
look for this woman? What friends has she? Is there one in all the world
who cares if she be alive or dead? Not one. Is there one who will stir
six steps to find out what has become of her? Not one."

Again he solaced himself with a draught of brandy, and then he set about
making his preparations for disposing of the dead body of his
slaughtered victim.

From a drawer in the room he took a large sheet, and spread it upon the
floor. Then he kicked and pushed the dead body with his feet on to it,
and then he deliberately rolled it up round and round in the sheet, and
at each fold feeling that it was further removed from his sight, he
seemed to breathe more and more freely.

He spoke in something like his old tones.

"That will do--that will do. The vaults will be the place. Was there
ever such a cunning place for murder to be done in as a chapel, with its
ready receptacles of the dead beneath it? There let her rot. She will
never come up in judgment against me from there. It is done now. The
deed that I often thought of doing, and yet never had the courage, nor
the opportunity at the same time, to accomplish until to-night. The
vaults--the vaults. Ay, the vaults!"

He lit a lantern that he took from the cupboard, and then he opened the
door that communicated with the staircase terminating in the chapel. He
listened as though he fancied that some one might be below listening to
the deed of blood above.

"All is still," he muttered, "so very still. It is providential. It is
the will of Heaven that this woman should die to night, and after all I
am but the instrument of its decrees--nothing more. That is comforting."

He now dragged the body to the door he had opened, but he did not carry
it. When he got it there he overbalanced it, and let it fall down. Mrs.
Oakley, even from where she was, heard the horrible smash with which it
reached the bottom of the stairs.

Lupin followed with the lantern.

And now it would seem as if another opportunity had presented itself to
Mrs. Oakley to escape. The staircase down which Lupin had gone
communicated with the chapel. It was another flight that led to the
ordinary door through which any one passed who might be coming to the
private part of the house. That staircase of course she expected to
reach without going through the room in which the murder was committed,
as her room and the adjoining one both opened upon its landing as well
as into each other.

Mrs. Oakley slowly rose from her knees.

"God help us," she said, "and give me strength to make an attempt to
leave this frightful place. There will surely be time while Lupin is in
the vaults. Oh, yes, there will surely be time."

She tottered along with as little strength as though she had been lying
for weeks upon a bed of sickness, so completely had she been unnerved by
what she had seen.

She touched the handle of the door. Even that was support. And then, she
turned it. The door did not open. It was locked!

Mrs. Oakley felt as if at that moment all her chance of escape was gone.
She felt as though she were given over by providence to Lupin to be
murdered. Why had he locked the door, but that if by any rare chance she
should awaken from the lethargic sleep into which he supposed her to be
plunged, she should have no outlet but through the room in which he
would be? But he was not there now, and the door of communication
between her room and that in which the murder had been done might not be
fast.

To try it was the work now of a moment; Mrs. Oakley felt a little more
self-possessed with the knowledge that Lupin was not close at hand, and
she opened the door. It yielded readily enough to her touch.

She was in the room of murder--in the very atmosphere of blood. She
glanced around her, and, although she had seen all through the opening
in the canvas partition, yet she was horrified to find herself closer to
the spot upon which the fearful deed had been done. Lupin, when he had
lit his lantern with which to go to the vaults, had not extinguished the
ordinary light that burnt in his room. That had a long spectral-looking
wick; but it gave sufficient light to enable Mrs. Oakley to see the
blood upon the floor.

She sickened at the sight.

But if she were to escape, it must be done at once. Lupin would not be
likely to linger longer by one brief moment in the vaults than was
absolutely necessary; and he might return before she had effected her
purpose yet.

She flew to the door of his room, which opened on to the landing. She
made an effort to open it. Alas! it was in vain; it, too, was locked,
and the key was gone!

"I am a prisoner!" said Mrs. Oakley, as she clasped her hands; "I am a
prisoner to this dreadful man!"

For some few moments now she felt completely overwhelmed by this
misfortune. The only outlet from the room that was not fast, was that
which Lupin himself had taken, and which led to the chapel. Should she
venture that way or not?--that was the question. Could she resolve upon
staying where she was, and trusting to an escape in the morning? No, no;
she told herself that would be too horrible. She would have, then, to
look at Lupin in the face, and to talk to him.

"No--no--no! I cannot do that," she said. "I will go down the staircase
that he has gone down--I will pass through the chapel--I will try to
open the chapel door, and then I will rush out with the cry of murder
upon my lips."

It was a trembling anxious thing to follow the murderer and his victim
down that staircase; but having found all other mode of egress denied to
her, Mrs. Oakley attempted it.

Slowly she went, step by step; and ever and anon she paused to listen
for any sound that should be indicative of Lupin's whereabouts--but she
heard nothing.

"He must be deep beneath the chapel," she said, "among the vaults--that
is where he must be. I shall be safe if I hasten now. Oh, so safe--quite
safe!"

She did hasten, and another moment brought her to the foot of the
stairs. A door in the chapel-wall terminated them. That was the door
against which Mrs. Oakley had heard the dead body strike with such a
frightful crash when Lupin had cast it down the stairs. It was swinging
open now.

Another moment and she was in the chapel.

From out of the aperture, occasioned by the lifting up of a large square
trap-door in the centre of the chapel floor, there came a faint stream
of light. Mrs. Oakley knew that that trap-door led to the vaults. She
knew that a flight of steps was immediately beneath it which lead to the
loathsome receptacles of the dead, where the pious members of Mr.
Lupin's flock were laid when they and this world had bidden each other
adieu. She knew that he derived no despicable revenue from letting such
lodgings to the dead.

And he was down there with his victim--the first person that he ever
permitted to lie there without a fee!

Mrs. Oakley, to reach the chapel door, must needs pass quite close to
the open trap-door; and as she neared it, a terrible curiosity took
possession of her--it was to see what Lupin was doing below--it was to
ascertain in what way he disposed of his victim's body. She thought that
she ought to see that. She thought, then, that she could tell all, and
bring the hounds of justice to the very spot where the murdered woman
lay.

She paused for a moment upon the brink of the trap, and then, by an
impulse that at the moment seemed, and was, irresistible, she began the
descent among the vaults.

These vaults were quite dignified by being so called. They were nothing
but cellars--nothing in the world but damp gloomy cellars--and Lupin
made as much of them as he did of the chapel overhead. The corpses lay
there thick and three-fold. A ghostly company! and yet Lupin had many
underground lodgings to let.

What cared he if the fumes from the dead came up, and made havoc upon
hot Sundays among the living? What cared he what mischief the
charnel-house beneath the planks did to the old and to the young? His
own constitution, he had a strong impression, could be fortified by
copious libations of brandy. Probably he was wrong in his practice, but
he had faith in his remedy, and that was a great thing--a very great
thing, indeed.

Mrs. Oakley slowly crept down the steps leading to the vaults. She was
guided by the faint light of Lupin's lantern, which was she knew not
where. Twice she paused to listen if he were coming, as in such a case
she would have flown back upon the wings of terror, but she heard
nothing, and she passed onward.

Twelve steps led to the lowest depth upon which the vaults were
situated. Then there was a kind of passage, upon which were flag stones
very roughly and clumsily laid down. Right and left of this passage the
vaults were. It wound completely round the chapel, but she had not to go
very far to ascertain where Lupin was at work. The light of the lantern
guided her to the half-open door of the vault, within which he was at
work.




                              CHAPTER CVI.
           MR. LUPIN FINDS HIMSELF IN AN AWKWARD PREDICAMENT.


Mrs. Oakley peeped into the vault, but she held herself in readiness to
fly at a moment's notice, and then she thought she could easily hide
among the pews in the chapel. Nothing, she thought, could be very well
easier than such a course. Could she not hide in the very pew that she
had for a long time called her own? And then by watching Lupin, she
should have the advantage of seeing in a moment when he had done his
work, and there would then be little trouble in eluding him.

On tip-toe, Mrs. Oakley advanced to the half-opened door of the vault,
and peeped in upon the man, who thought himself so very safe. The eye of
heaven, he must have thought, saw him; but he would have staked his life
forthwith upon the fact, that no human observation was bent upon his
actions; and yet there was some one for whom he entertained the greatest
contempt--one whom he would have defied to injure him, gathering up
evidence to hang him.

Go on, Lupin. Bury your victim. But don't think yourself so very safe
just yet. It is an old saying, that "Murder will out." Do you think that
yours will prove the exception?

From a recess in the wall Lupin had dragged a coffin. It was an old one
and rather rotten, so that by the aid of a small crowbar that he had
there--what use did Lupin find for a crowbar in the vaults beneath his
chapel? Was it to rip open the coffins and rob even the dead? Well,
well--by the aid of this crowbar, he soon forced open the lid of the
coffin.

He stood in it then, and stamped down the remains with his feet to make
room for the murdered body.

[Illustration: Mr. Lupin Crushes The Corpse To Make Room For His
Murdered Wife.]

Mrs. Oakley sickened at this; she had not quite expected to see such a
horror as that. It appeared to her at the moment, to be worse than the
murder above stairs. She really felt quite faint as she saw him.

When he had flattened the nearly decayed body in the coffin as much as
he could, he lifted the corpse of his victim from the floor of the
vault. It was still closely enveloped in the large sheet, although at
one part the blood had begun to make its way through all the folds upon
folds of that wrapper, and he threw it into the coffin. It more than
filled it.

Poor Mrs. Oakley shut her eyes; she knew what he was going to do. She
knew it from what he had done, and she saw it in his eyes. He was of
course going to tread down the dead body of her he had murdered, in the
same way that he had already trodden down the half-decomposed one in the
coffin.

Strange companionship! How little the very respectable defunct, who had
been expensively placed in one of the vaults, could have imagined that
she--it was a female--that she should be trodden down as flat as any
pancake, to make room for the Reverend Josiah Lupin's murdered wife!

    "To what base uses may we come as last."

Mrs. Oakley heard him treading and stamping, and then she opened her
eyes, and she saw him fitting on the lid of the coffin again. He had
made it hold its double burthen.

And now she had surely seen all that she came to see, and yet with a
frightful fascination she lingered as though spell-bound to the spot.
She thought that she had plenty of time. Of course Lupin would put the
coffin into its recess again, and that would take him some time. It
would, with its additional weight, certainly be no easy task, but he set
about it, and it is astonishing what herculean labours people will
perform, when their necks are to answer for any delay or dereliction of
the duty. Lupin dragged the coffin to its receptacle on a low shelf, and
fairly hitched one end of it in the aperture made for its reception.

By the assistance of the lever he pushed it fairly in, and then he
paused and wiped his brow.

"It is done," he said.

He leaned heavily against the damp wall.

"It is done--it is done. This will be one of the undiscovered murders
that are done in London. I am safe now. Nobody will miss her--nobody
will look for her--nobody will dream that this vault can possibly
conceal such a crime; and now that the terror of it, and the horror of
doing it, is all over, I feel like a new man, and am much rejoiced."

"Rejoiced," thought Mrs. Oakley with a shudder.

"She was the torment of my life," added Lupin. "I knew no peace while
she lived. Success had no charm for me. Go where I would, think of what
I would, do what I would, I always had the dread of that woman before my
eyes; but now--now I am rid of her."

He took up his lantern from the floor of the vault.

Now it was time for Mrs. Oakley to fly. She turned and hastily ran up
the staircase of the vault. The idea took possession, and it was after
all only a fancy, that Lupin was pursuing her with the crow-bar in his
hand. But how it urged her on. What wings it gave her, but confused her
the while, so that instead of hurrying to the chapel door, and making a
bold effort to open it as she had meant to do, she only sought the door
in the wall, and the staircase down which she had come to the chapel,
nor did she pause until she found herself in the murder room.

Then with a heart beating so wildly, that she was fain to lay her hands
upon it in the hope of stopping its maddening pulsation, she stopped to
listen.

It was only fancy. It was a delusion. No Lupin was pursuing her from the
vaults.

"Thank Heaven!" she said. "Thank Heaven! but oh, why am I here? Why have
I come here again, instead of making my escape by the chapel door? This
is a fatal error. Oh, Heaven save me! Is there yet time? Does he linger
yet sufficiently long in the vaults, to enable me to take refuge among
the pews?"

These were questions which the stillness in the chapel below seemed to
answer in the affirmative, and once more Mrs. Oakley approached the
staircase to descend it. She got three steps down the stairs, and then
she heard a footstep below. It was too late. Lupin was coming up. Yes,
it was too late!

He approached with a heavy and regular footfall. That heaviness and
regularity were sufficient evidences that he had not heard her, and had
no suspicion that she nor any one else had been a witness to his crime.
So far she was comparatively safe, but the blessed chance of escape
without any meeting with him was gone.

Up--up, he came! Mrs. Oakley retreated step by step as he advanced. She
passed into the chamber, which may for distinction's sake be called her
own room, and there she cast herself upon the couch, and closed her eyes
shudderingly.

She had a presentiment that Lupin would come to look at her to see that
she still slumbered. She was right.

He had not been in the room where the deed of blood had been committed
many minutes, when he opened the door of communication between the two
apartments, and came in not with the lantern, but with the candle he had
left burning upon the table. He did not come above three steps into the
room, and then he spoke--

"Sister Oakley it is time to pray."

Mrs. Oakley moved not--spoke not.

"Sister Oakley, will you be so good as to rise, and go to the corner of
the next street on a little errand for me?"

How tempting this was! but Mrs. Oakley had the discretion to imagine the
wolf in the sheep's clothing now; she saw in all this only a clear mode
of ascertaining if she were awake or not, and she would not speak nor
move.

This was, in truth, a wise policy upon the part of Mrs. Oakley. That it
was so, became abundantly apparent when Lupin spoke again.

"All is right," he said. "The opiate has done its work bravely, I feel
easy now, and yet I don't know how I came for a moment to feel
otherwise, or to imagine for a moment there was danger from this woman.
If I only had any proof that there was, I would soon put it beyond her
power to be mischievous. But, no--no, she has slept soundly and knows
nothing."

It required, indeed, no ordinary nerve during this speech of Lupin's,
for Mrs. Oakley to preserve the stillness of apparent deep sleep; but we
none of us know what we can do until we are put to it; after all, what a
just punishment to Mrs. Oakley was all that she was now going through.
She had had more faith in that bold, bad, mountebank of a parson than in
Heaven itself, and she was justly punished.

Having then made this trial of her sleeping state, Mr. Lupin retired
with the candle again, quite satisfied--at least one would have thought
so; and as he had talked of the amazing ease of mind he felt now that he
had, murdered his wife, it was rather surprising that he did not go to
bed and sleep serenely instead of pacing his room to and fro for more
than four hours mumbling disjointed words and sentences to himself as he
did so, for Mrs. Oakley heard him, but she did not dare to move.

Suddenly he flung open the door between the two rooms, and in a
startling voice he cried--

"Fire! fire!"

It was truly a wonder that upon this Mrs. Oakley did not jump up, it
sounded so very alarming; but it was not to be, and with a presence of
mind that surely was not all her own, she yet remained profoundly still.

"Fool that I am," muttered Lupin, "to be continually assailed by dread
of this woman, when everything assures me that she has been in a sound
sleep caused by a powerful narcotic, during the whole night; but the
morning is now near at hand, and she will soon awaken. I have already
got what money I can, from her, and I must give her breakfast and then
send her off. It would be useless to kill her."

The manner in which Lupin pronounced these last words was very alarming
for it implied rather that he was asking himself the question whether it
would be useless to kill her or not, than the expression of a decided
opinion; but still Mrs. Oakley moved not.

Lupin, suddenly, as though he had quite made up his mind not to trouble
himself about her any more, slammed to the door of communication between
the two rooms.

Mrs. Oakley breathed freely again--that is, comparatively freely; and
yet what a shocking agonizing idea it was that she might have to
breakfast with that dreadful man. What should she say to him?--how
should she look at him?

The dawn was coming, and she shook with apprehension to find that such
was the fact, and Lupin had said that she would soon awaken; so, effect
to awaken she must, in order to keep up the delusion; but how should she
manage then to deceive the suspicious vigilance of such a man?

But all this had to be encountered. How was it to be avoided? She could
do nothing but arm herself with such fortitude as she could call to her
aid.

Oh, how she wished herself in her own parlour behind the shop, and upon
her knees asking the pardon of her husband for all that she had done,
and for all that she had not done! What would she have not given even to
have seen the honest face of big Ben, the beef-eater!

The light of the coming day grew each moment stronger, and at length
Mrs. Oakley thought it would be prudent to seem to wake up, and calling
out "Mr. Lupin! Mr. Lupin!" she rose from the couch.

Lupin opened the door of communication between the two rooms, and glared
at her.

"Did you call, sister Oakley?"

"Yes, reverend sir, surely I have been sleeping, and have forgotten some
of the prayers."

"No; truly, sister Oakley, I have watched for you, and I can assure you
that you will enter into the kingdom always, provided that you are
regular in your contributions to the chapel, for at the last that of a
surety will be demanded to be known of you, sister Oakley."

"I have been thinking of that, brother Lupin," said Mrs. Oakley, "and
this day week I will manage to bring two pounds."

"Only two?"

"I will make it three, if I can, brother Oakley; but my head feels quite
confused and giddy. It is very strange."

"Ah," whispered Lupin to himself. "That is the natural effect of the
narcotic. It has worked well. Then," he said aloud, "sister Oakley, I
pray you to walk in to this room, and I will provide for you what the
profane world call the breakfast, for although food for the soul is in
alway preferable to food for the body, yet we must not always neglect
our earthly tabernacle."

"I am much obliged to you," said Mrs. Oakley. "You may depend upon my
regular offerings to the chapel."




                             CHAPTER CVII.
                        MRS. OAKLEY DISSEMBLES.


With trembling steps, Mrs. Oakley followed Lupin, the murderer, into his
own room. Of course she was resolved to see nothing, and to make no
remark that could in any way direct the attention of Lupin more closely
to her, and, oh, how she panted for some opportunity of rushing into the
street and crying aloud to the passers by, that the pious hypocrite was
a murderer. But as yet she felt that her life depended upon the manner
in which she played her part.

"Truly, sister Oakley," said Lupin, "I hope you passed a quiet and
peaceful night. Amen!"

"Very," replied Mrs. Oakley.

"Ah, I wish I could say as much, sister Oakley."

"And can you not?"

"Alas! no, I had some dreams--some very bad dreams; but Satan always
will be doing something, you know, sister. Do you know I dreamt of a
murder!"

As he uttered these words, no Grand Inquisitor could have looked more
keenly into the eyes of a victim, than did Mr. Lupin into the face of
Mrs. Oakley; but she divined his motive, she felt that he was trying
her, but she had even in such a moment sufficient presence of mind to
keep her eyes steadily upon his face, and to say with seeming unconcern,

"Murder, did you say, Mr. Lupin?"

"Yes, I did say murder, and you--." He pointed at her with his finger,
but finding that she only looked surprised, rather, he added--"and you
are one of the elect, I rejoice to say, sister Oakley. Amen! It is a
capital thing to be saved!"

"It is, indeed, Mr. Lupin."

"Well--well. Let us have the carnal meal, called breakfast. I will
proceed, God willing, to the corner of the court, and purchase two eggs,
Mrs. Oakley, if it be pleasing to you."

"Anything you like, Mr. Lupin; I have but a poor appetite in the
morning, always."

Mr. Lupin put on his hat, and after slowly turning round and casting an
anxious glance upon the room and every object within, to assure himself
that he had left no evidences of his crime behind him, he slowly left to
get the eggs.

Mrs. Oakley heard him descend the stairs, and she heard the door close
behind him. Then she asked herself if that were really and truly an
opportunity of escape that she dared attempt to avail herself of, or if
it were only one in seeming, and that if she were upon its provocation
to attempt to leave the place, she would only be confirming the slight
suspicions that might be in the mind of Lupin, concerning her privity to
his deed of blood.

He had talked of only going to the corner of the court, and how did she
know that he had even gone so far? Might not the message about the eggs
be merely a pretended one, to see what she would do? This was a
consideration that kept her, tremblingly, where she was.

About five minutes elapsed, and then she heard a knock at the door
below. Who could that be? Mr. Lupin had a key with which he always let
himself in, so it could not be he. What was she to think? what was she
to do? Suddenly then she heard the door opened, and then after a few
moments delay some footstep sounded upon the stairs, but it was very
unlike that of Lupin, the murderer.

The delightful thought came over the imagination of Mrs. Oakley, that
some one was coming to whom she might at once make an avowal of all she
knew of Lupin's guilt, and who might be able to protect her from the
vengeance of the murderer. She rose, and peeped through the key-hole.

She saw Lupin coming up the stairs. He was making quite a laborious
effort to tread differently to what was usual with him, and from that
moment Mrs. Oakley felt that she was to be subjected to some
extraordinary trial of her self-possession. She crept back to her seat,
and waited in terror.

In the course of a few moments, Lupin, after treading with a heavy thump
upon every stair, instead of gliding up in his usual manner, reaching
the door at which he tapped, and then in an assumed voice, which if she,
Mrs. Oakley, had not known he was there, would have deceived her, he
said--

"Hilloa! who's at home?"

"Who's there?" said Mrs. Oakley.

"It's John Smith," cried Lupin. "I am an officer of the police. Has
anybody anything to say to me here? They tell me in the court that some
odd noises were heard in the night."

"I don't know anything about it," said Mrs. Oakley, "but if you will
come in and wait until Mr. Lupin comes in, he may like to see you."

"Oh, no, no, no! It's no matter. Good morning, ma'am."

Down stairs went Lupin, thinking he had acted the officer to perfection,
and making no doubt in the world but that he had thoroughly deceived
Mrs. Oakley, who he was now quite satisfied knew absolutely nothing
about the murder.

In the course of a couple of minutes, Mr. Lupin in his own character
came gliding in.

"I am afraid I have kept you waiting, sister Oakley."

"Oh, not at all, but there has been a man there who says his name is
Smith, and he--"

"I met him! I met him! It is all right. He heard something going on in
the next house, I suppose, and mistook it for this. Pray cook the eggs
to your liking, sister Oakley, and help yourself to anything. Don't be
particular, sister Oakley, but make yourself at home."

"I will, reverend sir, I will."

Mrs. Oakley was really playing her part very well, but she fancied each
moment that the murderer would see something in her manner to give him a
suspicion that she knew too much for his safety.

She was wrong though, for upon the contrary, Mr. Lupin felt quite
satisfied that the secret of his guilt was confined to his own breast.

"I pray you, sister Oakley," he said, "to eat freely of my humble fare,
and after breakfast we will have a prayer."

It seemed to Mrs. Oakley, now that she had awakened to a sense of the
awful hypocrisy of Mr. Lupin, something very horrible for him to talk of
having a prayer; but she took care not to show what she felt in that
particular.

"How kind and good of you," she said.

"Ay, truly, sister Oakley, I am kind and good, and yet there are envious
folks in the world, who I dare say would not hesitate to give even me a
bad name."

"Impossible, surely."

"I would it were, I would it were, my dear sister Oakley, I would it
were impossible."

"It seems to me, reverend sir, as though it would not be in the power of
poor human nature to praise you too much; but it is time that I should
think of going home now, if you please."

"Well, sister, if you must go home among the heathens and the
Philistines, I will not hinder you; but with the hope of seeing you soon
again, I will now offer up a prayer."

It was truly sickening even to Mrs. Oakley, whose feelings the reader
will think could not be very fine, to see such an arch hypocrite
offering up a prayer to that Deity whom he must so bitterly have
offended by his awful crimes.

But Mr. Lupin cut the prayer tolerably short, and then giving to Mrs.
Oakley what he called the kiss of peace, and to which, loathsome as it
was from him, she felt herself forced to submit, he bade her good day.

And now, indeed, she began to entertain a sanguine hope, that she would
be released from his company, and she should soon be in a condition to
denounce him to justice for the awful crime which she had seen him
commit. She could not possibly avoid a slight feeling of satisfaction to
appear upon her face.

"You seem pleased," said Lupin.

"I am, reverend sir."

"May I ask what at?"

"Ah, how can I be otherwise than delighted, when I am assured by such a
saint upon earth as yourself that I am one of the elect?"

This was an answer with which, whether it was satisfactory or not, Mr.
Lupin was, as it were, compelled to put up with; but taking up his hat,
he said--

"Truly, sister Oakley, it will become me to see you a part of the way
home."

Mrs. Oakley expressed her satisfaction with the holy man's company, and
they both descended the stairs together. She felt, however, an exquisite
pang of alarm upon finding that Lupin led her down the staircase that
led to the chapel, and not down the one which would have conducted them
to the ordinary door of exit from the domestic portion of the building.

But even with all the dread upon her soul that he might be meditating
some awful act in the chapel, she felt that she must assume a calmness
though she felt it not.

"Why this leads to the chapel," she said. She thought it would sound
more natural for her to make that remark, than to say nothing about it.

"Yes, sister it does, and here is the trap-door that conducts to the
vaults."

He suddenly turned upon her, and clutched her by the arm, as he spoke.
Poor Mrs. Oakley then really thought that her last hour was come, and
that all along in pretending to have no suspicion of her, he was only
dissembling. It was a mercy she did not at that terrible moment commit
herself in some way. Surely Heaven supported her, for she did not.

"Reverend sir," she said, "what mean you?"

"What mean I? I mean will you descend to the vaults with me."

"And pray? Yes, if you wish it."

"Nothing--nothing," muttered Lupin. "What a fool I am. I might have been
well convinced long ago, and yet I cannot forbear new trials. All is
safe, all is safe. This way, sister Oakley, this way. I will only see
you to the corner of your own street."

"Many thanks."

They both emerged from the chapel. Lupin slammed the door after him, and
arm in arm they walked up the court together.

Poor Mrs. Oakley felt that to be the most trying moment of all for her
nerves. While she had much to do--while she was alone with Lupin in the
domestic portion of the chapel, and while she knew that the least slip
of the tongue, or the least want of control over her feelings might be
her death--she conducted herself gallantly; but now when she was fairly
in the open air, now that she was in comparative safety, her feelings
almost got the better of her.

It was only by a powerful effort that she could at all control them.

She felt that by suddenly quitting the arm of Lupin, and making a rush
for it, she might escape him, but then she did not want him to escape
the consequences of his crime, for Mrs. Oakley had a woman's sympathy
with the fate even of the not very respectable Mrs. Lupin. Besides, with
all the vindictive hate that he might be supposed to feel upon finding
that his guilt was known, he might yet pursue her, and before she could
find aid, kill her.

"I must still dissemble," she thought, "and speak this most monstrous
villain fairly."

"Quite a charming morning, reverend sir," she said.

"Very," said Lupin.

"I really am afraid that I am sadly intruding upon your time, by letting
you come with me?"

"Oh, no--no--no."

He seemed to be getting very thoughtful, and Mrs. Oakley was
proportionably more and more upon her guard, for she felt convinced that
if he really thought she knew anything of his guilt he would kill her.

Now they emerged from the court; but it was yet rather an early hour in
the morning, and but very few passengers were in the streets. The only
person that was tolerably close to them was an elderly woman, and Mrs.
Oakley much as she panted for an opportunity of separating herself from
Lupin, felt that the time to do so had not yet come.

On they went, in the direction of Mrs. Oakley's house, that house that
she now began to feel she had so much neglected, to look after what, in
the language of scripture, might truly have been termed "Strange
Idols"--that home which she now looked to as a haven of safety from the
terror of death itself.

"How silent you are, sister," said Lupin.

"Yes, I was thinking."

"Of what?" he said, fiercely.

"Of how much I should be able to take from Mr. Oakley's till, to bring
to you, this day week."

"Oh! oh!"

"You may depend, reverend sir, it shall be as much as possible. Of
course I must be cautious, though."

"Oh, yes--yes."

They had now reached within a few paces of the corner of the street, and
yet Mrs. Oakley had seen no one upon whom, from their appearance, she
thought she could rely to call to for aid against the murderer. Suddenly
then round the corner, there came a bulky form. The heavy tread of some
one of unusual weight sounded upon the street pavement.

Big Ben, the beef-eater, with his arms behind him, and in a very
thoughtful mood, came pacing slowly along.

As Mrs. Oakley said afterwards, her heart, at that moment, was in her
mouth.

She could not dissemble an instant longer with Lupin, but with a loud
shriek that echoed far and wide in the streets, she suddenly sprang from
him, crying--

"Ben, Ben, dear strong Ben, seize this man! He is a murderer!"

"D--n! Done at last!" cried Lupin.

He turned to fly, but treading upon a piece of cabbage-leaf that was
upon the pavement, down he fell.

"Easy does it," said Ben, and he flung himself upon the top of Lupin,
spreading out his arms and legs, and holding him by sheer weight as
firmly to the pavement as though he had been nailed there.

"Help, help, help! Murder! help!" shouted Mrs. Oakley. "Murder, murder,
murder!"

People began to flock to them from all parts. Lupin succeeded in getting
a knife from his pocket, but Mrs. Oakley held him by the wrist with both
hands, and in a minute more he was in the grasp of two strong men, one
of whom was a police-officer, and who gloried in the job.




                             CHAPTER CVIII.
    RETURNS TO MRS. LOVETT, AND SHOWS HOW SHE GOT OUT OF THE RIVER.


Our readers have been aware for a long time past that Mrs. Lovett was no
common, everyday, sort of woman, and what we are about to relate
concerning her, will be further proof that way tending, if it should be
by any sceptical person in any way required.

To all appearance, Todd had seen the last of her on the river. But Todd
was born to be deceived, and at the time he should have recollected an
old adage, to the effect that, folks who are born to be hanged are very
seldom drowned.

We shall see.

Mrs. Lovett did go down, but as fortune and the amazingly strong current
of the river would have it, she came up again, with a barge between her
and Todd, and involuntarily laying hold of the side of the barge, there
she remained, too exhausted to cry out, until Todd was far off.

She was seen at last by a man who was at the window of a public-house,
and in the course of ten minutes after Todd had began to congratulate
himself upon the demise of Mrs. Lovett, she was in a warm bed at the
public-house, and her clothes drying at the kitchen-fire.

She had scarcely been for a moment at all insensible; and as she lay in
bed she had a most accurate perception of all that happened. The reader
may suppose that the feelings of Mrs. Lovett towards Sweeney Todd, were
by no means ameliorated by the morning's proceedings.

And yet how calculating she was in her rage!

As the effects of her submersion wore off, and her ordinary strength
came back to her, her mind became intently fixed upon but one object,
and that was how to be completely and bitterly revenged upon Todd.

"He shall hang," she said. "He shall hang, but I must think of the
means, while I likewise take care to avoid the gallows myself; but he
shall hang, let the consequences be what they may."

The landlady of the public-house was very assiduous in her attention to
Mrs. Lovett, and while she was thus thinking of her revenge upon Todd,
she (the landlady) made her appearance in the room with a steaming glass
of mulled and spiced wine.

"I hope you are better," she said; "and if you will give me the name and
address of your friends, I will send to them at once."

"Friends!" said Mrs. Lovett. "How came you to think that I had any
friends?"

"Well, I hardly thought you were without. Don't most folks have friends
of some sort or another?"

"Ah, I had forgotten. I have a friend with me--a very dear friend, who
will not forsake me. I have more of them at home--for I have a home."

"Oh," thought the landlady, "she is raving."

"Bring me my stays," said Mrs. Lovett.

The stays, which, together with the rest of her apparel, now had got
quite dry, was brought to her, and in a little secret pocket in them,
Mrs. Lovett dived with her two fingers, and found a damp five pound
note.

"Take that," she said, "for your trouble. I do not want any change. Only
be so good now as to help me to dress, and tell me what the time is."

"Three o'clock," said the landlady, "and I'm sure you can't think how
pleased I am that you are better. Do you really think you are strong
enough to go home yet?"

"Yes. What I have to do at home will lend me strength, if I wanted it."

Mrs. Lovett was soon dressed, and at her request a coach was sent for;
and in the course of half-an-hour from the time that the landlady had
asked her if she should send for her friends, she, Mrs. Lovett, was
bowling along the dense thoroughfares of the city to her home.

What pen could describe the dark and malignant thoughts that filled her
brain as she proceeded? What language would be strong enough to depict
the storm of passion that raged in the bosom of that imperious woman?

It must suffice, that she made herself a solemn promise of vengeance
against Todd, let the risk or the actual consequences to herself be what
they might. If with perfect safety to herself she could be revenged upon
him--of course she would; but she resolved not to hesitate, even if it
involved a self-sacrifice, so full of the very agony of rage was she.

"He shall hang--he shall hang!"

Such were the words she uttered as the lumbering hackney-coach reached
Fleet Street.

For all she knew to the contrary, Todd might be looking from his door,
for that he had gone home in great triumph at the thought of having got
rid of her she did not doubt; and so as it was just then a great object
with her to keep him in that pleasant delusion, she got quite down among
the straw at the bottom of the hackney-coach.

But she kept her eyes--those bright metallic-looking eyes, which, with a
questionable taste, had been so much admired by the lawyers' clerks of
the Temple and Lincoln's Inn--she kept her eyes just on the edge of the
coach window, so that she might have a passing glance at Todd's shop.

Todd was at the door.

How pleased and self-satisfied he looked! He was rubbing his huge hands
slowly together, and a grim smile was on his horrible features.

Mrs. Lovett clinched her hands until her nails made marks in the palms
of them that did not come out for hours, and in a harsh growling voice,
she said--

"Ah, grin on, grin on, fiend--your hours from now shall be numbered. You
shall hang, hang, and I shall hope to see you in your last agony. If any
bribe can induce the hangman, by some common bungling to protract your
pain, he has but to name his price and he shall have it."

The coach rolled on.

Mrs. Lovett rose up from among the straw with a shudder. The immersion
in the river had not drowned her certainly, but it had done her no good;
and she could not conceal from herself, that a serious illness might
very probably result from her unexpected cold bath.

"Never mind!" she said. "Never mind! What care I so that I complete my
revenge against Todd? If I die after that it will not much matter. I
will have my revenge."

The coach stopped at the corner of Bell-yard.

"That will do," said Mrs. Lovett as she pulled the check-string. "That
will do. I will alight here."

She paid the coachman double the amount of his fare, so he only muttered
a few curses between his teeth, and drove off.

With quite a staggering step, for Mrs. Lovett was anything but well, she
walked to her own shop. The door was closed, and she looked through the
upper half of it which was of glass, just in time to see the highly
trustworthy personage whom she had left in charge of the concern, place
a bottle to her lips, and slowly lift it up.

Mrs. Lovett opened the door, just as the titillating contents of the
bottle were rippling over the palate of the lady, who had had such an
adventure with Todd.

"Wretch!" exclaimed Mrs. Lovett.

Down fell the bottle, and smashed into many fragments on the floor of
the shop. An unmistakable odour of gin filled the air.

"So," cried Mrs. Lovett, "this is the way you employ your time is it,
while I am away?"

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett Finds Somebody Out--At Home.]

"T--T--Todd," stuttered the woman, "T--T--Todd is such a nice man."

"Todd, do you say?"

"Yes--I--I say--T--Todd is a nice man."

"Answer me, wretch, instantly. Has he been here? Speak, or I will shake
your wretched life out of you."

Mrs. Lovett suited the action to the word, and the word to the action,
for she clutched her substitute by the throat, and shook her vehemently.

"D--D--Don't Mrs. L.--I--will--tell all--all. I will indeed."

"Speak then. Has Todd been here?"

"In course, and quite a nice man--I--I may say--quite a gin--I mean a
nice man--a cordial old Tom. No! Cream of the--Todd."

"Wretch!"

Mrs. Lovett paced the shop for a few moments in an agony of rage. Todd
presuming upon her death had actually been there, no doubt upon an
expedition to ransack the place. A touch to the lock of the parlour
door, told her at once that it was open, and from that moment she no
longer could doubt but that the whole house had been subject to the
scrutiny of Sweeney Todd.

"The wretch!" she said. "He thought to find enough no doubt to reward
his pains, but he has been deceived in that hope, I feel well assured.
What I have here, I have too well hidden for any search of a few hours
to find it. If they were to pull the house to pieces, brick by brick and
timber by timber, they might find something to pay them for their
labour."

The lady with the partiality for gin, now seemed to be lapsing into a
state of somnolency, but Mrs. Lovett gave her rather a rough shake.

"Tell me," she said, "when did this man come, and what did he say to
you?"

"Gin!"

"I ask you what Todd said to you?"

"Oh, yes. I--really--fine times. Old Tom Todd--cream of the Todd."

It was quite clear that she was too far gone in drunkenness for anything
distinct or to be relied upon to be got from her, and the only thing
Mrs. Lovett had to do, was to consider what to do with her. If she threw
her out of the shop into the court, the probability was, that a crowd
would collect round her, and that was just what Mrs. Lovett did not
want. Indeed, for all she, Mrs. Lovett knew, the drunken woman might
stagger round to Todd's, and let him know what of all things, she wished
to keep secret from him, namely, that she had returned.

Mrs. Lovett had not yet formed her plans, and certainly until she had
done so, she did not want any premature knowledge of her rescue from
drowning to reach the ears of Todd.

But what to do with the drunken woman was the question. Mrs. Lovett had
to think a little over that. At length, however, she made up her mind,
and approaching the lady who had such a partiality for Old Tom, she
said--

"Did you ever taste my cordial spirit, that I have up stairs in my
bedroom?"

"Eh?"

"Come, I will give you a bottle of it, if you will walk up stairs. Only
try."

By the assistance of Mrs. Lovett, the gin heroine rose and tottered to
the staircase; Mrs. Lovett pushed her on, and stair by stair she managed
to mount to the first floor. It was by far too great a job to get her
any further, so opening the door of the back-room, Mrs. Lovett pushed
her in with violence, and slammed the door upon her.

"Lie there and rot," she said, "so that you are out of my way. Lie there
and rot, idiot."

Without then pausing to cast another thought or look at her victim, Mrs.
Lovett walked down the staircase again to the shop.

When there, she felt a kind of faintness come over her, and she was
compelled to sit down for a few minutes to recover herself.

"How much I have to think of," she said, when she had a little
recovered. "How much I have to think of, and how little a time in which
to think. Something must be done before midnight. Todd will fly if I do
not do something."

A racking pain in her head, compelled her to rest it upon her hands.

"If I thought," she said, "that I should get very ill--if I thought that
there was any chance that I should die, I would go at once to the police
office and denounce him. But no--'tis only a passing pang, and I shall
soon be better--shall soon be myself again."

She did not speak now for some few moments, and during that time she
rocked to and fro, for the pain in her head was excessive. It did not
last, however, but gradually went off, leaving only a sensation of
dulness behind it, with some amount of confusion.

Then Mrs. Lovett, as well as she was able, set about thinking calmly and
dispassionately, as she hoped, about the best means of satisfying her
revenge against Todd. That that revenge should be complete and ample,
she was resolved.

Gradually she began to work out a plan of operations, and as she did so,
her eyes brightened, and something of her old expression of bold
confidence came back to her.

She rose and paced the shop.

"Yes, the villain shall die," she said, "by the hands of the
executioner--I swear it! And he shall know, too, that it is I who have
doomed him to such a death. He shall feel that, had he kept faith with
we all would have been well; but now he shall hang--hang!--and I shall
look on and see his torments!"




                              CHAPTER CIX.
                JOHANNA HAS PLENTY OF COMPANY AT TODD'S.


We return to Johanna, whom for a few hours, owing to the pressure of
other circumstances, we have been compelled, with all manner of
reluctance, to neglect.

Recent events, although they had by no manner of means tended to
decrease the just confidence which Johanna had in her own safety, had
yet much agitated her; and she at times feared that she should not be
able to carry on the farce of composure before Todd much longer.

"Charley, my dear boy," said Todd, "you are a very good lad, indeed, and
I like you."

"I am very glad to hear you say so, sir--very glad."

"That is right; but when I say I like any one, I do not confine myself
to that mere expression of liking, and there an end. Of course, as a
religious man, I love my enemies, and feel myself bound to do so--eh,
Charley?"

"Of course, sir."

Poor Johanna had no resource but to seem to be deceived by this most
disgusting hypocrisy.

"But although," continued Todd, waving a razor in the air; "although I
may love my enemies, I need not to go out of my way, you know, Charley,
to do good things to them as I would to my friends; but you I will do
all I can for; and as it may very materially help you to get an honest
independence in the course of a little time, I will manage to
accommodate you with sleeping here to-night and all nights henceforth."

"How kind of you, sir!"

"I am glad you appreciate it, Charley; and I feel quite sure that your
slumber will be most profound."

Todd, upon this, made one of his diabolical faces, and then, taking his
hat, he marched out, merely adding as he crossed the threshold of the
door--

"I shall not be long gone, Charley."

The day was on the decline, and a strong impression came over Johanna's
mind that something in particular would happen before it wholly passed
away into darkness. She almost trembled to think what that something
could be, and that she might be compelled to be a witness to violence,
from which her gentle spirit revolted; and had it not been that she had
determined nothing should stop her from investigating the fate of poor
Mark Ingestrie, she could even then have rushed into the street in
despair.

But as the soft daylight deepened into the dim shadows of evening, she
grew more composed, and was better able, with a calmer spirit, to wait
the progress of events.

"I am alone once more," said Johanna, "in this dreadful place. Again he
leaves me with all my dark and terrible thoughts of the fate of him whom
I have so fondly loved thronging around my heart; and this night, no
doubt, he thinks to kill me! Oh, Mark Ingestrie! if I were only but
quite sure that you had gone to that world from whence there is no
return, I think I could, with scarce a sigh, let this dreadful man send
me after you!"

Johanna rested her head upon her hands, and wept bitterly.

Suddenly a voice close to her said--

"St. Dunstan."

She sprang from the little low seat upon which she was, and, with a cry
of alarm, was about to make a rush from the shop, when the intruder
caught her by the arm, saying--

"Don't you know me, Johanna?"

"Ah, Sir Richard! my dear friend, it is, indeed, you, and I am safe
again--I am safe!"

"Certainly you are safe; and permit me to say that you have all along
been tolerably safe, Johanna. But how very incautious you are. Here I
have come into the shop, and actually stood by you for some few moments,
you knowing nothing of it! What now if Todd had so come in?"

"He would have killed me."

"He might have done so. But now all danger is quite over, for you will
have protectors at your hand. Do you know where Todd has gone?"

"I do not."

"Well, it don't matter. Let me look at this largest cupboard. I wonder
if it will hold two of my men? Let me see. Oh, yes, easily and
comfortably. I will be back in a moment."

He went no further than the door, and when he came back, he brought with
him Mr. Crotchet and another person, and pointing to the cupboard, he
said--

"You will stow yourselves there, if you please, and keep quiet until I
call upon you to come out."

"I believe you," said Crotchet. "Lord bless you, we shall be snug
enough. How is you, Miss O.? I suppose by this time you feels quite at
home in your breech--"

"Silence!" said Sir Richard. "Go to your duty at once, Crotchet. Miss
Oakley is in no humour to attend to you just now."

Upon this, Mr. Crotchet and the other man got into the cupboard, and a
chair was placed against it; and then Sir Richard said to Johanna--

"I will come in to be shaved when I know that Todd is here, and your
trials will soon be over."

"To be shaved?--By him?"

"Yes. But believe me there is no danger. Any one may come here now to be
shaved with perfect safety. I have made such arrangements that Todd
cannot take another life."

"Thank Heaven!"

"Here is a letter from your friend, Miss Wilmot, which I promised her I
would deliver to you. Be careful how you let Todd see it. Read it at
once, and then you had better destroy it at once. I must go now; but, of
course, if you should be in any danger, call upon my men in the cupboard
to assist you, and they will do so at once, although it may spoil my
plot a little."

"Oh! how much I owe you."

"Nay, nay, no more upon that head. Farewell now, for a brief space. We
shall very soon meet again. Keep a fair and agreeable face to Todd, if
you can, for I do not wish, if it can possibly be helped, anything to
mar the plot I have got up for his absolute conviction upon abundant
testimony."

Sir Richard shook hands with Johanna, and then hastily left the shop,
for he did not wish just then to be found there by Todd, who might
return at any moment.

The moment he was gone Johanna eagerly opened the letter that had been
brought to her, and found it to contain the following words:--

    "MY DEAR JOHANNA,--This is a selfish letter; for as I cannot see
    you, I think I should go mad if I did not write to you; so I do so
    for the ease of my own heart and brain. For the love of Heaven, and
    for the love of all you hold dear in this world, get away from Todd
    as quickly as you can; and when I see you again, I shall have
    something to say to you which will give you more pleasure than ever,
    with my bad advice, I have given you pain.

    "Sir Richard Blunt has kindly promised to give this to you, and you
    know that I am--Your ever affectionate

    ARABELLA."

"Yes," said Johanna, when she had finished the epistle. "In truth I know
you are ever my affectionate Arabella, and I am most happy in such a
friend. But this must not meet Todd's eye. Ah! that footstep, I know it
too well. He comes--he comes."

She had just hidden the letter, when Sweeney Todd made his appearance.

"Anybody been?" he asked.

"Yes, one man, but he would not wait."

"Ah, wanted to be shaved, I suppose; but no matter--no matter; and I
hope you have been quiet, and not been attempting to indulge your
curiosity in any way, since I have been gone. Hush! here's somebody
coming. Why, it's old Mr. Wrankley, the tobacconist, I declare. Good-day
to you, sir--shaved, I suppose? I'm glad you have come, sir, for I have
been out till this moment. Hot water, Charley, directly, and hand me
that razor."

Johanna, in handing Todd the razor, knocked the edge of it against the
chair, and it being uncommonly sharp, cut a great slice of the wood off
one of the arms of it.

"What shameful carelessness," said Todd; "I have half a mind to lay the
strop over your back, sir; here you have spoilt a capital razor--not a
bit of edge left upon it."

"Oh, excuse him, Mr. Todd--excuse him," said the old gentleman; "he's
only a little lad, after all. Let me intercede for him."

"Very good, sir; if you wish me to look over it, of course I will; and,
thank God, we have a stock of razors, of course, always at hand. Is
there any news stirring, sir?"

"Nothing that I know of, Mr. Todd, except it's the illness of Mr.
Cummings, the overseer. They say he got home about twelve to his own
house, in Chancery-lane, and ever since then he has been as sick as a
dog, and all they can get him to say is, 'Oh, those pies--oh, those
pies!'"

"Very odd, sir."

"Very. I think Mr. Cummings must be touched in the upper story, do you
know, Mr. Todd. He's a very respectable man, but, between you and I, was
never over bright."

"Certainly not, sir--certainly not. But it's a very odd case. What pies
can he possibly mean, sir? Did you call when you came from home?"

"No. Ha, ha! I can't help laughing; but, ha, ha! I have come away from
home on the sly, you see. The fact is, my wife's cousin--hilloa!--I
think you have cut me."

"No, no--we can't cut anybody for three-halfpence, sir. I think I will
just give you another lather, sir, before I polish you off. And so you
have the pearls with you; well, how odd things come round, to be sure."

"What do you mean?"

"This shaving-brush is just in a good state now. Always as a
shaving-brush is on the point of wearing out, it's the best. Charley,
you will go at once to Mr. Cummings, and ask if he is any better; you
need not hurry, that's a good lad. I am not at all angry with you now.
And so, sir, they think at home that you have gone after some business
over the water, do they, and have not the least idea that you have come
to be shaved? There, be off, Charley--shut the door, that's a good lad,
bless you."

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Johanna came back, the tobacconist was gone.

"Well," said Sweeney Todd, as he sharpened a razor very leisurely, "how
is Mr. Cummings?"

"I found out his house, sir, with some difficulty, and they say he is
better having gone to sleep."

"Oh, very good! I am going to look over some accounts in the parlour, so
don't choose to be disturbed, you understand; and for the next ten
minutes, if anybody comes, you will say I am out."

Sweeney Todd walked quite coolly into the parlour, and Johanna heard him
lock the door on the inside; a strange, undefined sensation of terror
crept over her, she knew not why, and she shuddered, as she looked
around her. The cupboard door was not close shut, and she knew not what
prompted her to approach and peep in. On the first shelf was the hat of
the tobacconist: it was rather a remarkable one, and recognised in a
moment.

"What has happened? Good God! what can have happened?" thought Johanna,
as she staggered back, until she reached the shaving-chair, into which
she cast herself for support. Her eyes fell upon the arm which she had
taken such a shaving off with the razor, but all was perfectly whole and
correct; there was not the least mark of the cut that so recently had
been given to it; and lost in wonder, Johanna, for more than a minute,
continued looking for the mark of the injury she knew could not have
been, by any possibility, effaced.

And yet she found it not, although there was the chair, just as usual,
with its wide spreading arms and its worn, tarnished paint and gilding.
No wonder that Johanna rubbed her eyes, and asked herself if she were
really awake?

What could account for such a phenomenon? The chair was a fixture too,
and the others in the shop were of a widely different make and
construction, so it could not have been changed.

"Alas! alas!" mourned Johanna, "my mind is full of horrible surmises,
and yet I can form no rational conjecture. I suspect everything, and
know nothing. What can I do? What ought I to do, to relieve myself from
this state of horrible suspense? Am I really in a place where, by some
frightful ingenuity, murder has become bold and familiar, or can it be
all a delusion?"

She covered her face with her hands for a time, and when she uncovered
them, she saw that Sweeney Todd was staring at her with looks of
suspicion from the inner room.

The necessity of instantly acting her part came over Johanna, and she
gave a loud scream.

"What the devil is all this about?" said Todd, advancing with a sinister
expression. "What's the meaning of it? I suspect--"

"Yes, sir," said Johanna, "and so do I; I must to-morrow have it out."

"Have what out?"

"My tooth, sir--it's been aching for some hours; did you ever have the
toothache? If you did, you can feel for me, and not wonder that I lean
my head upon my hands and groan."

Todd looked about half satisfied at this excuse of Johanna's, and for a
few moments as he looked at her, she thought that after all she should
have to call upon her friends in the cupboard to save her from the
danger that his eyes, in their flashing ghastliness, threatened. Another
moment, and her lips would have parted with the shrill cry of "Murder!"
upon them, and then Heaven only knows what might have been the result;
but he turned suddenly, and went into the parlour, muttering to
himself--

"It is not worth while now, and this night ends it all--yes, this night
ends it all."

He slammed the door violently behind him, and Johanna was relieved from
the horror which his gaze had awakened, in her heart. She stood still,
but gradually she recovered her former calmness--if calmness it could at
all be called, seeing that it was only a stiller species of agitation.

But she now began to recall the words of Sir Richard Blunt to the effect
that measures had been taken that no more murders could be committed by
Todd, and she began to feel comforted.

"There is something that I do not know yet," she said; "Sir Richard
should have told me how there could be no more murders done here, and
then I should not have suffered what I did, and what I still suffer with
the thought that almost before my eyes a fellow creature has been
hurried into eternity; and yet I ought to have faith, and in defiance of
all the seeming evidences of a horrible deed about me, I ought, I
suppose, to believe that it has been prevented in some most strange and
miraculous way."

The more Johanna thought over this promise of Sir Richard Blunt's the
more she became convinced that he would never have given utterance to it
if he had not felt perfectly sure it would be fulfilled, and so she got
comforted, and once again resolved to play her part in that dreadful
drama of real life, in the vortex of which, with the purest and the
holiest of motives, she had plunged recklessly, we will admit, but yet
from motives entitling her to sympathy on earth, and protection in
heaven.

Todd remained for a considerable time in the parlour; and when he came
out, Johanna saw that he had made some alteration in his apparel. The
first words he uttered were--

"Keep a good fire, Charley."

"Yes, sir."

"Did you ever see a house on fire, my boy?"

"I never did, sir."

"Ah! It must be an amusing sight--a very amusing sight, especially if
the conflagration spreads, and one has an opportunity of viewing it from
the water. Talking of water, the lady who was here this morning--Mrs.
Lovett--was very fond of water, and now she has got plenty of it. Ah!"

"Really, sir? Has she gone to the sea-side?"

Johanna looked Todd rather hard in the face as she spoke these words,
and the close observation seemed to anger him, for he spoke hastily and
sharply--

"What is it to you? Get out of my way, will you? and you may begin to
think of shutting up, I think, for we shall have no more customers
to-night. I am tired and weary. You are to sleep under the counter, you
know."

"Yes, sir, you told me so. I daresay I shall be very comfortable there."

"And you have not been peeping and prying about, have you?"

"Not at all."

"Not looking even into that cupboard, I suppose, eh? It's not locked,
but that's no reason why you should look into it--not that there is any
secrets in it; but I object to peeping and prying upon principle."

Todd, as he spoke, advanced towards the cupboard, and Johanna thought
that in another moment a discovery would undoubtedly take place of the
two officers who were there concealed; and probably that would have been
the case, had not the handle of the shop door been turned at that
moment, and a man presented himself, when Todd turned quickly, and saw
that he was a substantial-looking farmer, with dirty top-boots, as if he
had just come off a journey.

"Well, master," said the visitor, "I wants a clean shave."

"Oh," said Todd, not in the best of humours, "it's rather late; but I
suppose you would not like to wait till morning, for I don't know if I
have any hot water."

"Oh, cold will do."

"Cold? Oh, dear no; we never shave in cold water; and if you must, you
must; so sit down, sir, and we will soon settle the business."

"Thank you, thank you. I can't go to bed comfortable without a clean
shave, do you see? I have come up from Braintree with beasts on
commission, and I'm staying at the Bull's Head, you see."

"Oh, indeed," said Todd, as he adjusted the shaving cloth, "the Bull's
Head."

"Yes, master; why I brought up a matter o' 220 beasts, I did, do you
see, and was on my _pooney_, as good a stepper as you'd wish to see; and
I sold 'em all, do you see, for 550 _pun_. Ho, ho! good work that, do
you see, and only forty-two on 'em was my beasts, do you see; I've got a
missus at home, and a daughter; my girl's called Johanna--a-hem!"

Up to this point Johanna had not suspected that the game had begun, and
that this was no other than Sir Richard himself, most admirably
disguised, who had come to put an end to the mal-practices of Sweeney
Todd; but his marked pronunciation of her name at once opened her eyes
to that fact, and she knew that something interesting must soon happen.

"And so you sold them all?" said Todd.

"Yes, master, I did, and I've got the money in my pocket now, in
bank-notes; I never leaves my money about at inns, do you see, master;
safe bind, safe find, you see; I carries it about with me."

"A good plan, too," said Todd; "Charley, some hot water; that's a good
lad--and--and--Charley?"

"Yes, sir."

"While I am finishing off this gentleman, you may as well just run to
the Temple to Mr. Serjeant Toldrunis and ask for his wig; we shall have
to do it in the morning, and may as well have it the first thing in the
day to begin upon; and you need not hurry, Charley, as we shall shut up
when you come back."

"Very good, sir."

Johanna walked out, but went no further than the shop window, close to
which she placed her eyes, so that, between a pomatum jar and a lot of
hair brushes, she could clearly see what was going on.

"A nice-looking little lad, that," said Todd's customer.

"Very, sir; an orphan boy; I took him out of charity, poor little
fellow; but then, we ought to try to do all the good we can."

"Just so; I'm glad I have come to be shaved here. Mine's rather a strong
beard, I think, do you see."

"Why, sir, in a manner of speaking," replied Todd, "it is a strong
beard. I suppose you didn't come to London alone, sir?"




                              CHAPTER CX.
                         TODD'S HOUR HAS COME.


The hideous face that Todd made above the head of his customer at this
moment, was more like that which Mephistopheles might have made, after
achieving the destruction of a human soul, than anything human. Sir
Richard Blunt quickly replied to Todd's question, by saying--

"Oh, yes, quite alone; except the drovers I had no company with me; why
do you ask?"

"Why, sir, I thought if you had any gentleman with you who might be
waiting at the Bull's Head, you would recommend him to me if anything
was wanting in my way, you know, sir; you might have just left him,
saying you were going to Todd the barber's, to have a clean shave, sir."

"No, not at all; the fact is, I did not come out to have a shave, but a
walk, and it wasn't till I gave my chin a stroke, and found what a beard
I had, that I thought of it; and then passing your shop, in I popped, do
you see."

"Exactly, sir, I comprehend; you are quite alone in London?"

"Oh, quite; but when I come again, I'll come to you to be shaved, you
may depend, and I'll recommend you, too."

"I'm very much obliged to you," said Todd, as he passed his hand over
the chin of his customer, "I'm very much obliged; I find I must give you
another lather, sir, and I'll get another razor with a keener edge, now
that I have taken off all the rough, as one may say, in a manner of
speaking."

"Oh, I shall do."

"No, no, don't move, sir, I shall not detain you a moment; I have my
other razors in the next room, and will polish you off now, sir, before
you will know where you are; you know, sir, you have promised to
recommend me, so I must do the best I can with you."

"Well, well, a clean shave is a comfort, but don't be long, for I want
to get back, do you see."

"Not a moment, not a moment."

Sweeney Todd walked into his back-parlour, conveying with him the only
light that was in the shop, so that the dim glimpse that, up to this
time, Johanna from the outside had contrived to get of what was going
on, was denied to her; and all that met her eyes was impenetrable
darkness.

Oh, what a world of anxious agonising sensations crossed the mind of the
young and beautiful girl at that moment. She felt as if some great
crisis in her history had arrived, and that she was condemned to look in
vain into darkness to see of what it consisted.

We must not, however, allow the reader to remain in the same state of
mystification, which came over the perceptive faculties of Johanna
Oakley; but we shall proceed to state clearly and distinctly what did
happen in the barber's shop while he went to get an uncommonly keen
razor in his back-parlour.

The moment his back was turned, the seeming farmer who had made such a
good thing of his beasts, sprang from the shaving chair, as if he had
been electrified; and yet he did not do it with any appearance of
fright, nor did he make any noise. It was only astonishingly quick, and
then he placed himself close to the window, and waited patiently with
his eyes fixed upon the chair, to see what would happen next.

In the space of about a quarter of a minute, there came from the next
room a sound like the rapid drawing back of a heavy bolt, and then in an
instant, the shaving chair disappeared beneath the floor; and the
circumstances by which Sweeney Todd's customers disappeared was evident.

There was a piece of the flooring turning upon a centre, and the weight
of the chair when a bolt was withdrawn by means of simple leverage from
the inner room, weighed down one end of the top, which, by a little
apparatus, was to swing completely round, there being another chair on
the under surface, which thus became the upper, exactly resembling the
one in which the unhappy customer was supposed to be 'polished off.'

Hence was it that in one moment, as if by magic, Sweeney Todd's visitors
disappeared, and there was the empty chair. No doubt, he trusted to a
fall of about twenty feet below, on to a stone floor, to be the death of
them, or, at all events, to stun them until he could go down to finish
the murder, and--_to cut them up for Mrs. Lovett's pies!_ after robbing
them of all the money and valuables they might have about them.

In another moment, the sound as of a bolt was again heard, and Sir
Richard Blunt, who had played the part of the wealthy farmer, feeling
that the trap was closed again, seated himself in the new chair that had
made its appearance with all the nonchalance in life, as if nothing had
happened.

It was a full minute before Todd ventured to look from the parlour into
the darkened shop, and then he shook so that he had to hold by the door
to steady himself.

"That's done," he said. "That's the last, I hope. It is time I finished;
I never felt so nervous since the first time. Then I did quake a little.
How quiet he went: I have sometimes had a shriek ringing in my ears for
a whole week."

It was a large high-backed piece of furniture that shaving chair, so
that, when Todd crept into the shop with the light in his hand, he had
not the remotest idea it was tenanted; but when he got round it, and saw
his customer calmly waiting with the lather upon his face, the cry of
horror that came gurgling and gushing from his throat was horrible to
hear.

"Why, what's the matter," said Sir Richard.

"O God, the dead! the dead! O God!" cried Todd, "this is the beginning
of my punishment. Have mercy, Heaven! oh, do not look upon me with those
dead eyes."

"Murderer!" shouted Sir Richard, in a voice that rung like the blast of
a trumpet through the house.

In an instant he sprang upon Sweeney Todd, and grappled him by the
throat. There was a short struggle, and they were down upon the floor
together, but Todd's wrists were suddenly laid hold of, and a pair of
handcuffs most scientifically put upon him by the officers who, at the
word 'murderer,' that being a preconcerted signal, came from the
cupboard where they had been concealed.

"Secure him well, my men," said the magistrate, "and don't let him lay
violent hands upon himself."

[Illustration: Sweeney Todd's Hour Has Come.]

Johanna rushed into the shop, and clung to the arm of Sir Richard,
crying--

"Is it all over! Is it indeed all done now?"

"It is, Miss Oakley."

The moment Todd heard these few words addressed to Charley Green as he
thought him, he turned his glassy blood-shot eyes upon Johanna, and
glared at her for the space of about half a minute in silence. He then,
although handcuffed, made a sudden and violent effort to reach her, but
he was in too experienced hands, and he was held back most effectually.

He struck his forehead with his fettered hands, making a gash in it from
which the blood flowed freely, as in infuriated accents, he said--

"Oh fool--fool, to be cheated by a girl! I had my suspicions that the
boy was a spy, but I never thought for one moment there was a disguise
of sex. Oh, idiot! idiot! And who are you, sir?"

"I am Sir Richard Blunt."

Todd groaned and staggered. The officers would have let him sit down in
the shaving chair for a moment or two to recover from the shock his mind
had sustained by his capture, but when he found that it was the shaving
chair he was led to, he shuddered, and in a wailing voice, said--

"No--no! not there--not there! Anywhere but there. I dare not sit
there!"

"It isn't worth while sitting at all," said Crotchet. "I'm blowed if I
ain't all crumpled up in a blessed mummy by being in that cupboard so
jolly long. All my joints is a-going crinkley-crankley."

Todd looked in the face of Sir Richard Blunt, and in a faint voice
spoke--

"I--I don't feel very well. There's a little drop of cordial medicine
that I often take in my coat pocket. You see I can't get at it, my hands
being manacled. I only want to take a drop to comfort me."

"Get it out, Crotchet," said Sir Richard.

"Here ye is," said Crotchet, as he produced a little bottle, with a pale
straw-coloured liquid in, from Todd's pocket.

"Give it to me. Oh, give it to me," said Todd. "I will thank you much.
It will recover me. Give it to me!"

"No, Todd," said Sir Richard, as he took the little bottle and put it in
his own pocket. "I do not intend, if I can help it, to permit you to
evade the law by poisoning yourself."

Finding himself thus defeated in his insidious attempt upon his own
life, Todd got quite frantic with rage, and had a grand struggle with
the officers, in his endeavours to get at some of the razors that were
near at hand in the shop; but they effectually prevented him from doing
so, and finally he became too much exhausted to make any further
efforts.

"My curses be upon you all!" he said. "May you, and all who belong to
you--"

But we cannot transcribe the horrible denunciations of Todd. They were
too horrible even for the officers to listen to with patience, and Sir
Richard Blunt, turning to Johanna, said--

"Run over the way to your friends at the fruiterer's. All is over now,
and your disguise is no longer needed."

Johanna did not pause another moment, but ran over the way, and in the
course of a few moments she was in the arms of the fruiterer's daughter,
where she relieved her overcharged heart by weeping bitterly.

"Shut up the shop, Crotchet," said Sir Richard Blunt, "and then get a
coach. I will lodge this man at once in Newgate, and then we will see to
Mrs. Lovett."

At this name Todd looked up.

"She has escaped you," he said.

"I don't think so," responded Sir Richard.

"But I say she has--she is dead: she fell into the Thames this morning
and was drowned."

"Oh, you allude to your pushing her into the river this morning near
London-bridge?" said Sir Richard. "I saw that affair myself."

Todd glared at him.

"But it was not of much consequence. We got her out, and she is all
right again now at her shop in Bell-yard."

Todd held his hands over his eyes for some moments, and then he said in
a low voice--

"It is all a dream, or I am mad."

Crotchet, in obedience to the orders he had received, put up the
shutters of Todd's shop, and then fetched a coach, during the whole of
which time, Sir Richard Blunt himself kept his hand upon Todd's collar,
so that he could control him if he should again become so violent as he
had been.

The spirit to struggle was, however, gone from Todd for the time being.
Indeed, he seemed to be completely stunned by his capture, and to be
able only to see things darkly. He was yet to awaken to a full
consciousness of his situation, and let that awakening be when it would,
it was sure to be awful.

"All's right," said Crotchet. "Here's the vehicle, and the crib is shut
up."

"Crotchet!"

"Yes, your worship. What is it? Why, you never looked at a feller in
that sort of way before."

"I never did have anything so important to say to you, Crotchet, nor did
I ever place in your hands so important a trust. It is one that will
make you or mar you, Crotchet. I have myself important business here, or
I would myself take this man to Newgate. As it is, Crotchet, I wish to
entrust you with that important piece of duty, and I rely upon you,
Crotchet, for keeping an eye upon him, and delivering him in safety."

"It's as good as done," said Crotchet. "If he gets away from me, he has
only another individual to do, and that's the old gent as is down below,
with the long tail. Lor' bless you, sir, didn't I say from the first, as
Todd smugged the people as comed to him to be shaved?"

"You did, Crotchet."

"Werry good. Then does yer think as I'm the feller all for to let him go
when once I've got a hold of him? Rather not!"

"I entrust you with him then, Crotchet. Take him away. I give him
entirely into your hands."

Upon this, Crotchet slid his arm beneath that of Sweeney Todd, and
looking in his face with a most grotesque air of satisfaction, he said,
"kim up--kim up!"

He then, by an immense exertion of strength, hoisted Todd completely
over the door step, after which, catching him with both hands about the
small of his back, he pitched him into the coach.

"My eye," said the coachman, "has the gemman had a drop too much?"

"He will have," said Crotchet, "some o' these odd days. To Newgate--to
Newgate."

Crotchet rode inside along with Todd "for fear he should be dull," he
said, and the other officer got up outside the coach, and then off it
went to that dreadful building that Todd had often grimly smiled at as
he passed, but into which as a resident he had never expected to enter.

Sir Richard Blunt remained in the shop of Sweeney Todd. The oil lamp
that hung by a chain from the ceiling shed a tolerable light over all
objects, and no sooner had the magistrate fastened the outer door after
the departure of Crotchet with Todd, than he stamped three times heavily
upon the floor of the shop.

This signal was immediately answered by three distinct taps from
underneath the floor, and then the magistrate stamped again in the same
manner.

The effect of all this stamping and counter-signals was immediately very
apparent. The great chair which has played so prominent a part in he
atrocities of Sweeney Todd slowly sunk, and the revolving plank hung
suspended by its axle, while a voice from below called out--

"Is all right, sir?"

"Yes, Crotchet has taken him to Newgate. I am now alone. Come up."

"We are coming, sir. We all heard a little disturbance, but the floor is
very thick you know, sir. So we could not take upon ourselves to say
exactly what was happening."

"Oh, it's all right. He resisted, but by this time he is within the
stone walls of Newgate. Let me lend you a hand."

Sir Richard Blunt stooped over the aperture in the floor, and the first
person that got up was no other than Mr. Wrankley the Tobacconist.

"How do you feel after your tumble?" said Sir Richard.

"Oh, very well. The fact is they caught me so capitally below that it
was quite easy. Todd did not think it worth his while to come down to
see if I were alive or dead."

"Ah, that was the only chance; but of course if he had done so he must
have been taken at once into custody--that would have been all. Come on,
my friends, come on. Our trouble with regard to Todd is over now, I
think."

The two churchwardens of St. Dunstan's and the beadle, and four of Sir
Richard Blunt's officers, and the fruiterer from opposite, now came up
from below the shop of Sweeney Todd, where they had been all waiting to
catch Mr. Wrankley when the chair should descend with him.

"Conwulsions!" said the beadle, "I runned agin everybody when I seed him
a-coming. I thought to myself, if a parochial authority had been served
in that 'ere way, there would have been an end of the world at once."

"I had some idea of asking you at one time to play that little part for
me," said Sir Richard.

"Conwulsions! had you, sir?"

"Yes. But now, my friends, let us make a careful search of this house;
and among the first things we have to do is, to remove all the
combustible materials that Todd has stowed in various parts of it, for
unless I am much deceived, the premises are in such a state that the
merest accident would set them in a blaze."

"Conwulsions!" then cried the beadle. "I ain't declared out of danger
yet then!"




                              CHAPTER CXI.
                           MRS. LOVETT PLANS.


We hasten to Bell Yard again.

Mrs. Lovett's immersion in the Thames had really not done her much harm.
Perhaps the river was a little purer than we now find it, and probably
it had not entirely got rid of its name of the "Silver Thames"--an
appellation that now would be really out of place, unless we can imagine
some silver of a much more dingy hue than silver ordinarily presents to
the eye of the observer.

She soon, we find, settled in her own mind a plan of action,
notwithstanding the rather complicated and embarrassing circumstances in
which she found herself placed. That plan of action had for its basis
the impeachment of Todd as a murderer, at the same time that it looked
forward to her own escape from the hands of justice. Her first action
was to quiet the cook in the regions below, for if she did not take some
such step, she was very much afraid her establishment might come to a
stand-still some few hours before she intended that it should do so.

With this object, she wrote upon a little slip of paper the following
words, and passed it into the cellar through an almost imperceptible
crevice in the flooring of the shop--

"Early to-morrow morning you shall have your liberty, together with gold
to take you where you please. All I require of you is, that you do your
ordinary duty to-night, and send up the nine o'clock batch of pies."

This, she considered, could not but have its due effect upon the
discontented cook; and having transmitted it to him in the manner we
have described, she sat down at her desk to write the impeachment of
Todd. In the course of an hour, Mrs. Lovett had filled two pages of
writing paper with a full account of how persons met their death in the
barber's shop. She sealed the letter, and directed it to Sir Richard
Blunt in a bold free hand.

"It is done," she said. "When I am far from London, as I can easily find
the means of being, this will reach the hands of the magistrate to whom
it is addressed, and who has the character of being sharp and active."
(Mrs. Lovett did not know how sharp and active Sir Richard had already
been in her affairs!) "He will act upon it. Todd, in the midst of his
guilt, with many evidences of it about him, will be taken, and I shall
escape! Yes, I shall escape, with about a tithe of what I ought to
have--but I shall have revenge!"

On one of the shelves of the shop--certainly out of reach, but only just
so--stood an old dirty-looking tin jar, such as fancy biscuits might be
kept in. No one for a moment would have thought of looking for anything
valuable in such a place; and yet, keeping the shop door locked the
while, lest any intruder should at unawares pop in and see what she was
about, it was to this tin can upon its dirty shelf that Mrs. Lovett
cautiously went.

"Those who hide can find," she muttered. "I warrant now that Todd had
searched in every seemingly cunning and intricate hiding-place in this
whole house, and he has gone away disappointed. The secret of hiding
anything is not to try to find some place where people may be baffled
when they look, but to light upon some place into which they will not
look at all."

With these words, Mrs. Lovett took down the tin can, and having from the
upper portion of it removed some dusty, mouldy small biscuits, she dived
her hand into it, and fished up a leathern bag. The tape that held its
mouth together was sealed, and a glance sufficed to convince Mrs. Lovett
that it had not been touched.

"Safe, safe!" she muttered. "It is but a thousand pounds, but it is
safe, and it will enable me to fly from this place--it will enable me to
have vengeance upon Todd; and small as the sum is, in some country,
where money is worth more than it is in pampered England, I shall yet be
able to live upon it. I will not complain if I have but the joy of
reading an account of the execution of Todd. I fear I must deny myself
the pleasure of seeing that sight."

The little leathern bag she hid about her, and then she carefully
replaced the tin case upon the shelf whence she had taken it, to
disburthen it of its costly contents.

After this Mrs. Lovett got much calmer. She had not the least
apprehension now of a visit from Todd. She saw by the state of the house
that his search had been a prolonged one, and until he shut up his own
shop, she did not expect that he would again think of coming to Bell
Yard, and as that would be ten o'clock, she fully believed that before
then she would be far away.

And then she sat behind her counter, looking only a shade or so paler
than was her wont, and moving her lips slightly now and then as she
settled in her own mind the course that she would take so as to baffle
all pursuit.

"With no luggage but my gold and notes," she muttered, "I will leave
this place at half past nine, by which time the last batch of pies will
have been up and sold, and all will be quiet. That will be a little more
money to me. Then on foot I will take my way to Highgate--yes, to
Highgate, and I will trust no conveyance, for that might be a ready
means of tracing me. I will go on foot. Then passing Highgate, I will go
on foot upon the Great North Road until some coach overtakes me. It will
not matter whither it be going, so that it takes me on that road; and by
one conveyance and another, I shall at length reach Liverpool, from
which port I shall find some vessel starting to some place abroad, where
I can live free from the chance of detection. Yes, that is the plan!
That is the plan!"

Mrs. Lovett was a woman of some tact, and the plan of operations she had
chalked out was all very well, provided such very malapropos proceedings
had not taken place at Sweeney Todd's in the meantime. Little did Mrs.
Lovett suspect what was there transpiring.

And now we will leave her for a brief space behind her counter,
ruminating, and at odd times smiling to herself in a ghastly fashion,
while we pop down to the cellars, and take a glance at the impatient
imprisoned cook.

About ten minutes before he received the letter--if letter the little
flattering memorandum of Mrs. Lovett could be called--from his mistress,
the cook had been a little alarmed by a noise in the stone pantry, where
the mysterious meat used to make its appearance. Upon proceeding to the
spot with a light, he found lying upon the floor a sealed paper, upon
lifting which he saw was addressed to himself, and at one corner was
written the following words--

"Definitive instructions for to-night from Sir Richard Blunt."

To tear open the letter and to read it with great care, was the work of
a few moments only, and then drawing a long breath, the cook said--

"Thank God! I shall not stop another night in this place. I shall be
free before midnight. Oh, what an oppressive--what an overpowering joy
it will be to me once more to see the sky--to breathe pure fresh air,
and to feel that I have bid adieu for ever to this dreadful--dreadful
place."

The poor cook looked around him with a shudder, and then he had hardly
placed the magistrate's letter securely in his bosom, when the little
missive from Mrs. Lovett came fluttering to his feet, through the crack
in the roof.

"'Tis well," he said, when he had read it. "'Tis very well. This will
chime in most admirably with my instructions from Sir Richard Blunt.
Mrs. Lovett I thank you. You shall have the nine o'clock batch. Oh, yes,
you shall have them. I am all obedience. Alas, if she whom I loved had
not been false to me, I might yet, young as I am, feel the sunshine of
joy in the great world again. But I can never love another, and she is
lost--lost to me for ever. Ay, for ever!"

With this the poor cook, who but a few moments before had been so elated
by the thoughts of freedom, sat himself down, and in quite a
disconsolate manner rested his head upon his hands, and gave himself up
to bitter fancy.

"That she should be false to me," he said mournfully. "It does indeed
almost transcend belief. She, so young, so gentle, so innocent, and so
guileless. If an angel from Heaven had come and told me as much I should
have doubted still; but I cannot mistrust the evidence of my own senses.
I saw her. Yes, I saw her!"

The cook rose and paced the gloomy place to and fro in the restlessness
of a blighted heart, and no one to look at him could for a moment have
supposed that he was near his freedom from an imprisonment of the most
painful and maddening description to one of his impatient temperament.
But so it is with us all; no sooner do we to all appearance see the end
of one evil, than with an activity of imagination worthy to be excited
in better things, we provide ourselves with some real or unreal reason
for the heartache.

"I will so contrive," said the cook, "that before I leave for ever the
land of my birth, I will once more look upon her. Yes, I will once again
drink in, from a contemplation of her wondrous beauty, most delicious
poison; and then when I have feasted my eyes, and perchance grieved my
heart, I will at once go far away, and beneath the sun of other skies
than this, I will wait for death."

The more the poor cook thought of this unknown beauty of his, who surely
had behaved to him very ill, or he could not have spoken of her in such
terms, the more sorrow got upon his countenance, and imparted its sad
sweetness to his tones. Surely the time had not been very far distant
when that young man must have been in a widely different sphere of life
to that limited one in which he now moved.

Suddenly, however, he was recalled to a consciousness of what he had to
do, by the clock striking seven. He counted the strokes, and then
pausing before one of the large ovens, he said--

"The time has now come when I must cease to be making preparations to
obey the mandate of my imperious mistress. She will not now be content
merely to have issued her orders, but she will keep an eye upon me to
see that they are being executed, and unarmed as I am, and without the
knowledge of what power of mischief she may have, I feel that it would
not be safe yet to provoke her. No--no. I must seem to do her bidding."

With this, the cook set about the manufacture of the pies; and as it
would really have been much more troublesome to sham making them than to
make them in earnest, he really did manufacture a hundred of them.

But it was after all with a very bad grace that the poor imprisoned cook
now made the pies; and probably so very indifferent a batch of those
delicious pieces of pastry had never before found its way into the ovens
of Mrs. Lovett. The cook was not wrong in his idea that his imperious
mistress would take a peep at him before nine o'clock. At about eight,
the little grating in the high-up door was tapped by something that Mrs.
Lovett had in her hand, with which to attract the attention of the cook.
He looked up, and saw her dimly.

"Are you busy?" she said.

"Yes, madam, as busy as the nine o'clock batch usually makes me. Do you
not hear the oven?"

"I do--'tis well."

"Ah, madam," said the dissembling cook, "it will be well, indeed, if you
keep your word with me, and set me to-night at freedom."

"Do you doubt it?"

"I have no particular reason to doubt it, further than that the
unfortunate are always inclined to doubt too good news. That is all,
madam."

"If you doubt, you will be agreeably disappointed, for I shall keep my
word with you. You have done for me much better than I ever expected,
and I will be grateful to you now that you are going. I have said that
you shall not go without means, and you shall have a purse of twenty
guineas to help you on your way wherever you wish."

"How kind you are, madam! Ah, I shall be able now to forgive you for all
that I have suffered in this place--and, after all, it has been a refuge
from want."

"It has. No one can be better pleased than I am to find you view things
so reasonably. Send up the nine o'clock batch; and then wait patiently
until I come to you."

"I will."

"Till then, good-night!"

Mrs. Lovett left the grating; and as she went up to the shop, she
muttered to herself--

"They will, when they find him here, suspect he is an accomplice. Well,
let them hang him, for all I care. What can it matter to me?"




                             CHAPTER CXII.
      MRS. LOVETT FINDS THAT IT IS EASIER TO PLAN THAN TO EXECUTE.


It wants five minutes to nine, and Mrs. Lovett's shop is filling with
persons anxious to devour or to carry away one or more of the nine
o'clock batch of savoury, delightful, gushing gravy pies.

Many of Mrs. Lovett's customers paid her in advance for the pies, in
order that they might be quite sure of getting their orders fulfilled
when the first batch should make its gracious appearance from the depths
below.

"Well, Jiggs," said one of the legal fraternity to another, "how are you
to-day, old fellow? What do you bring it in?"

"Oh! I ain't very blooming. The fact is, the count and I, and a few
others, made a night of it last evening; and somehow or another I don't
think whiskey-and-water, half-and-half, and tripe, go well together."

"I should wonder if they did."

"And so I've come for a pie just to settle my stomach; you see I'm
rather delicate."

"Ah! you are just like me, young man, there," said an elderly personage;
"I have a delicate stomach, and the slightest thing disagrees with me. A
mere idea will make me quite ill."

"Will it, really?"

"Yes; and my wife, she--"

"Oh, bother your wife! It's only five minutes to nine, don't you see?
What a crowd there is, to be sure. Mrs. Lovett, you charmer, I hope you
have ordered enough pies to be made to-night? You see what a lot of
customers you have."

"Oh, there will be plenty."

"That's right. I say, don't push so; you'll be in time, I tell you;
don't be pushing and driving in that sort of way--I've got ribs."

"And so have I. Last night I didn't get a pie at all, and my old woman
is in a certain condition, you see, gentlemen, and won't fancy anything
but one of Lovett's veal pies; so I've come all the way from Newington
to get one for--"

"Hold your row, will you? and don't push."

"For to have the child marked with a pie on its--"

"Behind there, I say; don't be pushing a fellow as if it were half price
at a theatre."

Each moment added some new comers to the throng, and at last any
strangers who had known nothing of the attractions of Mrs. Lovett's
pie-shop and had walked down Bell Yard, would have been astonished at
the throng of persons there assembled--a throng that was each moment
increasing in density, and becoming more and more urgent and clamorous.

                  *       *       *       *       *

One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine! Yes, it is nine at
last. It strikes by old St. Dunstan's church clock, and in weaker
strains the chronometical machine at the pie-shop echoes the sound. What
excitement there is to get at the pies when they shall come! Mrs. Lovett
lets down the square moveable platform that goes on pullies in the
cellar; some machinery, which only requires a handle to be turned,
brings up a hundred pies in a tray. These are eagerly seized by parties
who have previously paid, and such a smacking of lips ensues as never
was known.

Down goes the platform for the next hundred, and a gentlemanly man
says--

"Let me work the handle, Mrs. Lovett, if you please; it's too much for
you I'm sure."

"Sir, you are very kind, but I never allow anybody on this side of the
counter but my own people, sir. I can turn the handle myself, sir, if
you please, with the assistance of this girl. Keep your distance, sir,
nobody wants your help."

"But my dear madam, only consider your delicacy. Really you ought not to
be permitted to work away like a negro slave at a winch handle. Really
you ought not."

The man who spoke thus obligingly to Mrs. Lovett, was tall and stout,
and the lawyers clerks repressed the ire they otherwise would probably
have given utterance to at thus finding any one quizzing their charming
Mrs. Lovett.

"Sir, I tell you again that I don't want your help; keep your distance,
sir, if you please."

"Now don't get angry, fair one," said the man. "You don't know but I
might have made you an offer before I left the shop."

"Sir," said Mrs. Lovett, drawing herself up and striking terror into the
hearts of the limbs of the law. "Sir! What do you want? Say what you
want, and be served, sir, and then go. Do you want a pie, sir?"

"A pie? Oh, dear no, I don't want a pie. I would not eat one of the
nasty things on any account. Pah!" Here the man spat on the floor. "Oh,
dear, don't ask me to eat any of your pies."

"Shame, shame," said several of the lawyers clerks.

"Will any gentleman who thinks it a shame, be so good as to step forward
and say so a little closer?"

Everybody shrunk back upon this, instead of accepting the challenge, and
Mrs. Lovett soon saw that she must, despite all the legal chivalry by
which she was surrounded, fight her battles herself. With a look of
vehement anger, she cried--

"Beware, sir, I am not to be trifled with. If you carry your jokes too
far, you will wish that you had not found your way, sir, into this
shop."

"That, madam," said the tall stout man, "is not surely possible, when I
have the beauty of a Mrs. Lovett to gaze upon, and render the place so
exquisitely attractive; but if you will not permit me to have the
pleasure of helping you up with the next batch of pies, which, after
all, you may find heavier than you expect, I must leave you to do it
yourself."

"So that I am not troubled any longer by you, sir, at all," said Mrs.
Lovett, "I don't care how heavy the next batch of pies may happen to be,
sir."

"Very good, madam."

"Upon my word," said a small boy, giving the side of his face a violent
rub with the hope of finding the ghost of a whisker there, "it's really
too bad."

"Ah, who's that? Let me get at him!"

"Oh, no, no, I--mean--that it's too bad of Mrs. Lovett, my dear sir. Oh,
don't."

"Oh, very good; I am satisfied. Now, madam, you see that even your dear
friends here, from Lincoln's Inn--Are you from the Inn, small boy?"

"Yes, sir, if you please."

"Very good. As I was saying, Mrs. Lovett, you now must of necessity
perceive, that even your friends from the Inn, feel that your conduct is
really too bad, madam."

Mrs. Lovett was upon this so dreadfully angry, that she disdained any
reply to the tall stout man, but at once she applied herself to the
windlass, which worked up the little platform, upon which a whole tray
of a hundred pies was wont to come up, and began to turn it with what
might be called a vengeance.

How very strange it was--surely the words of the tall stout impertinent
stranger were prophetic, for never before had Mrs. Lovett found what a
job it was to work that handle, as upon that night. The axle creaked,
and the cords and the pullies strained and wheezed, but she was a
determined woman, and she worked away at it.

"I told you so, my dear madam," said the stranger; "it is more evidently
than you can do."

"Peace, sir."

"I am done; work away ma'am, only don't say afterwards that I did not
offer to help you, that's all."

Indignation was swelling at the heart of Mrs. Lovett, but she felt that
if she wasted her breath upon the impertinent stranger, she should have
none for the windlass; so setting her teeth, she fagged at it with a
strength and a will that if she had not been in a right royal passion,
she could not have brought to bear upon it on any account.

There was quite an awful stillness in the shop. All eyes were bent upon
Mrs. Lovett, and the cavity through which the next batch of those
delicious pies were coming. Those who had had the good fortune to get
one of the first lot, had only had their appetites heightened by the
luxurious feast they had partaken of, while those who had had as yet
none, actually licked their lips, and snuffed up the delightful aroma
from the remains of the first batch.

"Two for me, Mrs. Lovett," cried a voice. "One veal for me. Three
porks--one pork."

The voices grew fast and furious.

"Silence!" cried the tall stout man. "I will engage that everybody shall
be fully satisfied; and no one shall leave here without a thorough
conviction that his wants in pies has been more than attended to."

The platform could be made to stop at any stage of its upward progress,
by means of a ratchet wheel and a catch, and now Mrs. Lovett paused to
take breath. She attributed the unusual difficulty in working the
machinery to her own weakness, contingent upon her recent immersion in
the Thames.

"Sir," she said between her clenched teeth, addressing the man who was
such an eye-sore to her in the shop. "Sir, I don't know who you are, but
I hope to be able to show you when I have served these gentlemen, that
even I am not to be insulted with impunity."

"Anything you please, madam," he replied, "in a small way, only don't
exert yourself too much."

Mrs. Lovett flew to the windlass again, and from the manner in which she
now worked at it, it was quite clear that when she had her hands free
from that job, she fully intended to make good her threats against the
tall stout man. The young beardless scions of the law, trembled at the
idea of what might happen.

And now the tops of the pies appeared. Then they saw the rim of the
large tray upon which they were, and then just as the platform itself
was level with the floor of the shop, up flew tray and pies, as if
something had exploded beneath them, and a tall slim man sprung upon the
counter. It was the cook, who from the cellars beneath, had laid himself
as flat as he could beneath the tray of pies, and so had been worked up
to the shop by Mrs. Lovett!

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett's Cook Astonishes Her Customers, Rather.]

"Gentlemen," he cried, "I am Mrs. Lovett's cook. The pies are made of
_human flesh_!"

                  *       *       *       *       *

We shrink, we tremble at the idea of attempting to describe the scene
that ensued in the shop of Mrs. Lovett contingent upon this frightful
apparition, and still more frightful speech of the cook; but duty--our
duty to the public--requires that we should say something upon the
occasion.

If we can do nothing more, we can briefly enumerate what did actually
take place in some instances.

About twenty clerks rushed into Bell Yard, and there and then, to the
intense surprise of the passers-by, became intensely sick. The cook,
with one spring, cleared the counter, and alighted amongst the
customers, and with another spring, the tall impertinent man, who had
made many remarks to Mrs. Lovett of an aggravating tendency, cleared the
counter likewise in the other direction, and, alighting close to Mrs.
Lovett, he cried--

"Madam, you are my prisoner!"

For a moment, and only for a moment, the great--the cunning, and the
redoubtable Mrs. Lovett, lost her self-possession, and, staggering back,
she lurched heavily against the glass-case next to the wall, immediately
behind the counter. It was only for a moment, though, that such an
effect was produced upon Mrs. Lovett; and then, with a spring like an
enraged tigress, she caught up a knife that was used for slipping under
the pies and getting them cleanly out of the little tins, and rushed
upon the tall stranger.

Yes, she rushed upon him; but for once in a way, even Mrs. Lovett had
met with her match. With a dexterity, that only long practice in
dealings with the more desperate portion of human nature could have
taught him, the tall man closed with her, and had the knife out of her
hand in a moment. He at once threw it right through the window into Bell
Yard, and then, holding Mrs. Lovett in his arms, he said--

"My dear madam, you only distress yourself for nothing; all resistance
is perfectly useless. Either I must take you prisoner, or you me, and I
decidedly incline to the former alternative."

The knife that had been thrown through the window was not without its
object, for in a moment afterwards Mr. Crotchet made his appearance in
the shop.

"All right, Crotchet," said he who had captured Mrs. Lovett; "first clap
the bracelets on this lady."

"Here yer is," said Crotchet. "Lor, mum! I had a eye on you months and
months agone. How is you, mum, in yer _feelin's_ this here nice
evening?--Eh mum?"

"A knife--a knife! Oh, for a knife!" cried Mrs. Lovett.

"Ex-actly, mum," added Crotchet, as he with professional dexterity
slipped the handcuffs on her wrists. "Would you like one with a hivory
handle, mum? or would anything more common do, mum?"

Mrs. Lovett fell to the floor, or rather she cast herself to it, and
began voluntarily beating her head against the boards. They quickly
lifted her up; and then the tall stranger turned to the cook, who, after
leaping over the counter, had sat down upon a chair in a state of
complete exhaustion, and he said--

"Do you know the way to Sir Richard's office, in Craven Street? He
expects you there, I believe?"

"Yes, yes. But now that all is over, I feel very ill."

"In that case, I will go with you, then. Crotchet, who have you got
outside?"

"Only two of our pals, Muster Green; but it's all right, if so be as you
leaves the lady to us."

"Very well. The warrant is at Newgate, and the governor is expecting her
instant arrival. You will get a coach at the corner of the yard, and be
off with her at once."

"All's right," said Crotchet. "I knowed as she'd be nabbed, and I had
one all ready, you sees."

"That was right, Crotchet. How amazingly quick everybody has left the
shop. Why--why, what is all this?"

As the officer spoke, about half a dozen squares of glass in the shop
window of the house were broken in, and a ringing shout from a dense mob
that was rapidly collecting in the yard, came upon the ears of the
officer. The two men whom Crotchet had mentioned, with difficulty
pressed their way into the shop, and one of them cried--

"The people that were in the shop have spread the news all over the
neighbourhood, and the place is getting jammed up with a mob, every one
of which is mad, I think, for they talk of nothing but of the tearing of
Mrs. Lovett to pieces. They are pouring in from Fleet Street and Carey
Street by hundreds at a time."




                             CHAPTER CXIII.
        THE ROUTE TO NEWGATE--MRS. LOVETT'S DANGER FROM THE MOB.


Mrs. Lovett, upon hearing these words, turned ghastly pale, but she did
not speak. The officers looked at each other with something like dismay,
and then before either of them could say another word, there arose a
wild prolonged shout from without.

"Out with her--out with her! Kill her! Tear her to bits and hang her on
the lamp-post in the middle of Bell Yard! Out with her! Drag her out!
Hang her! hang her!"

"The coach you say is waiting, Crotchet?" said the officer, who had been
intrusted by Sir Richard Blunt with the conduct of the whole business
connected with Mrs. Lovett's capture.

"It were," said Crotchet, "and that coachman ain't the sort of fellow to
move on till I tell him. I knows him."

"Very good, then we must make a dash for it, and get her away by main
force, it must be done, let the risk and the consequences be what they
may, and the sooner the better, too. Come on, madam."

"Death--death!" said Mrs. Lovett. "Kill me here, some of you, kill me at
once; but do not let me be torn to pieces by a savage mob. Oh, God, they
yell for my blood! Save me from them, and kill me here. A knife! oh, for
a knife!"

"And a fork too, mum," said Crotchet; "in course, if you wants 'em. I
tells you what it is, Mr. Green, that there mob is just savage, and we
have about as much chance of getting her down to Fleet Street with her
head on her shoulders, as all of us have of flying over the blessed
house tops."

"We must. It is our duty, and if we fail, they must kill us, which I
don't think they will do. Come on."

"I will go with you," said the cook, starting up from the chair upon
which he had on account of his weakness been compelled to seat himself,
"I will go with you, and implore the people to let the law take its
course upon this woman."

"In the cupboard, in the parlour," said Mrs. Lovett, speaking in a
strange gasping tone, "there is a letter addressed by me to Sir Richard
Blunt. It will be worth your while to save it from the mob. Let me show
you where to lay your hands upon it, and if you have any wish to take a
greater criminal than I, go to the shop of one Sweeney Todd, a barber,
in Fleet Street. His number is sixty nine. Seize him, for he is the head
of all the criminality you can possibly impute to me. Seize him, and I
shall be content."

"The man you mention," said Mr. Green, "has been in Newgate an hour
nearly."

"Newgate?"

"Yes. We took him first, and then attended to you."

"Todd--captured--in Newgate--and I in fancied security here remained
wasting the previous moments upon which hung my life. Oh,
fool--fool--dolt--idiot. A knife! Oh, sirs, I pray you to give me the
means of instant death. What can the law do, but take my life? What have
you all come here, and plotted and planned for, but to take my life? I
will do it. Oh, I pray you to give me the means, and I will satisfy you
and justice, and die at once."

Another loud roar from the infuriated people without, drowned whatever
the officer might have said in reply to this appeal from Mrs. Lovett,
and again arose the wild shouts of--

"Out with her!--Out with her!--Hang her!--Hang the murderess!--Hang her
in the yard!--Out with her!"

"Forward!" cried Mr. Green. "To hesitate is only to make our situation
ten times worse. Forward!"

"Hold a bit," cried Crotchet, "let me speak to the people; I knows how
to humour 'em. Only you see if I don't get her along. Come, mum, just
step this a-ways if yer pleases. Open the door, Mr. Cook, and let me out
first."

The cook opened the door, and before the mob could rush into the place,
Crotchet stepped on to the threshold of the shop, and in a tremendous
voice that made itself heard above all others, he cried--

"Hurrah! Hurrah!"

Nothing is easier than to throw a cry into a crowd, and to get it echoed
to your heart's content; and so some couple of hundred voices now
immediately cried--"Hurrah!" and when the vast volume of sound had died
away, Crotchet in such a voice that it must have been heard in Fleet
Street quite plainly, said--

"My opinion is, that Mrs. Lovett ought to be hung outright, and at once
without any more bother about it."

"Hurrah!--Hang her!--Hang her!" shouted the mob.

"And," added Crotchet, "I propose the lamp-post at the top of Fleet
Market as a nice public sort of place to do the job in. She says she
won't walk, but I have a coach in Fleet Street, and we will pop her into
that, and so take her along quite snug."

"Yes, yes," cried the people. "Bring her along, that will do."

"Oh, will it?" muttered Crochet to himself. "What a precious set of
ninnies you are. If I get her once in the coach, and she gets out again
except to step into the stone jug, may I be hanged myself."

"I think you have managed it, Crotchet," whispered Mr. Green, "I think
that will do."

"To be sure it will, sir. All's right. Bless your heart, mobs is the
stupidest beasts as is. You may do anything you like with them if you
will only let them have their own way a little, but if so be as you trys
to fight 'em, they is all horns and _porkipines_, quills and stone
walls, and iron rails, they is!"

"You are right enough, Crotchet; and now then let Smith stay here and
mind the house, and shut it all up snug till the morning; when it can be
thoroughly searched, and you and I and Simmons here will go with Mrs.
Lovett."

"And I too," said the cook. "We can go to Sir Richard's afterwards."

"So we can--so we can. Come on, now."

"You will deliver me up to the mob," screamed Mrs. Lovett. "Mercy!
Mercy! I shall be torn limb from limb. Oh, what a death! Are you men or
fiends that you will condemn me to it? Mercy!--mercy!"

This sudden passion of Mrs. Lovett's was the very thing the officers
would have desired, inasmuch as it materially helped to deceive the mob,
and to prevent any idea upon the part of the infuriated people, that
there was any collusion between the officers and Mrs. Lovett, for the
purpose of getting her safely to prison.

They dragged her out into Bell Yard, and then the shouts that the mob
set up was truly terrific.

"Lights! Links!" cried a voice. "Let's show her the way!"

In a moment an oil-shop opposite to Mrs. Lovett's was plundered of a
score or two of links, and being lighted with great rapidity from the
solitary oil-lamp that there stood in the middle of Bell Yard, they sent
a bright lurid glare upon the sea of heads, that seemed so close they
might have been walked upon all the way to Fleet Street. Another shout
echoed far and near, and then Crotchet took hold of one of Mrs. Lovett's
arms, and Mr. Green hold of the other, and the cook and the other
officers following, they all began slowly to make way through the mob.

"Let's get along with her," cried Crotchet. "I have her tight. She won't
get away. Some of you get a good stout rope ready, and make a noose in
it. We will hang her on the lamp-post at the top of the market. Bring
her along. Make way a little. Only a little!"

Mrs. Lovett shrieked as she saw the sea of angry faces before, behind,
and on all sides of her. She thought that surely her last hour was come,
and that a far more horrible death than any she had ever calculated upon
in her worst moments of depression, was about to be hers. Her eyes were
blood-shot--she bit her under lip through, and the blood poured from her
mouth--she each moment that she could gather breath to do so, raised a
fearful shriek, and the mob shouted and yelled, and swayed to and fro,
and the links were tossed from hand to hand, flashing, and throwing
around them thousands of bright sparks, and people rapidly joined the
mob.




                             CHAPTER CXIV.
         THE COOK WAITS UPON SIR RICHARD BLUNT AND HEARS NEWS.


It took a quarter of an hour to reach the coach from the door of Mrs.
Lovett's shop, a distance that in twenty steps any one might have
traversed; and, oh! what a quarter of an hour of horrible suffering that
was to the wretched woman, whose crimes had so infuriated the populace,
that with one voice they called for her death!

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett's Escort To The Gallows.]

The coach door was opened, and Crotchet pushed his prisoner in. Mr.
Green, and the other officer and the cook followed her.

"I will go on the box," said Crotchet.

"Very well," said Green, "but be mindful of your own safety, Crotchet."

"All's right. There ain't any more o' my sort in London, and I know I am
rather a valuable piece o' goods. Has anybody got the rope ready for the
lady?"

"Here you are," said a man, "I have one."

"You get up behind then," said Crotchet, "for of course you know we
shall soon want you."

"Yes, I will. That's right! It's all right, friends. I am to get up
behind with the rope. Here's the rope!"

"Three cheers for the rope!" cried somebody, and the cheers were given
with deafening violence. What will not a mob give three cheers for--ay,
or any number of cheers you like to name? A piece of poor humanity in
tinsel and fine linen, called a king or queen--a popular cry--a
murderess--a rope--anything will suffice. Surely, Mr. Crotchet, you know
something of the people!

"Now," said Crotchet to the coachman, "are you as bold as brass, and as
strong as an iron file?"

The coachman looked puzzled, but Mr. Crotchet pursued his queries.

"Will these 'osses, if they is frightened a bit, cut along quick?"

"Rather," said the coachman. "The blessed fact is, that they won't cut
along unless you do frighten them a bit; and as for me being an old file
and having lots o' brass, I doesn't consider as I'm a bit worser nor my
neighbours."

"You is as hignorant as a badger!" said Crotchet. "Make yourself easy
and give me the reins. The mobs o' people thinks as we is a going to
hang the woman at the corner of Fleet Market, but if I lives another ten
minutes, she will be in Newgate. There may be something of a scuffle,
and if anything happens to you, or to the coach or the 'osses, the
county will pay handsomely, so now give me the reins. You may not like
to whip through them, but I haven't the least objection."

The coachman looked scared and nervous, but he gave up the reins and the
whip to Crotchet, and then leaning back on the box, he waited with no
small trepidation the result of the expected disturbance, while he had
only Mr. Crotchet's word that the county would pay for handsomely.

The short distance from the corner of Bell Yard to the end of Fleet
Market was rapidly traversed, and when that interesting point was
reached, the dense mass of people set up another shout, and began to
surround the lamp-post that was there, and to fill up all the avenues.

"Get the rope up," said Crotchet.

"Yes, yes. Hurrah! hurrah! Pull her out, and hang her!"

The highly interesting process of getting the rope fixed upon the little
projecting piece of iron, upon which the lamplighter was wont to rest
his ladder, had the effect that Crotchet expected, namely, to attract
general attention; and then, taking advantage of the moment, he seized
the whip and used it with such effect upon the horses, that, terrified
and half maddened, they set off with the coach at a tearing gallop.

For a moment or two--and in that moment or two Mr. Crotchet with his
prisoner got to the corner of the Old Bailey--the mob were so staggered
by this unexpected elopement of the hackney-coach, that not a soul
followed it. The idea that the horses had of their own accord started,
being probably alarmed at the links, was the first that possessed the
people, and many voices called out loudly--

"Pull 'em in--pull 'em in! Saw their heads off!"

But when they saw Mr. Crotchet fairly turn into the Old Bailey, the
trick that had been played upon them became apparent; and one yell of
indignation and rage burst from the multitude.

The pursuit was immediate; but Mr. Crotchet had too much the start of
the mob, and long before the struggling infuriated people, impeding each
other as they tore along, had reached the corner of the Old Bailey, Mrs.
Lovett was in the lobby of the prison, and the officers safely with her.

She looked like a corpse. The colour of her face was that of soiled
white wax.

But mobs, if they cannot wreak their vengeance upon what may be, for
distinction's sake, called the legitimate object of their displeasure,
will do so upon something else; and upon reaching the door of Newgate,
and finding there was no sort of chance of getting hold of Mrs. Lovett,
they took the horses out of the hackney-coach, and started them off
through the streets to go where they liked; and then, dragging the coach
to Smithfield, they then and there made a bon-fire of it, and were very
much satisfied and delighted, indeed.

"Now, mum," said Crotchet to Mrs. Lovett, "didn't I say I'd bring yer to
the old stone jug as safe as ninepence?"

She only looked at him vacantly; and then, glaring around her with a
shudder, she said--

"And this is Newgate!"

"Just a few," said Crotchet.

The governor at this moment made his appearance, and began to give
orders as to where Mrs. Lovett should be placed. A slight change of
colour came over her face, as she said--

"Shall I see Todd?"

"Not at present," said the governor.

"I should like to see him to forgive him; for no doubt it is to him that
I owe this situation. He has betrayed me!"

The look which she put on when she uttered the words "I should like to
see him to forgive him," was so truly demoniac, that it was quite clear
if she did see Todd, that whether she were armed or not, she would fly
upon him, and try to take his life; and although in that she might fail,
there would be very little doubt but that, in the process of failure,
she would inflict upon him some very serious injury.

It was not likely, though, that the officials of Newgate would indulge
her with an opportunity.

"You had better all of you wait here," said the governor to Mr.
Crotchet, and the officers, and the cook, "until the mob is gone."

"The street is quite clear, sir," said a turnkey, "They have taken the
coach to knock it to pieces, I suppose, sir."

"And I'm done up at last!" said the coachman, wringing his hands, for he
had, in fear for his own safety, made his way into the lobby of Newgate
along with Mr. Crotchet; "I'm done up at last!"

"Not at all," said the governor. "We would not have lost such a prisoner
as this Mrs. Lovett, for the worth of fifty coaches. Every penny of your
loss will be made good to you. There is a guinea, in the meantime--go
home, and do not distress yourself upon the subject, my good fellow."

Upon this the coachman was greatly comforted, and with Mr. Crotchet and
the officers, he left the lobby of Newgate at the same moment that Mrs.
Lovett was led off into the interim of that gloomy and horrible abode.

The object of the officer was now to get to the private office of Sir
Richard Blunt as soon as possible, and let him know of the successful
capture of Mrs. Lovett. Sir Richard, too, it will be remembered, had
left a special message with the cook to repair to his office as soon as
he could after his release from his bondage in Bell Yard, so that the
liberated cook, who felt that he owed that liberation to the advice and
assistance of Sir Richard, did not scruple to obey the directions of the
magistrate at once.

The private-office of Sir Richard, it will be recollected, was in Craven
Street, at the bottom of the Strand.

Upon the route there, Mr. Crotchet and the cook held a long and very
serious discourse about the proceedings of Mrs. Lovett, and if the cook
was able to tell the active and enterprising Crotchet much that was
curious regarding the underground operations at Mrs. Lovett's, he, in
return, received some curious edifying information concerning the lady's
business connexion with Sweeney Todd, with the particulars of which the
cook had been completely ignorant.

By the time they reached Craven Street, therefore, the cook's eyes were
considerably opened, and many matters that had been to him extremely
obscure, became all at once quite clear, so that he was upon the whole
far from sorry for the companionship of the eccentric Crotchet on the
road down the Strand to the magistrate's private office.

Sir Richard was at home, and anxiously expecting them, so that upon the
first hint of their presence they were introduced to him, and he
received the report of the officer with evident satisfaction.

"Thank God," he said, "two of the greatest malefactors the world ever
saw are now in the hands of justice."

"Yes," said Crotchet. "They are cotched."

"You may depend all of you," added Sir Richard, "that your conduct and
great skill in exertions in this affair shall be by me communicated to
the Secretary of State, who will not leave you unrewarded. Pray wait for
me in the outer room, I have some private business with this gentleman."

The officers were a little surprised to hear Sir Richard Blunt call Mrs.
Lovett's cook, "this gentleman;" but they of course took no notice of
the circumstance while in the presence of their principal, and in a few
moments the magistrate was alone with the cook.

From a cupboard in his room, then Sir Richard Blunt took wine and other
refreshments, and laid them before the cook, saying--

"Refresh yourself, my friend; but for your own sake, as your fare has
been but indifferent for some time, I beg you to be sparing."

"I will, sir. I owe you much--very much!"

"You are free now."

"I--am--sir."

"And yet you are very unhappy."

The cook started and changed colour slightly. He filled, for himself, a
glass of wine, and after drinking it he heaved a sigh, as he said--

"Sir, I am unhappy. I do not care how soon the world and I part, sir.
The hope--the dream of my life has gone from me. All that I lived
for--all that I cherished as the brightest expectation of joy in this
world has passed away like a vapour, and left not a rack behind. I am
unhappy, and better, far better, would it have been for me if Sweeney
Todd had taken my life, or if by some subtle poison, Mrs. Lovett had
shuffled me out of the world--I am unhappy."

"Indeed! And you really think you have nothing in this world now to live
for?"

"I do. But it is not a thought only. It is a knowledge--it is a fact
that cannot be gainsaid or controverted. I tell you, sir, that I can
never now hope to realise the happiness which was the day-dream of my
existence, and which has passed from me like a dream, never--never to
come again. It was in the despair contingent upon such thoughts and
feelings, that I went to Mrs. Lovett and became her slave; but now I
will be off far away from England, and on some foreign shore I will lay
my bones."

"But, my good sir, you will be wanted on the trial of your old friend,
Mrs. Lovett."

"Cannot you hang the woman without my help?"

"Yes, I think we might, but so material a witness to her infamy as
yourself cannot be dispensed with. Of course I do not pretend to be a
conjuror, or to say to any man--'You shall be happy in spite of all your
prognostications to the contrary;' but from what you have told me of
your story, I must confess that to my perception you take much too
gloomy a view of your condition."

"Too gloomy!" exclaimed the cook, as he filled himself up another glass
of wine. "Too gloomy! My dear, sir, you don't know how I loved that
girl--you don't know how I--I--But it is no matter now--all that is
past. Oh God! that she should be false to me--she of all persons in the
great world!"

"And so you will let this little disappointment of the heart, place you
in your youth quite beside all possible enjoyment? Is this wise, sir? Is
it even manly?"

The poor cook was silent for a few moments, and then in a voice of deep
emotion, he said--

"Sir, you don't know how much I loved her. You do not know how I
pictured to myself happiness with her alone. You do not know, sir, how,
even when death stared me in the face, I thought of her and her only,
and how--But no matter--no matter, sir. She is false, and it is madness
to speak of her. Let her go, sir. It is just possible that in the time
to come, I may outlive the despair that now fills my heart."

"You surely will."

"I do not think it. But I will hope that I may."

"And have you really no hope--no innate lurking supposition in your
mind, that you may be doing her an injustice in your suspicions of her
faith?"

"Suspicions?"

"Ay, sir, suspicions, for even you must admit that you know nothing."

"Know nothing, sir?"

"Absolutely nothing. You will find, if you come to consider the affair,
that, as I say, you know nothing, but suspect much; and so upon mere
suspicion you will make your future life miserable. I would not so bend
to circumstances if the whole world stood up before me, and told me I
was right in my dread thoughts of one whom I had loved."

The poor cook glanced at Sir Richard Blunt, and for the space of about
half a minute, not one word passed between them. Then in a low voice,
the cook said--

"You have read Romeo and Juliet, sir?"

"Yes--what then?"

"There is one line there, in which we read that

    'He jests at scars who never felt a wound.'"

"Well, how would you apply that line to the present circumstances?"

"I would say you have never loved, sir, and I have loved."

"A broad assumption that, my friend," said Sir Richard Blunt, "a very
broad assertion, indeed. But come, I have to spare a short time. Will
you, in recompense for what I have done for you, relate to me more fully
than you have done, how it is that you suspect her whom you loved of
falsehood to you?"

"Do not say loved, sir; I love her still."

"I am glad to hear it. I pray you to go on, and tell me now all, if you
feel that you can have sufficient confidence in me, and that you can
view me with a sufficient friendly feeling."

"Oh, sir, why do you doubt me? Do I not owe to you my life? Do I not owe
it to you that I escaped the death that without a doubt was designed for
me by Todd? and was it not by your persevering, that at length I had
patience enough to wait until the proper time had come for my release,
when it could be accomplished without the shadow of a doubt as to the
result?"

"Well," said Sir Richard Blunt, with a smile, "I hope then that I have
established some claim upon you; so now tell me your story, my friend,
and at the end of it I will, from my experience, do what I can to bring
you substantial comfort."

"You shall hear all, sir," said the cook, "but comfort and I have parted
long since, I fear, from each other for ever."




                              CHAPTER CXV.
              THE COOK BECOMES A VERY IMPORTANT PERSONAGE.


At this last declaration of Mrs. Lovett's late cook, regarding the
tender adieu that he and comfort had taken of each other, Sir Richard
Blunt only smiled faintly, and slightly inclined his hand as much as to
say--

"That is all very well, but I am waiting to hear your story, if you
please."

"Well, sir," added the cook. "You already know that I am not exactly
what I seem, and that my being in that most abominable woman's
employment as a cook, was one of those odd freaks of fortune, which will
at times detract the due order of society, and place people in the most
extraordinary positions."

"Exactly."

"I am, sir, an orphan, and was brought up by an uncle with every
expectation that he would be kind and liberal to me as I progressed in
years; but he had taken his own course and had made up his mind as to
what I was to be, how I was to look, and what I was to say and to do,
without asking himself the question, if nature was good enough to
coincide with him or not. The consequence was then, that directly he
found me very different from what he wished me to be, he was very angry
indeed, and then I put the finishing stroke to his displeasure, by
committing the greatest crime that in his eyes I could commit: I fell in
love."

"Humph!"

"Yes, sir, that was just what he said at first, when some officious
friend told of it, and sending for me he said--'You must give up all
love nonsense if you wish to preserve my favour,' upon which I
said--'Sir, did you never love?' 'That is not the question,' he said.
'It is of your follies now, not mine, that we are speaking,' and so he
turned me out of the room."

"And what did you do? Did you give up your love?"

"No, sir; if he had asked me to give up my life that would have been
much easier to me."

"Go on. What then happened?"

"Why, sir, my uncle and I met very seldom, but there was one upon my
track that he paid to follow me, and to report my actions to him; and
that spy--oh, that I had caught him! that spy made my uncle acquainted
with the fact, that I continued, despite his prohibition, to meet with
the only being who ever awakened in my bosom a tender feeling; and so I
was abandoned by my relative, and left penniless almost."

"But you had youth and health?"

"I had, and I resolved to make use of those advantages as best I might,
by endeavouring while they lasted, frail and fluttering possessions as
they are, to make a home for myself and for her whom I loved."

"The feeling, I presume, was reciprocal?"

"I thought so."

"Was it only a thought, then?"

"Alas! no. It was a certainty; and if an angel with wings fresh spread
from Heaven, and carrying upon them the soft light of an eternal world,
had come to me and told me that she would be false to me, I would not
have believed as much."

"And yet--"

"And yet, as you say, I have found her false. Well--well, Sir
Richard--let me proceed. The thought of her unmans me at moments, but in
time I may recover from such feelings."

"Most unquestionably you will; and then you will look to your present
condition of mind with such a smile of incredulity, and only a faint
faith in your own memory that paints you such feelings."

"I cannot say, sir, that it will not be so, but I do not think so. To
proceed, however. I heard that an expedition was about to start to
explore some rich islands in the Southern Sea. If successful, every one
who took part in it would be enriched; and if unsuccessful, I could not
lose my life in a better cause then in trying to make a happy home for
her whom I love. I at once embraced the proposition, and became one of
the adventurers, much against the inclination of the gentle girl whom I
loved, and who in imagination pictured to herself a thousand dangers as
involved in the enterprise."

"You went?"

"I did, and with every hope of returning in about a year an independent
man. I thought little of the perils I was about to encounter in my
voyage. I and the fair girl upon whom I had fixed my best hopes and
affections parted, after many tears and protestations of fidelity. I
kept my faith."

"And she?"

"Broke hers."

"As you think--as you think. You cannot be too cautious, my young
friend, in making assertions of that character."

"Cautious, sir? Am I to believe the evidence of my own eyes, or am I
not?"

"Not always," said Sir Richard Blunt, calmly. "But I pray you go on with
your narrative."

"I will. The principal object of the voyage failed entirely; but by pure
accident I got possession of a String of Pearls, of very great value
indeed, which, provided I could get home in safety, would value in
Europe quite a sufficient sum to enable us to live in comfort. But the
dangers of the deep assailed us. We were wrecked; and fully believing
that I should not survive, I handed the pearls to a stronger comrade,
and begged him to take them to her whom I had loved, to tell herself my
fate, and to bid her not weep for me, since I had died happy in the
thought that I had achieved something for her; and so, my friend and I
parted. I was preserved and got on board a merchant vessel bound for
England, where I arrived absolutely penniless. But I had a heart full of
hope and joy; for if I could but find my poor girl faithful to me, I
felt that we might yet be happy, whether my comrade had lived to bring
to her the pearls or not."

"And you found her?"

"You shall hear, sir. I walked from Southampton to London, subsisting on
the road as best I could. Sometimes I met with kind treatment at
farm-houses, and sometimes with quite the reverse, until at length I
reached London tolerably exhausted, as you may suppose, and in anything
but a good plight."

"Well, but you found your girl all right, I suppose?"

"No. I walked up the Strand; and as some of our happiest interviews had
taken place in the Temple Gardens, I could not resist turning aside for
a moment to look at the old familiar spot, when what do you think was
the sight that met my eyes?"

"I really can't say."

"I will tell you, sir. I saw her whom I loved--the young and beautiful
girl for whom I had gone through so much--the being upon whose faith and
constancy I would at any time have staked my life--the, as I thought,
most innocent, guileless creature upon the face of the earth--"

"Well, well, my good friend, what did you see this paragon of perfection
about?"

"You will not believe it, sir."

"Oh, yes, I shall--do not be afraid of that--I shall believe it. Your
narrative bears too much the stamp of truth about it for me to doubt it
for a moment. I pray you to go on."

"I will then. The first object that met my eyes in that Temple Garden
was the being whom I loved so fondly leaning upon the arm of a man in a
military undress--leaning, did I say, upon his arm? she was almost upon
his breast, and he was actually supporting her with one of his arms
round her waist."

"Well?"

"What, sir! Is that all you can say to it? Would you say 'Well?' if you
saw the only creature you ever loved in such a situation, sir? Well,
indeed!"

"My dear friend, do not get excited, now."

"Oh, sir, it would excite a stick or a stone."

"Excuse me, then, for having said 'Well,' and go on with your story.
What did she say to excuse herself to you?"

"'Tis well, sir--of course, I cannot expect others to feel as I do upon
such an occasion. I did not speak to her, sir. The sight of such perfidy
was enough for me. From that moment she fell from the height I had
raised her to in my imagination, and nothing she could say, and nothing
I could say, would raise her up again."

"And you, then, only walked away?"

"That is all. With such a pang at my heart at the moment as I wonder did
not kill me, I walked away, and left her to her own conclusions."

"Then--then, my young friend, you did the very reverse of what I should
have done, for you should have gone up to her, and politely taken leave
of her, so as to let her know at all events that you were aware of her
perfidy. I should not have been content to let her have the satisfaction
of thinking I was at the bottom of the sea while she was enjoying a
flirtation with her officer; but, of course, different people take
different courses upon emergencies. There is one thing, however, that I
wonder you did not inquire about."

"What was that?"

"Your String of Pearls. How could you tell but that your friend had got
to London, and had actually given her the Pearls with your message
appended to them? I really am surprised that you did not step forward
and say, 'Oblige me, miss, with my pearls, if you no longer favour me
with your affections!'"

"No, no. To tell the truth, I was too heart-broken at the time to care
about anything in all the world; I had lost her who was to me the
greatest jewel it had ever contained, and I cared for nothing else. I do
believe I was a little mad, for I walked about the rest of that day, not
knowing where I went to, and at last I found myself, tired, worn out,
famishing, opposite to Mrs. Lovett's shop-window, and the steam of those
abominable pies began to tempt me, so much that I went into the shop,
and after some talk, I actually accepted the situation of cook to her,
and there, but for you, I should have breathed my last."

"Not a doubt of it. And now, my young friend, you know that I am a
police-magistrate, and I dare say you have heard a great deal about my
sources of information, and the odd way in which I find out things when
folks think they keep them a profound secret. You have told me all your
history, but you have thought proper, as you were, if you pleased, quite
justified in doing, to withhold your name."

"I have done so, but I hardly know why. I will tell it to you, however,
now."

"Hold, I know it."

"You know it, sir?"

"Yes, your name is Mark Ingestrie!"

"It is, indeed. But how you came to know that, sir, is to me most
mysterious."

"Oh, I know more than that. The name of the young lady who, you believe,
played you such a trick, is Johanna Oakley."

Mark Ingestrie, for it was indeed no other, sprang to his feet,
exclaiming--

"Are you man or devil, that you know what I have never breathed to you?"

"Don't be surprised, my young friend. I can tell you a little more than
that even. The friend to whom you intrusted your String of Pearls, was
named Francis Thornhill; and his dog--let me see--Oh, his large dog was
called 'Hector.'"

Mark Ingestrie trembled excessively, and sinking back in his seat, he
turned very pale.

"This must be a dream," he said, "or you, sir, get your information from
the spirits of the dead."

"Not at all. But have you faith in my inspiration now sufficient to
induce you to believe anything that I may tell you?"

"In good truth, I have; and I may well have, for after what you have
already told me, your power of knowledge cannot by me be for one moment
doubted."

"Very well, then. In the first place, Mr. Francis Thornhill reached
London in safety."

"He did?"

"I tell you so. He arrived in London with your String of Pearls in his
pocket. He fully believed you were dead. Indeed, he fancied that he had
seen the last of you, and was quite prepared to say as much to Miss
Johanna Oakley."

"And he did? That will be some excuse for her, if she thought that I was
gone."

"No, he did not. On his route he turned into the shop of Sweeney Todd to
be shaved, and there he was murdered."

"Murdered!"

"Yes, most foully murdered; and the String of Pearls got into the
possession of that man, proving ultimately one of the means by which his
frightful villainous crime came to light. The dog remained at Todd's
door seeking for its master, to the great discomfiture of the murderer,
who made every effort within his power for its destruction, in which
however he did not succeed."

"Gracious Heaven! my poor friend Thornhill to meet with such a fate! Oh
God! and all on account of that fatal String of Pearls! Oh,
Thornhill--Thornhill! rather would I have sunk for ever beneath the
wave, than such a dreadful end should have been yours."

"The past cannot be recalled," said Sir Richard. "It is only with the
present, and with the future that we have anything to do now. Would you
like to hear more?"

"More? Of whom? Is he not dead?--my poor friend?"

"Yes, he is dead; but I can tell you more of other people. I can tell
you that Johanna Oakley was faithful to you. I can tell you that she
mourned your loss as you would wish her to mourn it, knowing how you
would mourn hers. I can tell you that the gentleman's arm she was
leaning upon was only a dear friend, and that the fact of her having to
be supported by him at the unlucky moment when you saw this was solely
owing to the deep grief she was plunged into upon your account."

"Oh no--no--no!"

"I say yes. It was so, Mr. Ingestrie; and if you had at that moment
stepped forward, you would have saved yourself much misery, and you
would have saved her such heart-breaking thoughts, and such danger, as
it will frighten you to listen to."




                             CHAPTER CXVI.
         JOHANNA IS AMPLY PAID FOR HER BRIEF SERVICE AT TODD'S.


Upon hearing all this, poor Mark Ingestrie turned very faint and fell
back in his chair, looking so pale and wan, that Sir Richard Blunt was
compelled to go across the room to hold him up. After giving him a glass
of wine, he recovered, and with a deep sigh he said--

"And so I have wronged her after all! Oh, my Johanna, I am unworthy of
you!"

"That," said Sir Richard, "is a subject entirely for the young lady's
own consideration.--N. O. W."

Mark Ingestrie looked curiously in the face of Sir Richard Blunt, as
with marked emphasis upon each letter he said, "N. O. W!" But he had not
to wait long for an explanation of what it meant. A door at the back of
the room was flung open, and Johanna sprung forward with a cry of joy.
In another moment she was in the arms of Mark Ingestrie, and Sir Richard
Blunt had left the room.

[Illustration: The Meeting Of Mark And Johanna.]

It would be quite impossible, if we had the will to attempt it, for us
to go through the scene that took place between Johanna Oakley and Mark
Ingestrie in the magistrate's parlour. For about half an hour they quite
forgot where they were, or that there was any one in the world but
themselves. At the end of that period of time, though, Sir Richard Blunt
gently walked into the room.

"Well," he said, "have you come to any understanding about that military
man in the Temple Gardens?"

Johanna sprang towards the magistrate, and placing her arms upon his
breast, she kissed him on the cheek.

"Sir," she said, "you are our very dear friend, and I love you as I love
my father."

"God bless you!" said Sir Richard, "You have, by those few words, more
then repaid me for all that I have done. Are you happy?"

"Very, very happy."

"So very happy, sir," said Ingestrie, as his eyes glistened through
tears of joy, "that I can hardly believe in its reality."

"And yet you are both so poor."

"Ah, sir, what is poverty when we shall be together?"

"We will face that foe, Mark, I think," said Johanna, with a smile, "and
he shall not extort a tear from us."

"Well," said Sir Richard, as he opened his desk, "since you are not to
be knocked down by poverty, what say you to riches? Do you know these,
Mr. Ingestrie?"

"Why, that is my String of Pearls."

"Yes. I took this from Todd's escritoire myself, and they are yours and
Johanna's. Will you permit me always to call you Johanna?"

"Oh, yes--yes. Do so. All who love me call me Johanna."

"Very well. This String of Pearls, I have ascertained, is worth a
sufficient sum to place you both very far above all the primary
exigences of life. It will be necessary to produce them at the trial of
Sweeney Todd, but after that event they will be handed to you to do what
you please with them, when you can realise them at at once, and be happy
enough with the proceeds."

"If my poor friend, Thornhill," sighed Mark Ingestrie, "could but have
lived to see this day!"

"That, indeed, would have been a joy," said Johanna.

"Yes," said the magistrate; "but the grave has closed on his poor
remains--at least, I may say so figuratively. He was one of Todd's
victims, one of his numerous victims; for I do believe that, for a long
time, scarcely a week passed that did not witness some three or four
murders in that man's shop."

"Horrible!"

"You may well use that expression, in speaking of the career of Sweeney
Todd. It has been most horrible; but there cannot be a doubt of his
expiating his crimes upon the scaffold, together with his partner in
guilt, Mrs. Lovett."

Mark Ingestrie gave a shudder as that woman's name was mentioned, for it
put him in mind of the cellar where he had lived so long, and where it
was only by the most good fortune that he had not terminated his career.

Before they could say any more, one of the officers in attendance upon
Sir Richard, announced Colonel Jeffery.

"Ah, that is your dreadful military rival," said Sir Richard to
Ingestrie. "That is the gentleman whom you saw in the garden of the
Temple with Johanna."

"I have much to thank him for. His conduct to Johanna has been most
noble."

The colonel smiled when he saw Mark Ingestrie and Johanna, for he well
knew, from private information he had got from the magistrate, that Mark
Ingestrie and Mrs. Lovett's cook were identical; and holding out his
hand to the young man, he said--

"Accept of my best and sincerest wishes, Mr. Ingestrie."

"And you, sir," said Mark, "accept of my best thanks. Our gratitude is
largely due to you, sir."

"I am quite repaid by this very happy result; and I have the pleasure of
informing you, Sir Richard, that poor Tobias is very much better
indeed."

"Which I am rejoiced to hear," said Sir Richard. "And now, my dear
Johanna, it is time for you to go home. You will hear from me in the
morning, for I intend to do myself the pleasure of calling upon your
father, and explaining all to him; for there are some circumstances that
he is yet in ignorance of, and particularly concerning Mr. Ingestrie."

"I will walk with you to your door, Johanna," said Mark rising and
tottering.

"No," said Sir Richard Blunt; "that must not be to-night. Do not let
him, Johanna. He is by far too weak and unwell to do anything of the
kind. A calm and long night's rest here will do him a world of good.
Business prevents me from leaving the office; but I daresay the colonel
will see Johanna in safety."

"With pleasure," said Colonel Jeffery, "if Mr. Ingestrie has no
objection to my doing so."

"Sir," said Mark, "there is no one in all the world that I would more
cheerfully see protecting my Johanna. I feel that I am in too great a
state of exhaustion to go out. I leave her to your care, sir."

"That is right," said Sir Richard Blunt. "Now, good-night, Johanna, and
God bless you. You will see me in the morning, recollect."

Mark Ingestrie took a parting embrace of Johanna, and then she went off
with the colonel, who, on their road home, told her how he and Arabella
had got so far as to fix their wedding day, and how he should not feel
at all happy unless both she and Mark Ingestrie were at the ceremony.

"Indeed, he hoped," he said, "that they might give the parson only one
trouble, by being married upon the same occasion."

Johanna warded this last part of the colonel's speech; but she was
fervent in her hopes that he and Arabella would be so very happy, and in
her praises of her young friend; so in very pleasant discourse indeed,
they reached the old spectacle-maker's shop, and then the colonel shook
hands with Johanna, and bade her a kind and friendly adieu, and she was
let in by--to her immense surprise--her mother!

Mrs. Oakley fell upon Johanna's neck in a passion of tears, crying--

"Come, my child--come to your mother's heart, and tell her that you
forgive her for much past neglect and unkindness."

"Oh, mother," said Johanna, "do not speak so. There is nothing to
forgive; and if you are happy and we are all good friends, we will never
think of the past."

"That's right, my dear," said Mr. Oakley, from the passage; "that's
right, my love. Come in, both of you." But it is necessary that we
should briefly state how it was that this wonderful change in the
behaviour of Mrs. Oakley came about, and for that purpose we must
retrace our steps a little.

The reader will be so good as to recollect that the last time Mrs.
Oakley was introduced to his notice she was encumbered by Mr. Lupin, and
had the pleasure of introducing that gentleman to the notice of Big Ben
the beef-eater, who had quickly put all idea of escape out of the
question, as regarded that highly religious personage.

At that point the presence of other events compelled us to leave the
lady, and repair to Todd's shop, and to Mrs. Lovett's little concern in
Bell Yard.

The appearance of Lupin's face when he found that he was in the grasp of
Big Ben, would have been quite a study for a painter. It transcended all
description, and for the moment seemed as if he were bidding farewell to
this world and to all his iniquities in it, without the intervention of
the law. But in a few moments he recovered from this condition, and
sliding on to his knees, and in a whining tone, he cried--

"Mercy, Mercy! Oh, let me go!"

"At the end of a rope," said Big Ben. "Easy does it. What has he been
and done, Mrs. O.?"

"Murder, murder!"

A crowd of people soon began to collect around them, and then Lupin made
an effort to thrust himself out of the grasp of Big Ben, but the only
result of the effort was very nearly to strangle himself.

"You are killing the man, you great brute!" cried a woman. "You are
throttling the poor man."

"He will be murdered," shouted another female. "Oh, you great wretch, do
you want to take his life?"

"Listen to me," said Mrs. Oakley. "He has murdered his poor wife, and
that is the reason I have asked that he should be held tight."

"Murdered his wife!" exclaimed about twelve females in chorus. "Murdered
his wife? Then hanging is a great deal too good for him. Hold him tight,
sir, do. Oh, the wretch!"

The tide of popular feeling fairly turned against Mr. Lupin, and Big Ben
had as much difficulty now in preserving the half dead wretch from
popular fury as if he had been accused of any other crime, he might have
had to prevent popular sympathy from aiding his escape.

"Oh!" cried one lady, of rather extensive proportions, who was the wife
of a baker, "I should like to have him in a brisk oven for an hour and a
half."

"And I," said the lady of a butcher, "would see him slaughtered without
so much as winking at him."

"And serve him right, the wagabone!" cried Big Ben. "Come along, will
you, you ill-looking scarecrow! Easy does it. Will you walk? Oh, very
well, don't. Who are you?"

A little man with a constable's staff in his hand, rushed before Ben,
crying out--

"What is it? what is it? I'm a constable. What is it?"

"Murder!" said Mrs. Oakley. "I give that man in charge for murdering his
wife. I saw him do it."

"That will do," said the constable. "Give him to me. I'll take him. He
dare not resist me. I'll have him."

Big Ben looked at the constable and then he shook his head, as he said
very gravely--

"I tell you what it is, my little man, you ain't fit to tussle with such
a fellow as this--I'll take him along for you. Where is he to go?"

"To the round-house, in course; but I'm a constable. I must take him--I
will take him! Give him to me, sir, directly--I will have him--I must go
with him!"

"Wait a minute," said Ben. "Easy does it! You must go with him, you say?
Very good--easy does everything!"

With this, Ben grasped Mr. Lupin round the middle, and placed him under
his left arm, and suddenly pouncing, then, upon the constable, he caught
him up and placed him under the right arm; and then away he walked, to
the admiration of the populace, and paying about as much attention to
the kicking of the constable and the kicking of Mr. Lupin, as though
they were two dogs that he was carrying home.

And so the murderer was taken to the round-house, where Mrs. Oakley duly
preferred the charge against him, and promised to substantiate it before
a magistrate when called upon so to do.




                             CHAPTER CXVII.
     SHOWS HOW MRS. OAKLEY RECONCILED HERSELF TO EVERYBODY AT HOME.


When Ben and Mrs. Oakley had thus disposed of Mr. Lupin, and left him to
his solitary and not very pleasant reflections in a cell of the
round-house, they found themselves together in the open street, and Ben,
as he cast a woeful glance at her, said--

"Well, how does yer feel now? Easy does it! Oh, you aint a-been and
behaved yourself properly lately--you is like the old bear as we calls
Nosey. He's always a-doing what he shouldn't, and always a-never doing
what he should."

"Ben?"

"Well, blaze away. What is yer going to say now?"

"I feel, Ben, that I am a very different woman from what I was--very
different."

"Then you must have gained by the exchange, for you was, I will say it,
anything but a pleasant bit o' goods. There's poor old Oakley a-making
of spectacles all days, and a-wearing of his old eyes out--and there's
Miss Johanna, bless her heart! as wise a little bit o' human nature as
you'd wish to see, whether she's in petticoats or the other things; and
yet you neglects 'em both, all for to run arter a canting snivelling
wagabone like this Lupin, that we wouldn't have among the beasteses at
the Tower, if so be he'd come and offer himself."

"I know it, Ben--I know it."

"You know it! Why didn't you know it before?"

"I don't know, Ben; but my eyes are open now. I have had a lesson that
to my dying day I shall never forget. I have found that piety may only
be a cloak with which to cover up the most monstrous iniquity."

"Oh, you have made that discovery, have you?"

"I have, indeed, Ben."

"Well, I knowed as much as that when I was a small baby. It only shows
how back'ard some folks is in coming for'ard with their edication."

"Yes, Ben."

"Well, and what is you going to be arter now?"

"I wish to go home, and I want you to come with me, and to say a kind
word for me; I want you to tell them how I now see the error of my ways,
and how I am an altered woman, and mean to be a very--very different
person than I was."

Here Mrs. Oakley's genuine feelings got the better of her, and she began
to weep bitterly; and Ben, after looking at her for a few moments, cried
out--

"Why, it's real, and not like our hyena that only does it to gammon us!
Come, mother Oakley, just pop your front paw under my arm, and I'll go
home with you; and if you don't get a welcome there, I'm not a
beef-eater. Why, the old man will fly right bang out of his wits for
joy. You should only see what a house is when the mother and the wife
don't do as she ought. Mother O., you should see what a bit of fire
there is in the grate, and what a hearth."

"I know it--I ought to know it."

"You ought to know it!" added Ben, putting himself into an oratorial
attitude. "You should only see the old man when dinner time comes round.
He goes into the parlour and he finds no fire; then he says--'Dear me!'"

"Yes--yes."

"Then he gives a boy a ha'penny to go and get him something that don't
do him no sort of good from the cook's shop, and sometimes the boy nabs
the ha'penny and the shilling both, and ain't never heard of again by
any means no more."

"No doubt, Ben."

"Then, when tea comes round, it don't come round at all, and the old man
has none; but he takes in a ha'porth of milk in a jug without a spout,
and he drinks that up, cold and miserable, with a penny-loaf, you see."

"Yes--yes."

"And then at night, when there ought to be a little sort of comfort
round the fireside, there ain't none."

"But Johanna, Ben--there is Johanna?"

"Johanna?"

"Yes. Is she not there to see to some of her father's comforts? She
loves him--I know she does, Ben!"

Ben placed his finger by the side of his nose, and in an aside to
himself, he said--

"Now I'll touch her up a bit--now I'll punish her for all she has done,
and it will serve her right." Then, elevating his voice, he added--"Did
you mention Johanna?"

"Yes, Ben, I did."

"Then I'm sorry you did. Perhaps you think she's been seeing to the old
man's comforts a little--airing his night-cap, and so on--Eh? Is that
the idea?"

"Yes, I know that she would do anything gladly for her father. She was
always most tenderly attached to him."

"Humph!"

"Why do you say, Humph, Ben?"

"Just answer me one question, Mrs. O. Did you ever hear of a young girl
as was neglected by her mother--her mother who of all ought to be the
person to attend to her--turning out well?"

"Do not terrify me, Ben."

"Well, all I have got to say is, that Johanna can't be in two places at
once, and as she isn't at home, how, I would ask any reasonable
Christian, can she attend to the old man?"

"Not at home, Ben?"

"Not--at--home!"

"Oh, Heaven! why did I not stay in that dreadful man's house, and let
him murder me! Why did I not tell him at once that I knew of his crime,
and implore him to make me his next victim! Oh, Ben, if you have any
compassion in your disposition you will tell me all, and then I shall
know what to hope, and what to dread."

"Well," said Ben, "here goes then."

"What goes?"

"I mean I'm a-going to tell you all, as you seem as if you'd like to
know it."

"Do! Oh, do!"

"Then of course Johanna being but a very young piece of goods, and not
knowing much o' the ways o' this here world, and the habits and manners
o' the wild beasteses as is in it, when she found as the old house
wasn't good enough for her mother, she naturally enough thought it
wasn't good enough for her, you know."

"Oh, this is the most dreadful stroke of all!"

"I should say it were," said Ben, quite solemnly. "Take it easy though,
and you'll get through it in the course of time. Well then, when Johanna
found as everything at home was sixes and sevens, she borrowed a pair of
what do call 'ems of some boy, and a jacket, and off she went."

"She what?"

"She put on a pair of thingumys--well, breeches then, if you must have
it--and away she went, and the last I saw of her was in Fleet Street
with 'em on."

"Gracious Heaven!"

"Very likely, but that don't alter the facts of the case, you know, Mrs.
O. On she had 'em, and all I can say is that you might have knocked me
down flat to see her, that you might. I didn't think I should ever have
got home to the beasteses in the Tower again, it gave me such a turn."

"Lost! Lost!"

"Eh? What do you say? What have you lost now?"

"My child! My Johanna!"

"Oh! Ah, to be sure. But then you know, Mrs. O, you ought to have staid
at home, and gived her ever so much good advice, you know; and when you
saw she was bent upon putting on the boy's things, you as a mother ought
to have said, 'My dear, take your legs out of that if yer pleases, and
if yer don't, I'll pretty soon make you,' and then staid and gived the
affair up as a bad job that wouldn't pay, and took to morals."

"Yes--yes. 'Tis I, and I only, who am to blame. I have been the
destruction of my child. Farewell, Ben. You will perhaps in the course
of time not think quite so badly of me as you now do. Farewell!"

"Hold!" cried Ben as he clutched the arm of Mrs. Oakley only the more
tightly in his own: "What are you at now?"

"Death is now my only resource. My child is lost to me, and I have
driven her by my neglect to such a dreadful course. I cannot live now.
Let me go, Ben. You will never hear of me again."

"If I let you go may I be--Well, no matter--no matter. Come on. It's all
one, you know, a hundred years hence."

"But at present it is madness and despair. Let me go, I say. The river
is not far off, and beneath its waters I shall at least find peace for
my breaking heart. Let my death be considered as some sort of expiation
of my sins."

"Stop a bit."

"No--no--no."

"But I say, yes. Things ain't quite so bad as you think 'em, only it was
right o' me, you know, just to let you know what they might have been."

"What do you tell me?"

"Why that there ain't a better girl than Johanna in all the world, and
that if all the mothers that ever was or ever will be, had neglected her
and set her all their bad examples in the universal world, she would
still be the little angel that she is now, and no mistake."

"Then she is not from home? It is all a fable?"

"Not quite, Mrs. O. just you trot on now comfortably by the side of me,
and I will tell you the whole particulars, and then you will find that
there ain't no occasion to go plumping into the river on Johanna's
account."

Poor Mrs. Oakley, with delight beaming upon every feature of her face,
now listened to Ben while he explained the whole matter to her, as far
as he himself was cognisant of it; and if he did not offer to be very
explicit in minor details, she at all events heard from him quite enough
to convince her that Johanna was all that the tenderest mother could
wish.

"Oh, Ben," she said, as the tears coursed each other down her cheeks,
"how could you torture me as you have done?"

"All for your own good," said Ben. "It only lets you see what might have
happened if Johanna had not been the good little thing that she is,
that's all."

"Well, perhaps it is for the best that I should have suffered such a
pang, and I only hope that Heaven will accept of it as some sort of
expiation of my wickedness. If you had not held me, Ben, I should
certainly have taken my life."

"Not a doubt about it," said Ben; "and a pretty kittle of fish you would
then have made of the whole affair. However, that's all right enough
now, and as for old Oakley, all you have got to do is to go into the
shop and say to him. 'Here I am, and I am sorry for the past, which I
hope you will forgive, and for the future I will strive to be a good
wife.'"

"Must I say that, Ben?"

"Yes, to be sure. If you are ashamed to say what's right, you may depend
upon it you haven't much inclination to do it."

"You have convinced me, Ben. I will humble myself. It is fit and proper
that I should. So I will say as nearly as I can recollect just what you
have told me to say."

"You can't do better; and here we are at the corner of the street. Now
if you would rather go in by yourself without me, only say the word, and
I'm off."

Mrs. Oakley hesitated for a moment and then she said--

"Yes, Ben, I would rather go alone."

"Very good. I think it's better too, so good-by; and I'll call to-morrow
and see how you are all getting on."

"Do so, Ben. No one can possibly be more welcome than you will be. You
will be sure to come to-morrow?"

"Rather."

With this Ben walked away, and Mrs. Oakley entered the house. What then
passed we do not feel that we ought to relate. The humiliations of human
nature, although for the best of purposes, and for the ultimate
happiness of the parties themselves, are not subjects for the pen of the
chronicler. Suffice it, that Mr. and Mrs. Oakley were perfectly
reconciled, and were happy upon that day.




                            CHAPTER CXVIII.
             TAKES A PEEP AT TOBIAS AT THE COLONEL'S HOUSE.


The more stirring events of our story, have compelled us in some measure
to neglect poor Tobias. He had suffered very much from that visit of
Todd's to the colonel's house, and it had a very prejudicial effect upon
his mind too, inasmuch as it deprived him of that feeling of security,
which had before possessed him beneath that roof.

The colonel felt this very acutely, and he could not help perceiving by
Tobias's manner, that the faith he put in his assurance that Todd could
not possibly again come near him, was not full and complete. Under these
circumstances, then, it was a very great satisfaction to the colonel to
be able to make the gratifying communication he had it in his power to
make to Tobias, on the morning following the arrest of Todd and Mrs.
Lovett.

The illness contingent upon the fright that Todd had given the poor boy,
or the relapse as we might call it, had in a great measure worn off, and
if Tobias's mind could have been quite at ease, his recovery would have
been as rapid as any one could possibly have wished or expected.

As soon as he was up and about upon the following morning, then, after
the arrests, the colonel sought Tobias's room, and with a cheerful smile
upon his face he said--

"Well, Tobias, I come to bring you good news."

"Indeed, sir?" said Tobias his colour coming and going in flushes. "I am
very weak, and--and if--"

"Come, come, Tobias. What I am going to tell you will strengthen you, I
know. Todd is in Newgate!"

Tobias drew a long breath.

"Todd is in Newgate?" he replied. "Todd is in Newgate? The walls are
very thick. I am safe now."

"Yes, you are, indeed, Tobias. The walls of Newgate are thick, and the
doors are massive and well-guarded. Be assured that Todd will never
issue out at them but to his execution. Your old cunning enemy is at
length more powerless by a great deal than you are, and from this moment
you may completely banish all fear from your mind upon his account."

"And the woman, sir, Mrs. Lovett?"

"She is in Newgate likewise."

"Both, both, and their crimes then are all known at last, and there will
be no more murders, and no more poor boys driven mad as I was! Oh, God
be thanked, it is indeed all over now, all over."

With this Tobias burst into tears, and relieved his surcharged heart of
a load of misery. In the course of about five minutes he looked up with
such a great smile of happiness upon his face, that it was quite a joy
to see it.

"And you, sir, you," he said, "my dear friend have done all this!"

"Not all, Tobias. I have helped in every way that lay in my power to
bring the affair about, but it is Sir Richard Blunt the magistrate, who
has toiled day and night almost in the matter, and who has at last
brought it to so successful an issue, that the guilt of both Todd and
Mrs. Lovett can be distinctly and clearly proved, without the shadow of
a doubt."

"Unhappy wretches!"

"They are, indeed, Tobias, unhappy wretches, and may Heaven have mercy
upon them. Some other old friends of yours, too, will, before nightfall
I think, find a home in Newgate."

"Indeed, sir, whom mean you?"

"The folks at the madhouse at Peckham. Sir Richard would have had them
apprehended some time ago, but he was afraid that it might give the
alarm to Todd, before the affair was ripe enough to enable him to be
arrested, with a certainty of his crimes being clearly understood and
brought home to him. Now, however, that is all over, and they will be
punished."

"They are very, very wicked. I think, sir, they are almost worse than
Sweeney Todd."

"They are, if anything; but they will meet with their deserts, never
fear; and as Minna Gray is expected every moment, so your mother tells
me, I will not deprive you of the gratification of giving her the piece
of news yourself. Of course, all the town will know it soon through the
medium of the press; and Sir Richard Blunt, too, will be here in the
course of the morning, to arrange with you concerning your evidence."

"My evidence? Shall I be wanted?"

"Yes, Tobias. Surely you would not like so notorious a criminal to find
a loop-hole of escape, from the want of your evidence?"

"Oh, no, no--I will go. I have only to tell the truth, and that should
never be denied for or against. I will go, sir."

"You are right, Tobias. It is a duty you owe to society. If some one
long ago, and before you even had the evil fortune to go into his shop,
had found out and exposed the iniquities of Sweeney Todd, how much
misery would have been spared in this world both to you and to others!"

"Ah, yes, sir; and yet--"

"Yet what, Tobias?"

"I was only thinking, sir, that what at times seems like our very worst
misfortunes, at times turn out to be the very things that are the making
of us."

"Indeed, Tobias?"

"Yes, sir. If I had not been Sweeney Todd's boy, and if he had not
persecuted me in the way he did, I should never have known what it was
to have the friend I now have in you, sir; and perhaps she whom I love
so dearly, would not have thought so much of me, if she had not deeply
pitied me for all that I suffered."

"There is profound philosophy in what you say, my poor boy," replied the
colonel; "and if we could only bring ourselves to think, when things
apparently go wrong with us, that after all it is for the best, we
should be much happier than we are now; but with our short-sighted
wisdom, we hastily take upon ourselves to decide upon matters concerning
the issues of which we know nothing, and so by anticipation we make
ourselves pleased or sorrowful, when the precise contrary may be the
real result."

"Yes, sir," said Tobias, "I have had time to think of that, and of many
other strange things, as I lay here."

"Then you have done yourself some good, Tobias. But I hear a light
footstep upon the stairs, and I will now leave you, for I can guess by
that heightened colour that you hear it likewise, and I know that two
may be good company but three none."

Tobias would have said something deprecatory of the colonel leaving him,
and he did begin, but with a smile his kind and hospitable friend took
his leave, and Tobias soon had the satisfaction of relating to the young
girl, whom he was so tenderly attached to, that nothing further was now
to be feared from Sweeney Todd or from Mrs. Lovett.

We may now leave Tobias in good company; and it was really surprising to
those who have not made a habit of noting the intimate connection there
is between the mind and the body, to see how from the very moment that
he felt assured there was nothing further to apprehend from Sweeney
Todd, Tobias's health picked up and improved. The absolute dread with
which that bold impious bad man had inspired the boy, had been the sole
cause of keeping him in so delicate a state. His dreams had been all of
Todd; but now that word Newgate, in conjunction with Todd's name, was a
spell that brought with it peace and security.

Tobias, as he sat with the hand of the young and fair girl who had
pleased his boyish fancy in his own, was now truly happy.

When Johanna got home, after being escorted from Sir Richard Blunt's
house in Craven Street by Colonel Jeffery, she found her mother at home,
and not a little surprised was she to find herself suddenly clasped in
that mother's arms, a most unwonted process for Mrs. Oakley to go
through.

"Oh, my child, my dear child!" sobbed the now repentant woman. "Can you
forgive me as your father has done?"

"Forgive you, mother? Oh, do not speak to me in such a way as that. It
is quite a joy to find you--you are really my mother?"

"You might well doubt it, my dear child; but the future is before us
all, and then you will find that it was only when I could not have been
in my right mind, that I preferred any place to my own home."

Old Oakley wiped his eyes as he said to Johanna--

"Yes, my darling, your mother has come back to us now in every sense of
the word, and all the past is to be forgotten, except such of it as will
be pleasant to remember. Your good friend, and I may say the good friend
of us all, Sir Richard Blunt, sent us a letter to say that you would be
here to-night, and God bless him my child, for watching over you as he
did."

"Oh, how perilous an enterprise you went upon, my darling," said Mrs.
Oakley.

The door of the adjoining room was partially open, and from it now
stepped forward Arabella, saying--

"It is I who ought to ask pardon of you all for advising that step; and
you will grant me that pardon I am sure, if upon no other ground, upon
that that I have suffered greatly for my folly and precipitation."

"My dear Arabella," said Johanna, "you must not blame yourself in such a
way. How pleased I am to find you here, my dear friend. Ah! at one time
how little did we ever expect to meet all thus, in this little room!"

Johanna and Arabella embraced each other, and while they were so
occupied, big Ben came out of the room from whence Arabella had
proceeded, and flinging his arms round them both, he made a great
roaring noise, in imitation of the largest of the bears in the Tower
collection.

At the moment, Johanna was alarmed, and could not conceive what it was;
but Arabella, who knew that Ben had been in the room, waiting for some
opportunity of coming out in a highly practical manner, only laughed,
and then Johanna knew in a moment who it was, and she cried--

"Ben, it is you!"

"Yes, it's me," said Ben, "and I'm only astonished at you two girls
fancying I was going to be quiet, and see all that kissing and hugging
going on, and not come in for any of it. Don't kick now, for I must kiss
you both, and there's an end of it. It's no use a-kicking."

To the credit of both Arabella and Johanna we may state, that they
neither of them kicked, but very quietly let Ben kiss them both.

"Well," said Ben as he plumped himself down upon a chair after the
salute. "Well!--Murder! Where am I going to now?"

"Dear me," said Mrs. Oakley. "All four legs of the chair are broken off,
and Ben is on the floor."

"Really, Ben," said Mr. Oakley, "you ought to be perfectly careful when
you sit down."

"Easy does it," said Ben. "I really thought I was going to kingdom come.
Pull me, Johanna, my dear. Pull me up."

Johanna shook her head, and declined the Herculean attempt, so that Ben
had to scramble to his feet the best way he could, and then as he sat
down upon the sofa which was sufficiently strong to withstand any
shocks, Mrs. Oakley asked him what it was he had been upon the point of
saying, when the chair had so very unceremoniously given way with him;
but Ben had quite forgotten it, only he said he recollected something
else that was quite as good, and that was that he ordered to come about
that hour a foaming tankard of mulled wine, and then he winked at Mrs.
Oakley and hoped she had no medicine in the house to put in it.

"Oh, no, Ben," she said, "and if there isn't a knock at the door; and if
you ordered it at the Unicorn's Tail, you may depend that's it."

"Very good," said Ben, and then he proceeded to the door and found that
it was the boy from the Unicorn's dorsal appendage with the spiced wine;
and after whispering to bring a similar quantity in half an hour, and to
keep on at it every half hour until further orders, Ben took it into the
parlour, and a happier party than was there could not have been found in
all London.




                             CHAPTER CXIX.
         THE CRIMINALS IN NEWGATE.--TODD'S ATTEMPT AT SUICIDE.


It is grievous to turn from the contemplation of so pleasant and
grateful a scene as that that was taking place at the old
spectacle-maker's house, to dive into the interior of Newgate. But
thither it is that now we would conduct the reader.

The state of mind that Todd was in after his arrest, was one that such a
man with such strong passions as he had was exceedingly unlikely to come
to. It is difficult to describe it, but if we say that he was mentally
stunned, we shall be as near the mark as language will permit us to be.

He walked, and looked, and spoke very much like a man in a dream; and it
is really doubtful whether, for some hours, he comprehended the full
measure of the calamity that had befallen him on his apprehension.

At Newgate they are quite accustomed to find this unnatural calmness in
great criminals immediately after their arrest, so they take their
measures accordingly.

Sir Richard Blunt had given some very special instructions to the
Governor of Newgate concerning his prisoner, when he should arrive and
be placed in his custody, so everything was ready for Todd. How little
he suspected that for two days and two nights the very cell he was to
occupy in Newgate had been actually pointed out, and that the irons in
which his limbs were to be encompassed were waiting for him in the
lobby!

He was placed in a small stone room that had no light but what came from
a little orifice in the roof, and that was only a borrowed light after
all, so that the cell was in a state of semi-darkness always.

Into this place he was hurried, and the blacksmith who was in the habit
of officiating upon such occasions, riveted upon him, as was then the
custom, a complete set of irons.

All this Todd looked at with seeming indifference. His face had upon it
an unnatural flush, and probably Todd had never looked so strangely well
in health as upon the occasion of the first few hours he spent in
Newgate.

"Now, old fellow," said one of the turnkeys, "I'm not to be very far
off, in case you should happen to want to say anything; and if you give
a rap at the door, I'll come to you."

"In case I want to say anything?" said Todd.

"Yes, to be sure. What, are you asleep?"

"Am I asleep?"

"Why, he's gone a little bit out of his mind," said the blacksmith, as
he gathered up his tools to be gone.

The turnkey shook his head.

"Are you quite sure you have made a tight job of that?"

"Sure? Ay, that I am. If he gets out of them, put me in 'em, that's all.
Oh, no! It would take--let me see--it would take about half a dozen of
him to twist out o' that suit of armour. They are just about the best we
have in the old stone jug."

"Good."

"Yes, they are good."

"I mean very well. And now Mr. Sweeney Todd, we will leave you to your
own reflections, old boy, and much good may they do you. Good-night, old
fellow. I always says good-night to the prisoners, cos it has a tender
sort o' sound, and disposes of 'em to sleep. It's kind o' me, but I
always was tender-hearted, as any little chick, I was."

Bang went the cell door, and its triple locks were shot into their
hoops. Todd was alone.

He had sat down upon a stool that was in the cell; and that stool, with
a sort of bench fastened to the wall, was the only furniture it
contained; and there he sat for about half an hour, during which time
one of the most extraordinary changes that ever took place in the face
of any human being, took place in his.

It seemed as if the wear and tear of years had been concentrated into
minutes; and in that short space of time he passed from a middle aged,
to be an old man.

Then reflection came!

"Newgate!" he cried as he sprang to his feet.

The chains rattled and clanked together.

"Chains--Newgate--a cell--death! Found out at last! At the moment of my
triumph--defeated--detected! Newgate--chains--death!"

He fell back upon the stool again, and sat for the space of about two
minutes in perfect silence. Then he sprang up again with such a wild
yell of rage and mental agony, that not only the cell, but the whole of
that portion of the prison, echoed again with it.

The turnkey opened a small wicket in the door, which when it was opened
from without, still was defended by iron bars across it, and peering
into the cell, he said--

"Hilloa! What now?"

"Hilloa!" shouted Todd. "Air--air!"

"Air? Why what do you mean by gammoning a fellow in that sort o' way
for, eh? Haven't you got lots o' air? Well, of all the unreasonable
coves as ever I comed across, you is the worstest. Be quiet, will you?"

"No--no! Death--death! Give me the means of instant death. I am going
mad--mad--mad!"

"Oh, no yer ain't. It's only yer first few hours in the stone-jug that
has comed over you a little, that's all, old fellow. You'll soon pick
up, and behave yourself like any other christian. All you have got to do
is never to mind, and then it's nothink at all, old chap."

Clap went shut the little wicket door again.

"Help! Help!" shouted Todd. "Take these irons off me. It is only a dream
after all. Back, back you grinning fiends--why do you look at me when
you know that it is not real? No--no, it cannot be, you know that it
cannot be real."

"Be quiet will you?" shouted the turnkey.

"Keep off, I say. All is well. Mrs. Lovett dead--quite dead. The boy to
die too. The house in a blaze--all is well arranged. Why do you mock and
joke at me?"

"Well, I never!" said the turnkey. "I do begin to think now that he's
getting queer in the upper story. I have heard of its driving some of
'em mad to be bowled out when they didn't expect it, more 'special when
it's a hanging affair. I wonder what he will say next? He's a regular
rum un, he is."

"What have I done?" shouted Todd. "What have I done? Nothing--nothing.
The dead tell no tales. All is safe--quite safe. The grave is a good
secret keeper. I think Tobias is dead too--why not? Mrs. Lovett is dead.
This is not Newgate. These are not chains. It is only the nightmare. Ha!
ha! ha! It is only the nightmare--I can laugh now!"

"Oh, can you?" said the turnkey. "It's rather an odd sort o' laugh
though, to my thinking. Howsomdever, there's no rule agin grinning, so
you can go on at it as long as you like."

"Mercy!" suddenly shrieked Todd, and then down he fell upon the floor of
the cell, and lay quite still. The turnkey looked curiously in at him,
through the little grating.

"Humph!" he said, "I must go and report him to the Governor, and he will
do whatsomdever he likes about him; but I suppose as they will send the
doctor to him, and all that ere sort o' thing, for it won't do to let
him slip out o' the world and quite cheat the gallows; oh dear no."

Muttering these and similar remarks to himself, the turnkey went, as he
was bound in duty to do upon any very extraordinary conduct upon the
part of any prisoner in his department, to report what Todd was about to
the Governor.

"Ah!" said that functionary, the surgeon, "and I will soon come to him.
I fully expected we should have some trouble with that man. It really is
too bad, that when people come into the prison, they will not be quiet.
It would be just as well for them, and much more comfortable for me."

"Werry much, sir," said the turnkey.

"Well--well, he shall be attended to."

"Werry good, sir."

The turnkey went back and took up his post again outside Todd's door,
and in the course of ten minutes or so, without making the least hurry
of the subject, the Governor and the jail surgeon arrived and entered
the cell.

Todd was picked up, and then it was found that he had struck his head
against the stone floor, and so produced a state of insensibility, but
whether he had done it on purpose or by accident, they could come to no
opinion.

"Lay him on the bench," said the surgeon, "I can do nothing with him. He
will come to himself again in a little while, I daresay, and be all
right again in the morning."

"He seems really, indeed, to be a very troublesome man," said the
Governor to the surgeon.

"Very likely. Have you a mind for a game of cribbage to-night, Governor?
I suppose this fellow will hang?"

"Yes, I don't mind a game. Yes, they will tuck him up."

With this they left Todd's cell, and the turnkey closed the door, and
made the highly philosophical remark to himself of--

"Werry good."

Todd remained until the morning in a state of insensibility, and when he
awakened from it he was very much depressed in strength indeed. He lay
for about two hours gazing on the ceiling of his cell, and then the door
was opened, and the turnkey appeared with a bason of milk-and-water and
a lump of coarse bread.

"Breakfast!" he cried.

Todd glared at him.

"Breakfast; don't you understand that, old cock? However, it's all one
to me. There it is--take it or leave it."

Todd did not speak, and the not over luxurious meal was placed on the
table, or rather upon the end of the bench upon which he lay, and which
served the purpose of a table.

The moment Todd heard the door of the cell closed behind the turnkey, he
rose from his recumbent posture, and, although he staggered when he got
to his feet, he seized the bason, and at once, without tasting any of
its contents, broke it against the corner of the bench to fragments.

"I shall elude them yet!" he said. "They think they have me in their
toils--but I shall elude them yet!"

He selected a long jagged piece of the broken bason, and dragging down
his cravat with one hand, he was upon the very point of plunging it into
his throat with the other, when the turnkey sprang into the cell.

[Illustration: Todd In Newgate, Tries To Commit Suicide.]

"Hold a bit!" he cried. "We don't allow that sort of thing here with any
of our customers. You should have thought of those games before you got
into the stone jug!"

With one powerful blow, the turnkey struck the piece of the broken bason
from the hand of Todd, and with another he felled him to the floor.

"None o' your nonsense," he said; and then he carefully collected the
pieces of the broken bason.

"Why should you grudge me the means of death," said Todd, "when you know
that you have brought me here among you to die?"

"Contrary to rules."

"In mercy, I ask you only to give me leave to take my own life, for I
have failed in the object of my living."

"Contrary to rules."

The turnkey left the cell, then, as coolly as if nothing had happened,
and carefully locked the door again, while he went to report the
attempted suicide of the prisoner to the proper quarter.

Foiled, then, in every way, Todd looked round the cell for some means of
ridding himself of his life and his troubles together; but he found
none. He then paced the cell to and fro like a maniac, as he muttered to
himself--

"All lost--lost--lost--all lost! Foiled, too, at the moment when I
thought myself most secure--when I had made every preparation to leave
England for ever! Oh, dolt that I was, not to have done so long ago,
when I had half--ay, when I had only a quarter of the sum that I should
this day have fled with! In my dreams I have seen myself as I am now,
and the sight has shaken me, but I never thought to be so in reality. Is
there any hope for me? What do they know?--what can they know?"

Upon these questions, Todd paused in his uneasy walk in the cell, and
sat down upon the low stool to think. His head rested upon his breast,
and he was profoundly still.




                              CHAPTER CXX.
    A LUNCHEON AT SIR RICHARD BLUNT'S.--THE DOG AND HIS OLD FRIEND.


We willingly leave Todd to his own reflections upon the disastrous state
of his affairs, while we solicit the attention of our readers to the
private house and office of Sir Richard Blunt again, in Craven Street.

The worthy magistrate had quite a party to lunch on that day, and he had
fixed the hour as eleven when he wished to see his friends.

Those friends consisted of Johanna Oakley, Mark Ingestrie, Mr. and Mrs.
Oakley, Colonel Jeffery, Arabella Wilmot, and Big Ben, who was, at the
special request of Johanna, gladly included in the party.

A happier party than that could not very well have been found throughout
the whole length and breadth of London; and there was but one slight
shade of disquietude upon the face of Johanna, when she at times thought
that at one o'clock she would have to attend the police-office at Bow
Street to give her testimony against Todd the murderer.

"Well," said Ben, "here we are alive--all alive, and as merry as so many
grigs; and all I can say is, my tulips, that I will show the wild
beasteses to anybody as likes to come to the Tower, free, gratis and for
nothing. Take it easy, Mr. Ingestrie, and don't be casting sheep's-eyes
at Johanna. The little love of a thing ain't at all used to it--indeed,
she ain't; and the only person as she lets love her above a bit, and
takes it easy with, is me; so don't come any nonsense."

"But, Mr. Ben," said Mark, "I may look sometimes?"

"Yes, now and then, if you take things easy."

Old Mr. Oakley had got on his spectacles, and seemed as if he could not
be done looking at Mark Ingestrie; and more than once, or twice, or
thrice, the old gentleman would shake hands with him, telling him that
he looked upon him quite as one risen up from the dead, in a manner of
speaking.

"Yes, sir, you may well, indeed, look upon me as such; but I hope now
for long life and happiness."

A glance at Johanna was sufficiently expressive of with whom he hoped
for happiness--and that glance was returned with one of those sweet
endearing looks that only those who truly love can cast one upon
another.

"And I, too," said Colonel Jeffery, "put in my claim to the happiness of
the future, for am I not blessed with one whom I feel that I can love!"

"Stop!" said Arabella. "We won't have any conversation of this sort
before company, colonel, if you please; so I will trouble you to be
quiet."

"I am all submission," said the colonel; "and I hope my humble conduct
upon this occasion will be to you all, ladies and gentlemen, a good
example of what I shall be when I am married."

This was said in so comical a manner that the whole party laughed
amazingly, and then Sir Richard Blunt said rather gravely--

"I expect two old friends here this morning."

"Old friends?" said everybody, in surprise.

"Yes. The one is the captain of the ship which brought poor Mr.
Thornhill and his dog home, and who has been to Hamburgh with his
vessel, and the other is the dog himself."

At this moment an officer, for Sir Richard was quite wholly attended
upon by the police at that private office of his, came in to say that a
gentleman wanted to see him.

"It is the worthy captain," said Sir Richard; "show him in at once."

"If you please, Sir Richard," added the officer, "there is a man, too,
with a great dog who wishes to see you, and the dog has been in the hall
once, and walked off with a plate of cheese-cakes and a pickled tongue
that were coming in to your worship."

A roar of laughter testified to the amusement which this freak of
Hector's caused, and Sir Richard said--

"Well, I don't know any one who was so much entitled to be invited to
lunch as Hector, and no doubt he thought so too; and as we had not the
courtesy to open the door for him, and properly accommodate him, he has
helped himself on the road, that's all."

"Shall I admit him, sir?"

"Yes, and the man who is with him. He is one of the witnesses who I
trust will help to bring Todd to justice. Show them all in."

In a very few minutes the captain of the vessel, with whom the reader
had some slight acquaintance at the beginning of this most veritable
narrative, made his appearance, and Colonel Jeffery warmly shook hands
with him. The dog knew the colonel and the captain likewise, and was
most vociferous in his joy to see them.

It was an affecting thing then to see the creature pause suddenly in his
manifestations of delight, and look sad and solemn, after which he
uttered a dismal howl, and catching the colonel by the skirt of his
coat, he tried to pull him towards the door of the room.

"Poor fellow," said the captain, "he does not forget his master yet, I
see."

"No," said Colonel Jeffery, "nor never will. If he had his own way now,
and we would follow him, I lay any wager he would take us to Sweeney
Todd's shop."

"In course he would, sir," said the ostler. "In course he would. Lord
bless you, gemmen, if this here dog as I calls Pison, cos why he was
pisoned, was only to get hold of Todd, I would not give much for his
chances. You sees, gemmen, as I have kept him in good condition."

"He does look well," said the captain.

"Indeed it does you great credit," said Colonel Jeffery; "but his keep
must cost something. There is my guinea towards it."

The colonel placed a guinea in the ostler's hand, and his example was
followed by all present, so that the ostler found himself growing quite
a man of substance when he least expected it.

"Lor, Pison," he said, "you'll be a fortin for a fellow yet, you will.
But I hope, gemmen, as you don't mean to take him away, cos if that's
the caper, here's the money agin, and I'd rather keep Pison. He's got
fond o' me by this time, poor fellow, and I have got fond on him, as I
hav'nt no other brothers and sisters or family of my own."

"It would indeed be unfair," said the colonel, "to deprive you of him.
But tell me, are you comfortable in your situation?"

"Lor bless you, sir, it ain't much of a situation. Lots of hard work,
and werry little for it."

"Well, if you like to come into my service and bring Hector with
you--you are welcome."

"Oh, won't I, sir, above a bit. Why, Pison, we is promoted, old fellor.
We is a going to a new place, where there will be no end of grub, old
chap."

"You shall not have any complaints to make in that department," said the
colonel.

"So then," said the captain, "it is quite clear that Mr. Thornhill was
murdered by that rascal of a barber?"

"Quite," replied Sir Richard Blunt, "and it is for that murder we mean
to try Todd. If, however, by any chance, he should escape conviction
upon that, we will be provided with two more indictments against him, so
that he is tolerably well cared for; but the murder of Mr. Thornhill is
what we mean ostensibly to go upon."

"That's right, sir," said the ostler, "and I'll bring Pison as a witness
to all the blessed facts. He'll settle the business, even if the jury is
half as stupid agin as usual."

"He will be committed for trial this morning," said Sir Richard Blunt,
"for the murder of Mr. Thornhill; and that woman, Mrs. Lovett, will be
arraigned as an accessory before the fact, so that there can be very
little doubt of the fate of both of them; and if ever two notorious
criminals deserved that the last dread sentence of the law should be
carried out against them, Sweeney Todd and Mrs. Lovett are those two."

"They could not be worse," said the captain.

"No, that would be impossible," remarked the colonel. "I shall be glad
when this gloomy tragedy is over though. The public mind will soon be
filled with it, and we shall hear of nothing but of Sweeney Todd and
Mrs. Lovett, with all their sayings and doings, for the next few months
to come."

"That is true enough," said Sir Richard Blunt. "But I don't think you
will find any but one feeling upon the subject, and that will be one of
universal condemnation."

"Not a doubt of it."

"There is another too who will suffer the just reward of his crimes,"
said the magistrate glancing at Mrs. Oakley.

She shook her head and sighed, for she shrunk naturally from the awfully
responsible share she was condemned to have in the conviction of Mr.
Lupin.

"I will do my duty," she said, "in that dreadful piece of business. The
guilt of Lupin, although not so extensive as Todd's, is to the full as
great."

"It is indeed, madam."

"Ah, yes!" said Ben. "They are a bad lot altogether, and the sooner they
are hung up like a rope of ingions the better. Bless me, I always was
delicate, and so was obliged to take things easy; but I have more than
once looked into that horrid pie shop in Bell Yard, and thought I should
like a smack of about fifteen or twenty of them, just to stay my stomach
till I got home to the Tower; and what a mercy it was I never bought
'em."

"It was, indeed, my friend," Sir Richard said.

"Yes, you may say that, my dear, sir--you may say that. With my very
delicate stomach, I should have been as good as done brown if I had had
'em. I should have fallen a victim to the wild beasteses, the very next
time as I went a-near 'em; and all I can say is, as I shall be uncommon
glad to show these creatures to any of this company, as will come to the
Tower at feeding time."

Ben had made this liberal offer so often that the company left off
thanking him for it; but the ostler whispered to him--

"I'll come and bring Pison."

"No, will you though?" said Ben.

"Yes, to be sure I will. Who knows but he'd like to see them wild
beasteses, as perhaps he has only heard of 'em in a wery promiscous sort
o' way."

"Not a doubt of it," cried Ben, "not a doubt of it--only when he does
come you must tell him to take things easy, and not be discomposed at
any of the roaring and bellowing, as the creatures sets up at times."

"Oh, I'll hold him."

"You needn't go for to hold him. Just you impress upon him afore he
comes that easy does it, that's all you need do, and then he'll know
very well what to do."

"Won't I!"

The conversation was rather breaking up into small fragments, when the
magistrate rose from his seat.

"Now then," said Sir Richard Blunt, "it is time for us to go to Bow
Street, where I appear as a witness to-day, instead of as a magistrate."

As he spoke, the clock in the office sounded the half-past twelve.

All the guests of the magistrate rose, for they knew that his duties
were imperative. There was a tone of great gravity now about Sir Richard
Blunt as he spoke--

"I fully expect," he said, "that Todd will be committed for trial and
Mrs. Lovett likewise. Already she has made repeated applications to her
attendants in prison, to be permitted to become evidence against Todd."

"Which will surely not be permitted?" said the colonel.

"Certainly not; the evidence against him is quite clear enough without
the assistance of Mrs. Lovett, while the proofs of her criminality with
him, are of too strong a character for her to be given any chance of
escape."

"She is a dreadful woman."

"She is, indeed; but you will all of you soon see how she conducts
herself now, for she will be brought up with Todd."




                             CHAPTER CXXI.
          TODD IS COMMITTED FOR TRIAL, AND EXPECTS THE WORST.


By the time the police office at Bow Street opened upon the morning, a
wild vague, and uncertain sort of rumour had spread itself over London,
concerning the discoveries that had been made at Todd's house in Fleet
Street, and at Mrs. Lovett's in Bell Yard, Temple Bar.

Of course, the affair had lost nothing from many-tongued rumour, and the
popular belief was, that Todd's house had been found full of dead bodies
from the attics to the cellars, while Mrs. Lovett had been actually
detected in the very act of scraping some dead man's bones, for tid-bits
to make a veal pie of.

A dense crowd had assembled in Fleet Street, to have a look at Todd's
now shut-up house, and that thoroughfare very soon, in consequence,
became no thoroughfare at all. Bell Yard too was so completely blocked
up, that the lawyers who were in the habit of using it as a short cut
from the Temple to Lincoln's Inn, were forced to take the slight round
of Chancery Lane instead; and the confusion and general excitement in
the whole of the neighbourhood was immense.

But it was in Bow Street, and round the doors of the police-office, that
the densest crowd, and the greatest excitement prevailed. There it was
only with the greatest difficulty that the officers and others
officially connected with the public office could get in and out of it
as occasion required; and the three or four magistrates who thought
proper to attend upon that occasion, had quite a struggle to get into
the court at all.

By dint of great perseverance, our friends, with Sir Richard Blunt, at
length succeeded in forcing a passage through the crowd, to the
magistrates private entrance, and having once passed that, they were no
longer in the smallest degree incommoded.

"Well, Crotchet," said Sir Richard, as he encountered that individual,
"Have you been to Newgate this morning?"

"Rather, Sir Richard."

"Any news?"

"No. Only that Todd has been a trying it on a little, that's all."

"What do you mean?"

"Why he's only petikler anxious to save Jack Ketch any trouble on his
account, that's all, Sir Richard; so he's been trying to put himself out
o' this here world, and shove himself into t'other, without going
through all the trouble of being hung, that's all, sir."

"I fully expected that both Todd and Mrs. Lovett would make some such
attempts; but I hope the governor of Newgate has been sufficiently
careful to prevent the possibility of either of them succeeding."

"It's all right," added Crotchet. "I seed 'em both, and they is as
lively as black beetles as has been trod on by somebody as isn't a very
light weight."

The doors of the court had not been opened, but when they were, the
struggle for admission was tremendous, and it required the utmost
exertions of the officers of the establishment to keep anything like a
semblance of order. The few night charges were rapidly disposed of, and
while a gentleman who looked very foolish, was fined five shillings for
being drunk and disorderly the evening previous, a roaring shout from
the mob in the street proclaimed the arrival of the two important
prisoners from Newgate.

Up to some time after his arrest, Todd, notwithstanding some stray words
that would indicate a contrary state of things, fully believed that he
had succeeded in murdering Mrs. Lovett, and it was not until the morning
that he became aware of her escape from drowning in the Thames.

It did not require a conjuror to tell the authorities that there would
be some trouble in getting the prisoners to Bow Street, so it was
thought better to make one job of it, and to place Todd and Mrs. Lovett
in the same coach along with four officers.

With this intent the coach was brought close to the wicket-gate of
Newgate, and Todd and Mrs. Lovett, well guarded, were brought to the
lobby at the same moment. The moment Todd caught sight of Mrs. Lovett, a
kind of spasm seemed to shake his frame, and pointing to her, he cried--

"Does that woman indeed live, or is she but some fiend in the shape of
such a one come to torment me?"

"That is Mrs. Lovett," said the Governor.

"Oh, no--no--no," added Todd, "it is not so--it cannot be. The dark
rolling river cannot so give up its dead."

"You were well disposed that it should not," said Mrs. Lovett, bending
upon Todd a most ferocious glance.

"She is saved!" gasped Todd.

"Yes, I am saved to your confusion. I call you all to witness," she then
added in a loud voice, "that I had no idea of the extent of Todd's
iniquity; but what I do know I will freely tell as evidence for the
crown against him."

Mrs. Lovett looked peculiarly at the Governor while she uttered these
words, for she was anxious to know what he thought of them, but that
functionary took not the remotest notice.

At this moment one of the warders announced the sheriff, and one of the
Sheriffs of London with his gold chain of office on, appeared in the
lobby. To him Mrs. Lovett immediately turned, saying--

"Sir, I offer myself as king's evidence. Do you understand me?"

"Perfectly, madam; but I have nothing to do with the matter."

"Nothing to do, sir? Then why do you wear that bauble?"

"My office, so far as you are concerned, madam, will be to keep you in
safe custody, and see that the sentence of the law is carried into
effect upon you, in case you should be convicted of the crimes laid to
your charge."

"But I turn king's evidence. It is quite a common thing that you have
all heard of that often enough."

"Now, madam, the coach is ready," said a turnkey.

"Where are you going to take me? Is not this Newgate?"

"Yes, but you must undergo an examination at the police-office in Bow
Street."

Without any further ceremony, Mrs. Lovett was handed into the coach, and
Todd after her. She was at first placed in the seat immediately opposite
to him, but she insisted upon changing it, saying, that she could not
bear to look at him all the way that she went, and as it was a matter of
no moment which way she sat, the officers so far indulged her as to
permit her to change her place.

In this way then, both of them upon the same seat, while three officers
sat opposite to them, and one with them, dividing them, they arrived at
Bow Street, and were met by that roaring shout, that everybody had
heard, from without the court.

Of course every precaution had been taken to prevent the mob from
wreaking their vengeance upon the criminals, which they were
well-disposed to do. A number of people were knocked down and some of
the officers rather roughly treated; but the result was, that Todd and
Mrs. Lovett were got into the office in safety.

Sweeney Todd, as he ascended the steps of the office, turned his head
for a moment, and looked at the sea of angry faces that was in the
street. He shuddered and passed on. Mrs. Lovett did not look round at
all.

With great difficulty the door of the office was closed, and then in a
few moments Todd and Mrs. Lovett were placed side by side at the bar of
justice.

There was one person sitting on the bench near to Sir Richard Blunt,
upon whom Todd fixed his eyes in amazement. That person was Johanna
Oakley. The features came at once to his recollection, and as though he
really doubted if he were awake or not, he more than once pressed his
hand upon his eyes.

[Illustration: Todd And Mrs. Lovett At Bow Street Police Office.]

His and every one else's attention were, however, speedily taken up by
the conduct of Mrs. Lovett. The moment comparative order was restored in
the crowded court, so that what she said could be distinctly and clearly
heard, she spoke--

"I am willing to turn king's evidence upon this occasion, and to declare
all I know of Todd's nefarious transactions. I am quite willing to tell
all--I don't perhaps know the full extent of Todd's guilt, but I repeat
I will turn king's evidence, and tell all I do know."

A gentleman, plainly dressed in black, rose new, and in a calm, assured
voice, said--

"Upon the part of the crown I reject the offer of the female prisoner.
Anything she may say will be used as evidence against her, if it bear
that construction."

"Reject?" cried Mrs. Lovett. "And pray, sir, who are you that you dare
reject such a proposition for furthering the ends of justice?"

"That, madam, is the Attorney-General," said an officer.

"Oh," said Mrs. Lovett, "and am I to understand that I am accused of any
participation in Todd's crimes?"

"You will find by the evidence that will be adduced against you of what
you are accused," said the magistrate. "You, I believe, Sir Richard
Blunt, give these people in charge?"

"Yes," said Sir Richard rising. "I charge them with, in the first place,
the wilful murder of Charles James Thornhill. If your worship should
think fit, from the evidence that will be brought forward, to commit
them upon that charge, I shall not at present trouble you with any
others, although I am fully prepared with several."

"What is the meaning of all this?" cried Mrs. Lovett. "I will be heard."

Sir Richard Blunt paid no manner of attention to her, but brought before
the magistrate quite sufficient evidence to warrant him in committing
both the prisoners for trial.

The only great effect that the proceedings seemed to have upon Todd
consisted in his surprise when Johanna Oakley came forward, and to her
examination he listened attentively indeed. When she related how, under
the name of Charles Green, she had taken the situation of errand boy at
Todd's shop, and been in daily communication with Sir Richard Blunt,
Todd dashed his clenched fist against his own head, crying--

"Dolt--Idiot--idiot! and I did suspect it once!"

Johanna went on then to state how in hunting over Todd's shop and house
for some vestige of Mark Ingestrie, the sleeve of a seaman's jacket was
found, which she had thought belonged to him, but which would be
identified by the captain of the ship as having been part of Mr.
Thornhill's apparel when he went on shore upon that fatal morning of his
murder, no doubt by Todd.

The evidence against Mrs. Lovett consisted of the fact of there being an
underground communication all the way from the cellars of Todd's house
to her cooking concern; and Mark Ingestrie had quite enough to tell of
that to make it tolerably clear they acted in concert.

Of course there could be but one opinion in the minds of all present of
the guilt of the prisoners; but it was necessary that that guilt should
be legally as well as morally proved, and hence the evidence was very
carefully arranged to meet the exigencies of the case.

"Have you any legal adviser?" said the Magistrate to Todd.

"No," was the brief response.

The same question was put to Mrs. Lovett, but she did not answer, and
the death-like paleness of her countenance sufficiently testified that
it was out of her power to do so. In another moment, overcome by dread
and chagrin, she fainted.

"Is she dead?" said Todd.

No one replied to the question, and he added--

"Look to her well or she will yet baffle you. If ever the spirit of a
fiend found a home in any human brain it is in that woman's. I say to
you, look to her well, or she will still baffle you all by some rare
device you little dream of."

Mrs. Lovett in her insensible state was carried from the court, and a
surgeon was in prompt attendance upon her. It was found that there was
nothing the matter with her; she had merely fainted through sheer
vexation of spirit at finding that her overtures to be evidence against
Todd were not attended to in the way she had wished; for now, with the
loss of everything but life, how glad she would have been to back out of
those odious transactions which clung to her.

Todd was asked if he had anything to say.

"Really," he said. "I do not know what it is all about. I am a poor
humble man, who get but a scanty living by shaving any kind customer,
and all this must be some desperate conspiracy against me on the part of
the Roman Catholic, I think."

"The Roman Catholics?"

"Yes, your worship. I never would shave or dress the hair of a Roman
Catholic if I knew it, and more than one of that religion have sworn to
be avenged upon me."

"And is this your defence?"

"Yes, exactly; it is all I can say; and if I perish, it will be as one
of the most innocent of men who ever was persecuted to death."

"Well," said the magistrate, "I have heard many a singular defence, but
never one like this."

"It's--it's truth," said Todd, "that staggers your worship."

"Well, you can try what effect it will have upon a jury. I commit you
for trial on the charge of wilful murder."

"Murder of whom?"

"Charles James Thornhill."

"Oh, your worship, he is alive and well, and now in Havannah. If I have
murdered him, where is the body?"

"We are prepared," said the Attorney General, "with that objection. At
the trial we will tell the jury where the body is."

Mrs. Lovett, now having sufficiently recovered, was brought into court
to hear that she was committed for trial, but she made no remark upon
that circumstance whatever; and in the course of a few moments another
shout from the multitude without announced that the prisoners were off
to Newgate.




                             CHAPTER CXXII.
        A LARGE PARTY VISITS BIG BEN AND THE LIONS IN THE TOWER.


On the morning following the committal of Mrs. Lovett and Sweeney Todd
to Newgate for trial, a rather large party met at the office of Sir
Richard Blunt, in Craven Street, Strand. The fact was that after the
proceedings at the police-office, Big Ben had earnestly besought them
all to name the day to visit him and the lions in the Tower, and as no
day was so convenient to Sir Richard as that immediately following, it
was arranged that they were all to meet at the private office in Craven
Street, and go there by water to the Tower.

The sun shone beautifully; and to look at that party no one would have
supposed that there had ever been such persons as Sweeney Todd and Mrs.
Lovett in the world.

The party consisted of Colonel Jeffery, Tobias, Mr. and Mrs. Oakley,
Minna Gray, Johanna, Mark Ingestrie, Arabella Wilmot, and the
fruiterer's daughter from Fleet Street, who had been so kind to Johanna
during that very sad and anxious time that she had passed while in the
temporary service of Todd.

[Illustration: Tobias And Minna Rejoice At The Capture Of Todd And Mrs.
Lovett.]

So happy-looking and smiling a party surely could not have been found in
all London, as they made up. It will be seen that there were no less
than three couples intent upon matrimony, for although it was understood
that Tobias was to wait two years yet before he married, he looked as
happy as the rest.

A large eight-oared barge was at the stairs at the bottom of the street
to convey them, and as they all walked to it arm-in-arm, and in couples,
everybody who met them would have it that it was a wedding, and many
jocular remarks were made to them by the way.

"Upon my word," said Sir Richard, "I shall be considered a match-maker,
and folks will say that I keep this office of my own only as a
matrimonial speculation."

"You certainly," said the colonel, "have been the cause of two or three
matches, at all events, for, but for you, I doubt if any of us would
have felt as we feel to day, Sir Richard."

"He has restored Mark Ingestrie to me," said Johanna.

"And my Johanna to me," said Ingestrie.

"And my dear Minna to me," cried Tobias.

"Stop--stop!" cried Sir Richard.

"And I am quite certain," said the colonel, "that I owe to him the joy
of calling Arabella mine."

Sir Richard Blunt came now to a halt, as he said--

"Stop, all of you, or I will not go one step further. If we get into
this kind of talk, who is to say where it will end? Let us enjoy
ourselves, and make it a rule to say anything but revert to the past. It
has its joys and its sorrows, but it had better upon this occasion be
left to itself."

"Agreed--agreed," said everybody.

The barge was a very handsome one. Indeed Sir Richard Blunt had borrowed
it of one of the city companies for the occasion, and beneath the gay
awning they could all sit with perfect ease.

And now in the course of another five minutes they were going down the
river, quite at a slashing pace, towards the old Tower; and as they were
animated by the many pleasing sights upon the river, their conversation
soon became animated and spirited.

"What is that?--A wherry coming towards us from the Temple-stairs," said
the colonel.

All eyes were bent upon the wherry, which shot out from the little
landing-place by the side of the Temple Gardens, and presently they,
with one accord, cried out--

"It's Hector!"

In truth Hector was there, but with him was the colonel's new groom, the
late ostler, who had been so efficient a protector to the dog, and the
captain of the ship, whom he knew so well.

"Barge a-hoi!" cried the captain.

"Ay--ay!" shouted Ingestrie in reply, and the wherry shot alongside the
barge.

"Well," said the captain, "I do think for you all to go on such a party
as this, and not ask me and Hector, is too bad."

"But," said Sir Richard Blunt, "you told me you were going to be very
busy at the docks."

"So I did, but I found our owner had not come to town, and I have
nothing to do to-day. I called at your house, colonel, hoping to be in
time to come with you, but you had gone. Hector, however, saw me, and
made such a racket I was forced to bring him."

"And no one can be more glad to see you and Hector than I," cried the
colonel.

"And I didn't like, sir," said the ostler, "not for to come for to go,
when Pison said as he'd like to come."

"Very good," said the colonel smiling. "Come on board."

The waterman who was with the wherry laid it alongside the barge, and
having been liberally paid for his freight, rowed off again, leaving
with the barge party, his two customers and the dog.

The Tower was soon in sight, for at that time there were not by any
means so many obstructions to the navigation of the River Thames as are
to be found now, and the stream too was very much clearer than now it
can boast of being. The host of manufactories that have since risen upon
its banks were not then thought of.

"I do think," said Colonel Jeffery, "that I can see our friend Ben at
the landing place. Look, Mr. Oakley, is that not Ben?"

"Bless you, sir," said Mr. Oakley, "I couldn't see so far if you would
make me king of England for doing so. Johanna, my love, you have young
eyes, and know Ben well."

"Yes, pa, it is Ben, and he is waving his hand to us, and looks so
pleased."

"He is a most worthy honest fellow," said Sir Richard Blunt. "I like him
very much, from what little I have seen of him. He has the simplicity of
a child."

"Yes," added the colonel, "and the candour and honesty of a lover of
human nature. I believe a better heart than Ben's never beat in human
bosom."

"I am quite sure of it," said Johanna. "I love Ben very much indeed. He
has been ever a kind and indulgent friend to me."

"Do you hear that, Mr. Ingestrie?" said Arabella.

"Yes," laughed Mark, "but I decline investing Ben with any of the
attributes of a rival. Now, I love you, Miss Wilmot very much indeed,
because you have always been such a dear kind friend to Johanna; and I
daresay the colonel will permit me to do so."

"To be sure I will--at a distance," said the colonel.

Everybody laughed at this, and then, as the rowers increased their
exertions to come in to the Tower stairs with some eclat, the barge soon
was safely moored at the landing place.

"Here you are all of you," cried Ben, capering in his huge delight.
"Here you all are. Come along. Oh, how hungry I am."

"That sounds as if you meant to eat us, Ben," said Sir Richard, as he
stepped from the barge.

"Oh, dear no. Only I have got a little bit of lunch ready for you all,
and as I helped to place it on the table it made me so hungry that I've
been half mad ever since, and I'm as thirsty too as can be. Oh, Mr.
Jeffery, I often think if the Thames were only strong ale, what a place
the Tower would be."

"You may depend," said Sir Richard, "if it were, the government would
pretty soon bottle it all off."

Johanna was going to step on shore, but Ben made a dash at her, and
lifting her up as you would some little child, he seated her on his left
arm, and so fairly carried her into the Tower.

"You wait, Miss Arabella," he cried. "I'll come for you."

This so alarmed Miss Wilmot that she sprang on shore in a moment, and
all the party laughed heartily to see Mark Ingestrie flying along after
Ben, and shouting as he went--

"Put her down--put her down! Ben!--Ben! She'd rather walk. Put her
down!"

Ben paid no manner of attention to any of these remonstrances, but
carried Johanna right into the Tower before he set her upon her feet
again, which he then did as tenderly as though she had been some infant,
only just learning to walk.

"Mind how you go," he said. "Take it easy. Easy does it."

"But I can walk, Ben."

"Very good. Mind how you does, you nice little thing. Oh, I likes you a
great deal better in the petticoats and not the breeches."

"Well, Ben," said Mark Ingestrie, "I am certainly very much obliged to
you--very much, indeed."

"Don't mention it, my boy," replied Ben, totally oblivious of the manner
in which Mark Ingestrie uttered the words--a manner which betrayed some
little pique upon the occasion. The laughter of Johanna and his friends,
however, soon chased away the temporary cloud.

"Where's the t'other little one?" said Ben.

"I am here," cried Arabella, laughing.

"Oh, you got on without me, did you? Very good: only if you had only
waited, I shouldn't have thought it no trouble at all, whatsomedever.
Easy does it, you know."

"Thank you, Ben. I'd just as soon walk, and a little rather, perhaps, of
the two. It was quite amusing enough to see you carry Johanna."

"Well--well, there ain't much gratitude in this world. Come on, all of
you, for you must be famished; and as for me, I haven't had a bit of
anything to eat for a whole hour and a half, and then it was only a
pound and three quarters of beef-steak, and a half quartern loaf!"

"But we are none of us hungry," said Johanna.

"Never mind that," replied Ben, "you don't know what you may be; so
always eat when you can get it. That's my maxim, and I find it answers
very well. Plenty to eat and drink, and taking things easy, is how I get
through the world, and you'll all on you find it the best in the long
run."

"There are worse philosophies than that going," said Sir Richard Blunt
to Colonel Jeffery.

"Very much worse," laughed the colonel.

Ben now led the way along a narrow arched passage, and through two
rather gloomy corridors to a stone room, with a grand arched roof, in
the ancient fortress; and there, sure enough, they found the little
snack, as he called it, laid out very nicely for their reception.

A table ran along the centre of the room, and at one end of it there was
placed an immense round of corn beef. At the other was a haunch of
mutton, weighing at least thirty pounds. Somewhat about the middle of
the table was an enormous turkey; and those dishes, with a ham and four
tongues, made up a tolerable repast.

Six half-gallon flagons, filled with old Burton Ale, stood at regular
distances upon the table.

"It's only," said Ben, "a slight snack, after all; but I hope you will
be just able to find enough."

"Enough!" cried Sir Richard. "Why, there's enough for fifty people."

"There's almost enough for a regiment!" said the colonel.

"Oh, you are joking," said Ben; "but come, sit down. You, father Oakley,
sit here by this little bit of mutton, and I'll cut up the beef."

After considerable laughing they were all seated; and then Ben, finding
that Johanna was on one side of him, and Miss Wilmot on the other,
declared that he was quite satisfied.

He cut, first of all, a cold tongue in halves down the middle
lengthways, and placed one half upon a plate for Johanna, and the other
on a plate for Arabella. Then upon the tongue in each plate, he placed
about a pound of ham.

"Take that, my little dears," he said, "to begin with, and don't be
sparing now, for there's the turkey and the mutton, you know, to fall
back upon. Easy does it."

The room resounded with shrieks of laughter at the looks of utter
distressful dismay which Johanna and Arabella cast upon their plates;
and Ben looked from one face to another in perfect astonishment, for he
could not see any joke for the life of him.

"Dear Ben," said Johanna, "do you really imagine we can eat a tenth part
of all this?"

"Do I imagine?--In course I does. Only you begin. Lord bless you, that
ain't much. Come--come, you want your ale, I suppose. So here it is."

Upon this, Ben poured them each out about a quart of the strong ale, and
requested them to take an easy pull at that.

They found that it was of no use requesting Ben to diminish the quantity
he helped them to; so they just, as he advised, took it easy, and ate
what they had a mind to do.

As for Ben himself, he cut one large slice off the round of beef, and
then placed upon it two slices of ham, so that the thickness--for he was
not a delicate carver--was about three inches; and so he set to work,
every now and then taking up one of the half-gallon ale flagons, and
pledging the company all round.

Probably, rough and homely as was Ben's lunch, not one of them present
had ever enjoyed such a meal more than they this did; and if we might
judge by the loud laughter that echoed about the old arched roof, a
merrier hour was never spent than in the Tower with Big Ben.

But it was a sadness to Ben to find that such little progress was made
in the consumption of his eatables and drinkables; and he uttered many
groans as he watched Johanna and Arabella.




                            CHAPTER CXXIII.
                        THE BEASTS AT THE TOWER.


All good things must have an end, and Ben's lunch in the Tower was not
any exception to the rule. At last even he was satisfied that nobody
would eat any more, although he was very far indeed from being satisfied
that they had had enough.

"Won't anybody be so good," he said, "as just to try and pick a little
bit of something?"

"No--no!" was the general response.

"Indeed, Ben," said Colonel Jeffery, "if we take any more we shall
positively be ill, and I'm sure you don't wish that."

"Oh, dear, no," groaned Ben; "but it's quite clear to me, of course,
that you don't like the lunch, or else you could not have took it so
very easy."

With one accord upon this, everybody declared that they had liked it
amazingly well.

"Then you will all try a drop more ale?"

Upon this, they rose from the table, for they had a well-grounded
suspicion that if they staid any longer, Ben would try to force
something down their throats, whether they would or not.

"Ah, well," said Ben, with a sigh, when he found that they would not be
prevailed upon to take anything else. "Then we may as well go and see
the lions in the Tower."

"Oh, yes," added Johanna, "I have heard so much of them, that I quite
long to see them."

"Should you, my duck?" cried Ben; "then come along."

Here Ben would have carried Johanna again, for somehow he had got the
idea fixed in his head that the kindest thing he could possibly do as
regarded Johanna was to prevent her from using her feet; but Mark
Ingestrie interposed, saying--

"Ben, she would much rather walk. You forget, my kind friend, that she
is no longer now a child."

"Oh, dear," said Ben, with a look of profound wisdom, "if you come to
that, we are all children. Look at me, I'm only a fine baby."

Everybody laughed at this sally of Ben's, as well they might; and then,
being fully convinced that no more eating nor drinking was at all
practicable, Ben proceeded to lead the way to the lions.

"Is there any danger?" said Arabella. "I hope you will not let any of
them out of their cages, Mr. Ben."

"Oh, dear, no, there's no danger, and we don't let any of them out. We
only pokes them up a bit with a long pole, to make 'em rather lively to
visitors."

"And have no accidents ever happened?" said Johanna.

"Lord bless you, no. To be sure one of the warders, who was rather a new
hand, would put his hand in between the bars of the lion's den and get
it snapped off; and once a leopard we had here broke loose, and jumped
on the back of a sentinel, and half eat him up; but we haven't had any
accidents."

"Why, what do you call them, Ben?"

"Oh, nothing at all."

"I dare say," said Sir Richard Blunt, "that the poor warder and the
sentinel would have called those little incidents something."

"Well, perhaps they might," said Ben. "In course people will think of
themselves before anybody else; but, howsomdever, don't you be after
going to be afeard, my little dears; and if any of the beasteses was to
get out, always recollect that easy does it, and it's no use making a
fuss."

"I suppose you think, Ben, that if we are to be eaten up by a lion or a
leopard, there's no such thing as avoiding our fate," said the colonel.
"Is that your idea?"

"Well, I hardly know," said Ben. "But one day we had a young chap--a new
warder--who came here out of the country, and he said he had had a dream
the night before he came that he should be devoured by a wolf. Now we
hadn't a wolf in the Tower collection at all, so, in course, we all
laughed at him, and told him he would have to go to foreign parts to
bring his dream true. But you'd hardly believe it, that very day afore
the young fellow had been one hour in the Tower, there comes a boat to
the stairs, with an officer, and he asks to see the keeper of the
beasts, and he says to him--'My ship is lying at the Nore, and we have
brought from Friesland one of the largest wolves as ever was known for
the Tower collection,' says he, 'and he's in a large bag we made on
purpose to hold him in the boat.' Well, when the young warder heard this
he said--'That's my wolf. He has come for me!' and off he set a
trembling like anything. The wolf was brought in in a coal sack, and we
got him into an empty den that was shut up with a chain and a staple
only; but as all the fastenings were out of his reach, he could not
interfere with it if he was ever so cunning. Well, night came, and we
all took it easy, and went to bed; but in the middle of the night what
should we hear but the most horrid howling that ever you could think of,
and when we ran to the Lion Tower, where it came from, we found the iron
door of the wolf's den open, and the young warder lying, half in and
half out of it, stone dead. The wolf had had him by the throat."

"And what became of the wolf?" said Johanna.

"He was gone, and we never so much as heard of him from that day to
this."

"Well, Ben," said the colonel, "that is a very good story of the lions
in the Tower, and here we are, I think, close to them."

A terrific roar at this moment proved the colonel's words to be
tolerably true.

"Ah, they are feeding some on 'em," said Ben. "It just the time, and
they will not be convinced as easy does it."

"It is hard enough, Ben," said Sir Richard Blunt, "to convince human
beings of that piece of philosophy, to say nothing of lions and tigers."

"Oh, but," said Ben, with great gravity, "lions and tigers is generally
much more reasonable than human beings."

Another roar from the menagerie joined in as bass to the laugh with
which this piece of philosophy from so unlikely a person as Ben was
received.

"Come on," he said; "come on. They can make a noise, but that's just
about all they can do. Come on, my little dears--and if you fell at all
afeard, all you have got to do is to take hold of the lion by the nose,
and then you'll find he looks upon you as one of them as takes things
easy, and he won't say another word to you anyhow."

"We will leave that to you, Ben," said Johanna, "and in the meantime, I
will keep close to you, you know."

"Do, my little duck; and I'll just carry you."

"No--no--no!"

Johanna darted away; for if she had not done so, Ben would inevitably
have had her up in his arms by way of showing his affection for her. It
was a fixed idea of his, and was not to be shaken by any denials or
remonstrances.

And now in a few minutes, after traversing the highly picturesque and
antique passages of the Tower, the little party arrived at where the
lions were kept.

The colonel gave a caution to the late ostler of the inn in Fleet Street
to keep an eye over Hector, who not being accustomed to an introduction
to such animals as he was about to see, might fancy himself called upon
to do something out of the way upon the occasion.

"Oh, I'll watch him, sir," said the man. "Come here, Pison, will you?
and don't you be after going and interfering with wild beasteses. Lor
bless you, sir, he'll be quite glad to see 'em, and will go on speaking
of 'em for ever afterwards--I know he will."

"Here you are," said Ben, as he halted opposite the door of a lordly
lion. They all looked at the immense creature with a vast amount of
interest, for such creatures were rather rarities at that time in
London.

While our friends are thus examining the king of the forest, as he
crunches a huge beef bone with his formidable jaws, we may give a brief
account of the wild creatures that in old times were kept in the tower.
There was Pedore, a beautiful lioness, brought from Senegal, and
presented to the king by Governor V. Harora.

Cæsar, brother to Pedore, brought from the same place, and presented to
his majesty, by Captain Haycraft. He has been in the Tower about eight
months, is three years and a half old, and supposed to be the finest
lion ever seen in England. His looks strike the stoutest beholder with
astonishing awe. His head is large, being covered with a long shagged
mane that reaches to his shoulders, and adds rather to the terror than
majesty of his countenance; for his eyes being very fiery, and darting,
as it were, a kind of red flame through his long, shaggy, and
dishevelled hair, raises such an idea of fierceness as cannot be excited
in a mind unaccompanied with fear, nor can we conceive it possible for
human courage to encounter a creature of such a dreadful aspect, without
the intervention of some lucky circumstance, notwithstanding the stories
that have been related of men killing lions in equal combat. His mouth
opens wide, and discovers a frightful set of teeth; and when he roars he
may be heard at a great distance.

Miss Jane, a beautiful lioness, about six years old, brought from the
coast of Barbary, by Sir Jacob Wyatt.

Phillis, a large wolf, brought from Boulogne, in France, and presented
to his majesty by Colonel Hollingworth. It is in form not unlike a dog
of a mixed breed, and has been in the Tower about five years. These are
very ravenous creatures, which inhabit the immense forests in France and
other parts, and are a terror to men and cattle. In the severe season of
the year they come from the woods and fall ravenously upon every living
thing they meet, and have been known to enter houses in search of food.

Sukey, a North American bear, brought over by Lord Bruce. She has been
in the Tower about twelve months.

Hector, a most beautiful lion, sent from the Emperor of Morocco as a
present to his majesty. He is fourteen years old, and has been in the
Tower about ten. He greatly resembles Cæsar.

Helena, companion to Hector, a very handsome lioness, and presented also
by the Emperor of Morocco.

Miss Gregory, a beautiful leopardess, about twenty years of age. She was
sent to his late majesty by the Dey of Algiers, and presented by the
late Algerine Ambassador.

Sir Robert, a fine leopard, of a shining yellow colour intermixed with
bright spots. He was brought from Senegal by--Touchit, Esq. He has been
in his present situation about eight years, during which he has had
seven young ones by two different leopardesses. The young, however, all
died soon after being whelped, except one which lived about ten months.

Miss Nancy, a very beautiful lioness, brought from Senegal, and
presented to his majesty by -- Brady, Esq. She has been here only about
nine months, is not quite two years old, and seems very tractable.

A lion monkey. This beast is of a black colour, with very shaggy hair.
It was brought from the Cape of Good Hope, and has been here about four
months.

An American black bear, lately brought over by Colonel Clarke.

A racoon, brought from Norway by Colonel Clarke. This is a very small
beast, and exceedingly harmless. It lives on the sea-sands, and chiefly
on shell fish, which it takes in a very safe and dexterous manner; for
whenever the fish opens its shell to receive either air or nourishment,
this creature, we are told, puts a small pebble in, so that the shell
may not close again, and picks out the fish with its claws.

Rose, a large Norway wolf, presented about four years since by Herr
Widderman. He is about six years old, and appears very fierce and
ravenous.

Miss Sally, a beautiful leopardess, presented by the Emperor of Morocco,
and brought over in the same ship with Hector.

These were the principal inhabitants of what was called the Lion's
Tower; and Ben, who was never so much in his glory as when he was
describing the creatures and commenting upon them, went through the list
of them with commendable accuracy.

It was quite impossible but that the party should very much admire these
wild inhabitants of the woods and wastes of nature, and Ben was
wonderfully gratified at the fearless manner in which both Johanna and
Arabella approached the dens.

The inspection of the beasts lasted more than an hour, and then, as Sir
Richard Blunt had no more time at his disposal, they all again proceeded
to the barge that was waiting for them. Ben accompanied the party from
the Tower, as the Oakleys had invited him to dine with them.

"Ah," he said, "by the time we get to your house, cousin Oakley, I shall
be half famished. Thank goodness! I have ordered something to eat to be
put on board the barge, in case we should be sharp set."




                             CHAPTER CXXIV.
        RETURNS TO NEWGATE, AND THE PROCEEDINGS OF MRS. LOVETT.


While those persons, in whose happiness we and our readers, no doubt,
likewise feel a kindly interest, are thus in the happy society of each
other, compensating themselves for many of the mischances and deep
anxieties of the past, some events were taking place in Newgate of a
character well worth the recording.

Mrs. Lovett, when she found that her proposition to turn evidence
against Todd would not be listened to, but that it was the fixed
determination of the authorities to include her in the prosecution,
became deeply despondent. Upon being taken back to Newgate, she did not
say one word to any one; but when she was placed in her cell, she paced
to and fro in its narrow confines with that restless perturbed manner
which may be noticed in wild animals when caged.

After about an hour, then, she called to one of the attendants of the
prison, saying--

"I wish to speak to some one who has authority to hear what I may choose
to relate."

"The chaplain will come," was the reply.

"The chaplain!" repeated Mrs. Lovett with a burst of rage, "what do I
want with chaplains? Do I not know perfectly well that when a person is
found too idiotic for ordinary duties he is made a chaplain of a jail?
No! I will not speak to any of your chaplains."

"Well, I never!" said the turnkey. "Our chaplain for certain ain't a
conjuror, but I never heard afore that he was sent here on account of
being weak in the upper story. It's likely enough though for all that.
Perhaps Mrs. Lovett, you'd like to see the Governor?"

"Yes, he will do much better."

"Very good."

Such a prisoner as Mrs. Lovett could command an interview with the
Governor of Newgate at any reasonable period; and that functionary
having been apprised of her wish to see him, together with what she had
said of the chaplain, repaired to her cell with an ill-concealed smile
upon his face, for in his heart he perfectly agreed in Mrs. Lovett's
estimation of jail chaplains.

"Well, madam," he said. "What have you to say to me?"

"In the first place, sir, I am here without other clothing then that
which I now wear. Is it inconsistent with your regulations for me to
have a box of clothes brought me from my home?"

"Oh no--you can have them. I will get an order from the committing
magistrate for you to have your clothes brought here. Of course they
will be scrupulously examined before they reach you."

"What for?"

"It is our custom, that's all."

"You are afraid that I should escape?"

"Oh, no--no! No woman ever yet escaped from Newgate, and I don't think
any man ever will again."

"Perhaps not. For my part, I care not how many men escape, so that you
take good care Sweeney Todd does not."

"You may make yourself easy upon that score."

"Good--then when I get my clothes here, I will make a full confession of
all I know, regarding Todd's crimes."

"And your own?"

"Yes, if you like. And my own. Be it so. But mark me, I will have no
pettifogging, prying, canting parsons in the cell. If you bring your
chaplain here I am mute."

"Very well, I will say as much. Of course, if you are inclined to make a
confession, you can make it to whom you please."

"I should presume so."

With this, the Governor left Mrs. Lovett, and she commenced again her
uneasy pacing of the cell. In about two hours, a large box was brought
to her with nearly the whole of her clothes from her house in Bell Yard.
She selected a dress, with a number of heavy flounces, and put it on,
appearing to be much better satisfied than she had been.

"Ah," said the turnkey, "that's the way with women. Give them dress, and
even in Newgate they feel comfortable, but make 'em go shabby, and you
had much better hang them outright."

Another hour passed, and then the Governor, with a magistrate and
writing materials, came to the cell of the wretched woman.

"If Mrs. Lovett," he said, "you still think proper to persevere in your
intention of making a confession, this gentleman, who is a magistrate,
will in his official capacity receive it, and I will witness it; but you
do it entirely at your own risk and peril."

"I know it," replied Mrs. Lovett, "and I likewise do it to the risk of
the peril of Sweeney Todd."

"You can make what statement you please. How far it will be taken as
evidence against another, will depend entirely upon how it is in
essentials corroborated by others," said the magistrate.

"I am content. Now, sir, will you listen to me?"

"Most certainly."

The Governor arranged his writing materials, and while the magistrate
listened, Mrs. Lovett said in a calm clear voice--

"Believing that I am upon the brink of the grave, I make this statement.
Todd first connived the idea of that mutual guilt which we have both
since carried out. He bought the house in Bell Yard, as likewise the one
in Fleet Street, and by his own exertions, he excavated an underground
connection between the two, mining right under St. Dunstan's church, and
through the vaults of that building. When he had completed all his
arrangements, he came to me, and cautiously made his offer; but he did
not tell me that those arrangements were then complete, as that he
doubtless thought would have placed him too much in my power, in the
event of my refusing to co-operate with him in his iniquity. He need not
have given himself that amount of trouble; I was willing. The plan he
proposed was, that the pie-shop should be opened, for the sole purpose
of getting rid of the bodies of people, whom he might think proper to
murder, in or under his shop. He said that fearing nothing, and
believing nothing, he had come to the conclusion, that money was the
great thing to be desired in this world, inasmuch as to it he had found
that all people bowed down. He said that after the murder of any one, he
would take the flesh from the bones quickly, and convey to the shelves
of the bake-house in Bell Yard the pieces, as materials for the pies.
Minor arrangements he left to me. He murdered many. The business went on
and prospered, and we both grew rich. He refused me my share of the
spoil; and so I believe we both fell to our present state."

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett Makes Her Confession To The Governor Of
Newgate.]

"Have you any more to add?" said the magistrate.

"Nothing. But I will answer you any question you may choose to ask of me
upon the subject."

"No. It is not my province to ask anything. This is clearly a voluntary
statement and confession. No questions need be, or ought to be, asked
concerning it at all."

"Very well."

"You are aware that it will be used against you."

"And against Todd?"

"Yes, it is a strong corroboration of the evidence against him; and as
such, if there had been any doubt, would have gone far towards making
his conviction certain."

"Then I am satisfied, sir."

The magistrate slightly inclined his head and left the cell with the
Governor. When they were outside he said to the latter--

"I would advise you to keep a sharp watch upon that woman. My firm
opinion is, that she contemplates suicide, and that this statement is
merely made for the purpose of damaging Todd as much as possible."

"No doubt, sir. You may depend upon our keeping a good watch upon her.
It is quite impossible she can do herself a mischief. There is literally
nothing in the cell for her to convert to any such use; besides, I doubt
if really great criminals ever have the courage to die by their own
hands."

"Well, it may be so; of course your experience of these people is very
considerable. I only tell you my impression."

"For which, sir, I am much obliged, and will be doubly cautious."

Mrs. Lovett, when she was once more alone, paced her cell in the same
restless manner that she had done before. It was not then so much as it
is now the custom in Newgate to keep such a strict watch upon prisoners
before conviction, and with the exception that there was a man in the
passage close at hand, boxed up in a sentry-box, and whose duty it was
now and then to open the small square wicket in the cell door, and see
that the prisoner was all right, Mrs. Lovett had no surveillance over
her.

As she paced to and fro, she muttered to herself--

"Yes, I will do it. They think that I would go through the formal parade
of a trial. They think that I will stand in one of their courts
shrinking before a jury; but I will not--I will not. Oh no, Todd may do
all that. It is fitting that he should; but I, having failed in my one
great enterprise, will bid adieu to life."

She paused, for the man was at the wicket.

"Do you want anything?" he said.

"No, my friend. Only the poor privilege of being alone."

"Humph! I thought I heard you speaking."

"I was only rehearsing my defence."

"Oh, well; that's a new dodge anyhow. You take it easy, Ma'am Lovett, if
anybody ever did."

"Innocence, my friend, should be composed."

The turnkey stared at her through the little bars that crossed even that
small orifice in the door, and then closed it without another word. He
was scarcely used to such an amount of cool effrontery as he found
exhibited by Mrs. Lovett.

"Alone again," she said. "Alone again. I must be cautious, or they will
suspect my purpose. I must only converse with myself in faint whispers.
I would not be thwarted willingly in this my last and boldest act; and I
am resolved that I will not live to look upon the light of another day.
I am resolved, and wound up to my purpose. Oh, what poor fools they are
to fancy they can prevent such a one as I am from dying when and how I
wish! They have unwittingly supplied me with the ready means of death
to-day."

These words were spoken so low, that if the turnkey had been listening
with all his might on the other side of the door he could not possibly
have overheard them. The recent visit of that functionary, if the peep
through the little opening in the door could be called a visit, had
taught Mrs. Lovett to be more cautious how she trusted the air of her
cell with the secret resolves of her teeming brain.

But now that she had really and truly made up her mind to commit
suicide, all the worst passions of her nature seemed to be up in arms
and to wage wild war in her heart and brain; while amid them all was the
intense hatred of Todd, and the hope that she should be revenged upon
him, by his being brought to death upon the scaffold, triumphant over
every other.

"I had hoped," she said; "oh, how I had hoped, that I might have had the
satisfaction of witnessing such a scene--but that is past now. I must go
before him; but still it is with the conviction that die he must. I
feel, I know that he will not have the courage to do as I am about to
do, and if he had, I am certain he has not provided himself with the
means of success as I have provided myself."

These last words she scarcely whispered to herself, so very fearful was
she that they might be overheard by the turnkey who was so close at
hand.

And now a fear came over her that he was watching her through some
little hole or crevice of the door, and the very thought was sufficient
to make her wonderfully uneasy. If it were so, there was quite
sufficient reflected light in the cell to make every one of her actions
easily observable, and so her cherished design of taking her own life
would be defeated completely.

In lieu of a piece of whalebone in the back of her dress, there was a
small tin tube, soldered perfectly tight against the escape of any
fluid, and made fast at each end. That tin tube had been in the dress
she now selected for many months, and it was filled with a subtle liquid
poison, a very few drops of which would prove certainly fatal.

She dreaded that she should be observed to take this ingenious
contrivance from her dress and pounced upon before she could break it
open and make use of its contents.

She sat down on the miserable kind of bench which served as a bed, and
in a very low whisper to herself she said--

"I must wait till night--yes, I must wait till night!"

She knew well that the indulgence of a light would be denied to her, and
she smiled to herself, as she thought how that mistaken piece of prison
policy would enable her to free herself from what now was the bitter
encumbrance of existence.

"The twilight," she muttered, "will soon creep into this gloomy place,
and it will be my twilight, too--the twilight of my life before, and
only just before, the night of death begins. That night will know no
dawn--that long, long sleep which will know no waking! Yea, I will then
escape from this strong prison!"




                             CHAPTER CXXV.
          MRS. LOVETT SEES SOME TWILIGHT SPECTRES IN HER CELL.


After she had sat for some time in this state of feeling, and just
before the darkness got so apparent that but little could be seen of the
few articles that the place contained, she heard the door open.

A flash of light came into the place.

"Who is that?" she cried.

"Oh, you needn't think as it's robbers--it's only me," said a voice.
"You are quite safe here, ma'am. That's one good of being in the stone
jug: you needn't be afraid of thieves breaking into your place."

She saw that it was the turnkey whose duty it was to keep watch in the
passage outside her cell.

"What do you want here?" she said, "Cannot I have the poor privilege of
being left alone?"

"Oh, yes, only it's your rations' time, and here's your boiled rice and
water, and here's your loaf, mum. In course, that ain't exactly the sort
of thing you have been accustomed to; but it's all the county
allows--only between you and me and the post, Mrs. Lovett, as they say
you have got a pretty heavy purse, you can have just what you like."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, in a moderate way you know. You have only to pay, and you can have
anything."

"Then even Newgate is like the rest of the world. Money rules even here,
does it?"

"Why, in a manner of speaking, a guinea is worth twenty-one shillings
here, just the same as it is outside, ma'am."

"Then how much will purchase my liberty?"

The turnkey shook his head.

"There, ma'am, you ask for an article that I don't deal in. My shop
don't keep such a thing as liberty. What I mean is, that you may have
just what you like to eat and drink."

"Very well. In the morning you can bring me what I order."

"Oh, yes--yes."

"I will pay handsomely for what I do order, for I have, as you say, a
heavy purse. Much heavier, indeed it is, than any of you imagine, my
friends."

"Your humble servant, ma'am. I only wish Newgate was full of such as
you."

"Ah, I hear a footstep. Who is it that is about to intrude upon me
to-night?"

"It's the chaplain."

"The chaplain? I thought he understood that I declined his visits
completely."

"Why, you see, ma'am, so you did, but it's his duty to go the round of
all the cells before the prison shuts up for the night, so he will come,
you see; and if I might advise you, ma'am, I should say be civil to him
whatever you may think, for he can do you an ill turn if he likes in his
report. He has more underhanded sort of power than you are aware of,
Mrs. Lovett; so you had better, as I say, be civil to him, and keep your
thoughts to yourself. Where's the odds, you know, ma'am?"

"I am much obliged to you for this advice, and I will pay you for it.
There is a couple of guineas for you as a slight remembrance of me, and
let others say what they will, you at least will not accuse me of
ingratitude for any benefit conferred upon me."

"That I won't, ma'am; but here he comes. Mum is the word about what I
have said, or else my place would not be worth much, I can tell you."

"Depend upon me."

The turnkey, with a great show of respect, backed out of the cell as the
chaplain entered it.

"Well, Mrs. Lovett," said the pious individual, "I hope to find you in a
better frame of mind than upon my last visit to you."

"Sir," said Mrs. Lovett, "if you will come to me at your own hour in the
morning, I shall then present myself to you in a different manner, and I
shall no longer object to anything you may be pleased to say to me."

"What a blessed conversion. Really, now, this is very satisfactory
indeed. Mrs. Lovett, of course you are a very great sinner, but if you
attend to me, I can warrant your being received in the other world by
ten thousand angels."

"I thank you, sir. Half the number would be quite sufficient, I feel
assured, for my poor deserts."

"Oh no, ten thousand--ten thousand. Not one less than that number. But
if you have any doubts about the reality of flames everlasting, I shall
have great satisfaction in removing them, by holding your hand for a few
moments in the flame of this candle."

"You are very kind," said Mrs. Lovett, "but I shall be quite as well
convinced if you hold yours, as I shall then I hope see the agony
depicted in your countenance."

"Humph!--ah! No, I would rather not exactly. But quite rejoicing that
you are in so very pious a frame of mind, I shall have the pleasure of
seeing you to-morrow morning at eleven o'clock."

"That will do very well," said Mrs. Lovett.

The chaplain, thinking he had made quite a wonderful convert in Mrs.
Lovett, and with serious thoughts of getting somebody to write a tract
for him on the subject, left the cell, little suspecting how he was to
be duped.

"Well, you did gammon him," said the turnkey, "I will say that for you."

"Can you not leave me a light?"

"Agin the rules. Can't do it; but I'll wait till you have put the
mattress to rights, if you like."

"Oh, no. It will do very well. Good night."

"Good night, Ma'am Lovett, and thank you for me. They may say what they
likes about you, but I will stick up for you, so far that you are
liberal with your tin, and that's a very good thing indeed. I ain't
quite sure that it isn't everything, as this here world goes."

The door of the cell was closed, and the last rays of the turnkey's
candle disappeared. Mrs. Lovett was alone again in her dreary cell.

The darkness now was very intense, indeed: for during the few minutes
that she had been conversing with the chaplain, the twilight had almost
faded away, dropping quite into night, so that not an object was visible
in the cell. She heard the turnkey's footsteps die away in the distance,
and then indeed she felt truly alone.

"And I shall not see the sunlight of another day," she said. "My
pilgrimage is over."

She pronounced these words with a shudder, for even she could not at
such a moment feel quite at ease. She held in her hands the means of
death, and yet she hesitated--not that she had the remotest intention of
foregoing her fixed resolve; but feeling that at any moment she had it
in her power now to carry it out, she lingered there upon the shores of
life.

"And it has come to this," she said. "After all my scheming--after all
my resolves, it has come to suicide in a felon's cell. Well, I played a
daring game, and for heavy stakes, and I have lost, that is all."

She covered her eyes with her hands for several minutes, and slowly
rocked to and fro.

Who shall say what thoughts crossed that bold bad woman's soul at that
time? Who shall say that in those few moments her memory did not fly
back to some period when she was innocent and happy?--for even Mrs.
Lovett must have been innocent and happy once; and the thought that such
had been her blessed state, compared to what it was now, was enough to
drive her mad--quite mad.

When she withdrew her hands from before her eyes she uttered a cry of
terror. Memory had conjured up the forms of departed spirits to her; and
now so strong had become the impression upon her mind in that hour of
agony, that she thought she saw them in her cell.

"Oh, mercy--mercy!" she said. "Why should I be tortured thus? Why should
I suffer such horrors? Why do you glare at me with such fiery eyes for,
horrible spectres!"

[Illustration: Mrs. Lovett In Newgate.--Is Conscience-Stricken.]

She covered up her eyes again; but then a still more terrible
supposition took possession of her, for instead of fancying that the
spectres were in the darkness of the cell at some distance from her, she
thought that they all came crowding up to within an inch of her face,
gibing and mocking.

"Off--off!" she cried, as she suddenly stretched out her arm. "Do not
drive me quite mad."

Her eyes glared in the darkness like those of some wild animal. They
looked phosphorescent, and for some time such was the agony and the
thraldom of her feelings, that she quite forgot she had the means of
death in her hands.

She began to question the spirits that fancy presented in the darkness
as thronging her cell.

"Who are you?" she said. "I know you not. I did not kill you! Why do you
glare at me? And you, with your face matted with blood, I did not kill
you. Who are you, too, with those mangled limbs? I killed none of you.
Go to Sweeney Todd--go to Sweeney Todd!"

She kept her hands stretched out before her, and she fancied that it was
only by such an action that she kept them from touching her very face.
Then she dropped upon her knees, and in the same wild half-screaming
voice she spoke again, crying--

"Away with you all! Todd it was that killed you--not I. He would have
killed me, too. Do you hear, that he tried to kill me? but he could not.
What boy are you? Oh, I know you now. He sent you to the madhouse. You
are George Allan. Well, I did not kill you. I see that there is blood
upon you! But why do you all come to me and leave Todd's cell
tenantless, except by himself? for you cannot be here and there both!
Away, I say! Away to him! Do not come here to torture me!"

Tap--tap--tap came a sound on the door of the cell.

"Hush!" she said. "Hush!"

"What's the matter?" said the turnkey.

"Nothing--nothing."

"But I heard you calling out about something."

"It is nothing, my friend. All is right. I was only--only praying."

"Humph!" said the turnkey. "If you were, it is something rather new, I
reckon. She can't do any mischief, that's one comfort; and many of the
worst ones as comes here don't pass very nice, cosy, comfortable nights.
They fancies they sees all sorts of things, they does. Poor devils! I
never seed nothing worse than myself or my wife in all my time, and I
don't think I ever shall."

Mrs. Lovett did not now utter one word until she was sure the turnkey
was out of hearing. That slight interruption had recalled her to
herself, and done much to banish from her disturbed imagination all
those fancied monsters of the brain which had disturbed her.

"Why did I yield even for a moment," she said, "to such a load of
superstition? I thought that even at such a moment as this I should be
free from such terrors. How I should have smiled in derision of any one
else who had been weak enough to give way to them--and yet how real they
looked. How very unlike the mere creations of a disturbed brain. Could
they be real? Is it possible?"

Mrs. Lovett shook a little as she asked herself these questions, and it
was only at such a moment that she could or was at all likely to ask
them, for our readers may well believe that such a woman could have had
no sort of belief in a providence, or she never, with her active
intellect, could have fallen into the mistake of supposing that she was
compassing happiness by committing crime.

For awhile now the doubt that she had suggested to herself shook her
very much. It was the very first time in all her wicked life that
anything like a perception of a future state had crossed her mind; and
each minute how fearfully to her the possibility, and then the
probability, that there really was another world than this, began now to
grow upon her.

That thought was more full of agony than the appearance of the spectres
had been to her--those spectres which were only called into existence by
her own consciousness of overpowering guilt and deep iniquity.

"I am going now," she said. "I am going. World that I hate, and all upon
thee, farewell!"

She broke the tin case containing the poison, and applying one of the
broken ends to her lips, she swallowed two drops of the deadly liquid,
and fell dead upon the floor of her cell.




                             CHAPTER CXXVI.
                 SWEENEY TODD IS PLACED UPON HIS TRIAL.


It was about eight o'clock in the morning that the officials of Newgate
found their way to the cell of Mrs. Lovett. At first they thought that
she was sleeping upon the floor of her prison, but when they picked her
up, they soon became aware of what had really happened, and the alarm
spread through the prison.

The governor was vexed, and the chaplain was vexed, and when the sheriff
was sent for, he, too, was vexed, so they all revenged themselves upon
the turnkey, whose duty it was to be in the passage adjoining the cell,
and they fancied they met the justice of the case by discharging him.

Of course, in a very few hours the news of Mrs. Lovett's suicide became
known all over London, with very many exaggerations; and there was not
one person in the whole of the vast population of the great city who did
not know the fact, save and except that man who would feel most
interested in it. We, of course, allude to Sweeney Todd.

He, in his cell in Newgate, saw no newspapers, and held no conversation
with the world without; and as none of the persons in any way connected
with the prison chose to inform him of what had happened, he had not the
least idea but that Mrs. Lovett was, along with him, suffering all the
terrors of suspense antecedent to her trial upon the serious charge
impending over her.

Of course when the day of his, Todd's, trial should arrive, the fact
could no longer be kept secret from him; and that day come at last to
wither up any faint hopes that he might cling to.

Scarcely ever in London had such an amount of public excitement been
produced by any criminal proceedings, as by the trial of Sweeney Todd.
While he pursued a monotonous life from day to day in his cell, haunted
by all sorts of fears, and the prey of the most dismal apprehensions,
the public appetite had been fed by all sorts of strange and vague
stories concerning him.

The most hideous crimes had been laid to his charge; and in the
imagination of the people, the number of his victims was quadrupled, so
that when the morning of his trial arrived, so great was the excitement,
that business in the City was almost at a stand still, and sober-minded
men who did not see any peculiar interest in the sayings and doings of a
great criminal, were of course disgusted that the popular taste should
run that way.

As regarded Todd himself, he had gone into Newgate with a fixed
determination in his own mind to commit suicide if he possibly could;
but he had not taken the precaution that Mrs. Lovett had long before, in
providing the means of so doing; and consequently he was thrown upon the
scanty resources that might present themselves to him in the prison.

That those resources would be few and limited enough, may be well
imagined, for the most special instructions had been given by Sir
Richard Blunt to prevent Todd from committing suicide; and since Mrs.
Lovett had so disposed of herself despite the authorities, those
precautions had been redoubled; so that Todd, after two or three
abortive attempts, and thinking the matter over in every way, saw that
there was no chance for him in that way, and he made up his mind to
abide his trial, with the hope that he might, during the course of it,
be able to say enough to make Mrs. Lovett's conviction certain, while he
felt certain that he could not possibly make his own situation worse
than it was.

He thought, too, that perhaps after conviction he might behave so
cunningly as to deceive his jailer into an idea that he was full of
contrition and resignation, and so, at some ungarded moment, achieve the
object that now he felt to be impossible.

With these hopes and feelings, then, little suspecting that Mrs. Lovett
had already removed her case to a higher tribunal, Sweeney Todd awaited
his trial.

Probably he had no idea of the amount of excitement that his case had
created outside the prison. The customary calm of the officials of the
jail, had deceived him into a belief, that after all it was no such
great matter; but he quite forgot that that was a professional calm,
with which the people had nothing to do, and in which it was not at all
likely they would participate.

The Governor came into his cell about a quarter before nine o'clock on
the morning fixed for his trial.

"Sweeney Todd," he said, "you are wanted in court."

"I am ready," said Todd.

He rose with alacrity, and accompanied the Governor and two turnkeys. It
was the custom then to place prisoners accused of such heavy offences as
fell to Todd's charge in irons, and if the authorities had any suspicion
of violent intentions upon the part of such prisoners, the irons
accompanied them to the bar of the Old Bailey. Todd was so accompanied;
and as he walked along, his irons made a melancholy clank together.

His imprisonment preceding his trial had been uncommonly short, but yet
it had been sufficient to bring him down greatly in appearance. He had
never been one of the fat order of mortals, but now he looked like some
great gaunt, ghost. Every patch of colour had forsaken his cheeks, and
his eyes looked preternaturally lustrous.

Those who had not been accustomed to the sight of him during his
imprisonment in Newgate, shrunk from him as he followed the Governor
through the gloomy passages of the prison. Two well-armed officers keep
close upon his heels, so that Todd could not complain of a want of
attendants.

[Illustration: Todd Goes To Take His Trial.]

Even he recoiled when he was brought into the court of the Old Bailey,
for it was a complete sea of heads; and from the dock he could hear the
roar and the shout, and the shrieks of people outside, who were still
struggling for admission.

It was then that the idea first seemed to strike him that the public, in
him, had recognised one of those notorious criminals, that awaken in no
small degree popular indignation by their acts. Indeed, upon his first
appearance in the court, there was a strange kind of groan of
execration, which was tolerably evident to all, and yet not defined
enough for the judge to take any notice of.

The strife continued at the door of the court, and it was quite evident
that the officers were engaged in a severe struggle with the crowd
outside.

"Let the doors be closed," said the judge; "the court is already
inconveniently crowded."

Upon this order, the officers redoubled their exertions; and being
assisted by some of the spectators already within the court, who were
fearful of being trampled to death if the crowd should once get in, the
doors were made to shut, and fastened.

A yell of rage and disappointment came from the mob; and then a loud
voice, that towered above all other noises, shouted--

"Bring Todd out and we will hang him at once without any further
trouble. We only want Todd!"

The countenance of the prisoner turned as white as paper, and his
glaring eyes were fixed upon the doors of the court.

"It is quite impossible," said the judge, "that the business of the
court can be carried on under these circumstances; I hope that the civil
power will be sufficient to repress this tumult without, otherwise it
will be my duty to send for a guard of military, and then bloodshed may
be the consequence, from which those who create this riot alone will be
in any way answerable."

"Bring him out!" cried a hundred voices. "Out with him! Todd--Todd! We
want Todd."

There was then such a furious hammering at the doors of the court, that
it was quite impossible to hear what any one said. Sir Richard Blunt
suddenly appeared on the bench, and leaning over to the judge, he said--

"My lord, I am collecting a force with which I shall be able to clear
the entrances to the court."

"I wish you would, Sir Richard. This riot is most disgraceful."

"It is, my lord; but it shall be suppressed now with as much speed as
may be."

With this, Sir Richard immediately retired. He collected together a
force of fifty constables, and forming them into a sort of wedge, he
suddenly opened a side door, and attacked the mob. The fight, for a
hand-to-hand fight it now was, did not last more than ten minutes, when
the mob gave way, and "every one for himself" became the cry. In five
minutes more the party of officers had possession of all the avenues to
the court, and a profound silence succeeded to the riot that had taken
place.

"I think now," said the judge "we may proceed to business. This riot has
been a most disgraceful one, and if the officers will bring any one
before me who has taken part in it, I will commit him to prison at
once."

"They are all dispersed, my lord," said Sir Richard.

"The court thanks you, sir," said the judge. "Let the proceedings
commence at once."

Todd now glared about him, and his lips kept moving as though he were
repeating something to himself in a whisper. The Governor of Newgate
leant forward, and said--

"Do you wish to say anything?"

"Yes. Where is _she_?"

"Mrs. Lovett do you mean?"

"I do. Why am I here, and she not? Where is she? If she be innocent, why
then so am I. I do not see her."

"She will not be here."

"Not here? How--why?"

"She is dead."

Todd nearly dropped to the floor, and from that moment a great portion
of his courage, small as it was, departed, and he looked like a ghost
rather than a living man. At times, he kept muttering to himself the
word--"Dead--dead--dead!"

The usual formalities were gone through, and then Todd was roused up to
plead to the indictment, charging him with the murder of Francis
Thornhill.

The governor touched him on the shoulder.

"Plead to the indictment," he said.

"Dead!" cried Todd. "Why is she dead?"

"Prisoner at the bar," said the clerk of the arraign. "Do you plead
guilty or not guilty to the charge here made against you?"

"Not guilty!" cried Todd, as he roused himself up, and glared at the
judge like an enraged tiger.

Government had entrusted the prosecution to the Attorney General of the
time being, and that functionary was in court. He rose to open the case,
and spoke as follows, amid the most breathless silence--

"My lord, and gentlemen of the jury--

"The prisoner at the bar was originally indicted along with a female
named Lovett--"

"Where is she?" said Todd.

"Prisoner," said the judge, "at the proper time you will have an
opportunity of making any observation you may think fit, but it is
scarcely necessary for me to inform you that this is not the time."

"She is not dead!" cried Todd. "She has been let escape by some
juggling, in order that all the vengeance of the law might be directed
against me. It is not true that she is dead. Some of you are chargeable
with allowing that woman to escape. I tell you that she is a fiend and
not a woman. But she has had gold at her disposal, and she has bribed
you all--I say she has bought you all."

"Prisoner," said the judge, "this cannot be permitted. You only deeply
prejudice your own case by this conduct."

"That is impossible. I know that you are all in one large conspiracy
against me, and you have let that woman escape, in order that the last
drop should not be wanting to fill my cup of bitterness to the
overflowing."

"It will be impossible," said the Attorney-General, "to proceed with the
case, if the prisoner at the bar continues these interruptions."

"Prisoner," said the judge, "I, and all here present, are disposed to
give any allowance and indulgence to a man in your situation; but let me
beg of you to be silent."

"I am done," said Todd, "but it is false to say that she is dead. That
fiend cannot die. She is a devil, I tell you all, and if there be any
here who fancy that she is dead, I tell them that they are mistaken. She
cannot be killed. I know that well. Go on with what you call your
proceedings; I have no more to say to you."




                            CHAPTER CXXVII.
                  THE TRIAL OF SWEENEY TODD CONTINUED.


This ebullition of feeling upon the part of Sweeney Todd was by some of
the spectators looked upon as a vague indication of insanity, while some
of the members of the bench looked very mysterious, and asked themselves
if it were not the first step in the direction of some very clever
defence. But then they were gentlemen who never exactly saw anything as
the world in general agrees to see it.

The judge shook his head as if he rather doubted Sweeney Todd's implicit
promise that he would not again interrupt the proceedings; and among the
whole of the spectators of that most extraordinary trial, the most
intense interest was evidently rather on the increase than the
diminution.

The judge finding that Todd did not again say anything for a few
moments, slightly inclined his head to the Attorney-General, as much as
to say--"Pray get on, now that there seems an opportunity of so doing;"
and that personage, learned in the law, accordingly rose again, and
having adjusted his gown, addressed himself again to the case before
him, with his usual skill.

"My lords, and gentlemen of the jury--

"If this were only some ordinary everyday proceeding, I should not sit
so calmly under the indecorous interruptions of the prisoner at the bar;
but when I feel, in common with all here present, that that person has
so great a stake as his life upon the issue of this investigation, I am
disposed in all charity to allow a latitude of action, that otherwise
would not, and could not, be endured.

"Gentlemen of the jury, I yet hope that these unseemly interruptions are
over, and that I shall be permitted in peace to make those remarks to
you, which it is my duty to make on behalf of the crown, who prosecutes
in this serious case.

"Nothing can be further from my wish than to heighten by any strength of
phraseology or domestic detail the case against the prisoner at the bar.
I shall confine myself to a recital of the bare facts of the case,
feeling that, while I cannot detract from them, they are of such a
character of horror, as to require no adventitious aid from the art of
the orator.

"Gentlemen, it appears that the prisoner at the bar is arraigned for the
wilful murder of Francis Thornhill. From what information we have been
able to collect, the prisoner, Sweeney Todd, is a native of the north of
England. He came to London about eighteen years ago, and was in very
great poverty, when he opened a small barber's shop in Crutched Friars.
He remained in that shop about seventeen months, and then paid one
hundred and twenty-five pounds for the lease of a house in Fleet Street,
for which he was thus only to pay a rental to the Skinners' Company of
seventeen pound ten per annum, he consenting to keep the premises in
ordinary repair.

"The lower part of this house had been a small hosier's; but the
prisoner at the bar altered it into a barber's shop, and he has there
continued to reside until his arrest upon the serious charge which we
are brought here to investigate.

"What were the pursuits of the prisoner during his occupancy of that
house, it is not our province just now to inquire, as all our attention
must be directed to a consideration of the one charge, to answer to
which he stands at the bar of this court; and I shall, therefore,
proceed to detail the evidence upon which the prosecution founds that
charge:--

"It appears that upon the third day of August last, a ship of 400 tons
burthen, called the Star, arrived in the London Docks. On board of that
ship was the captain, and a crew of nine seamen, and two boys. As
passengers, there was a Colonel Jeffery, and a Mr. Thornhill, whose
death is the motive of the present proceedings. There was likewise a
large dog named Hector on board the vessel, which was very much attached
to Mr. Thornhill.

"Now, gentlemen of the jury, it had so happened that Francis Thornhill
had been commissioned, during the progress of a wreck at sea by a young
gentleman named Mark Ingestrie, to take a certain String of Oriental
Pearls, valued at somewhere about sixteen thousand pounds sterling, to a
young lady in London, named Johanna Oakley; and this Francis Thornhill,
fully believing that Mark Ingestrie had perished at sea, was most
anxious to fulfil his request regarding this valuable and important
String of Pearls.

"As early as possible he landed from the ship, taking the String of
Pearls with him, and his faithful dog Hector accompanied him on shore."

At this moment, Hector, who was in court, having for the second time
heard his name mentioned, began to think probably that something was
going on concerning him, and he set up a loud bark of defiance.

The effect of this was greatly to interest some of the auditory, while
it brought a smile to the faces of others. Todd turned deadly pale, and
in a voice of alarm, he cried--

"Keep off the dog--keep off the dog, I say!"

"Bow!--wow!--wow!" barked Hector again.

"That dog," said the judge, "must be immediately removed from the court.
Officers, see to it."

"I beg, my lord," said the Attorney-General, "that you will allow him to
remain, for I assure your lordship that he is a witness in this most
important case."

"A witness?"

"Yes, my lord; I speak advisedly, and as a favour I hope your lordship
will permit him to remain."

"Will anybody keep him quiet?"

"Oh, yes, your worship," cried the ostler. "I'll keep Pison like a mouse
as has fainted clean away."

"Who is that man, and what does he say?" said the judge.

"My lord," said the Attorney-General, "he says he can keep the dog quite
quiet if you will allow him to remain."

"Oh, very well. Pray proceed, Mr. Attorney."

The Attorney-General then resumed.

"With the String of Pearls then, and the dog, which the jury have seen,
Mr. Francis Thornhill went into the City to fulfil the request of Mark
Ingestrie. The address he had was to Mr. Oakley, a spectacle-maker in
the City, with whom Miss Oakley, who was to have the String of Pearls,
resided.

"Gentlemen of the jury, neither Francis Thornhill nor the String of
Pearls ever reach their destination. It appears that on his route,
Thornhill went into the shop of the prisoner at the bar to be shaved,
and no one ever saw him come out again. The dog though was found sitting
at the door of the shop, and when Todd opened his shop-door, the dog
rushed in and brought out his master's hat.

"Gentlemen, the captain of the ship and Colonel Jeffery, both became
very anxious concerning the fate of Mr. Thornhill, and they made every
inquiry. They questioned the prisoner at the bar, who at once admitted
that he had shaved him, but stated that he had left his shop when that
operation was over. The captain of the Star was compelled to go to
Bristol with his ship, but Colonel Jeffery, in conjunction with a
friend, pressed his inquiries about Mr. Thornhill without success. The
matter appeared to be involved in the most profound mystery, and the
only hope of an elucidation of it, consisted in the probability that
such a valuable piece of property as the String of Pearls would be sure
to turn up some day in some one's possession. Gentlemen, it did so turn
up. It appeared that at Hammersmith resided a Mr. John Mundell, who lent
money upon securities, and it will be deposed in evidence, that one
evening the prisoner at the bar, magnificently attired, and in a
handsome coach, went to this Mr. Mundell, and pawned a string of pearls
for some thousands of pounds.

"It is to be regretted that this Mundell cannot be brought before the
jury. He is dead, gentlemen; but a confidential clerk of his, who saw
the prisoner at the bar, will depose to the facts.

"We thus then, gentlemen of the jury, commit the prisoner with the
disappearance of Thornhill, and now we come to the strongest features of
this most remarkable case.

"It appears that for a considerable time past, the church of St.
Dunstan's had become insufferable from a peculiar stench with which the
whole of that sacred edifice appeared to be constantly filled, and it
baffled all the authorities to account for it.

"No one had been entombed in any of the vaults beneath the church for a
considerable time, and in fact, there was no apparent reason for the
frightful miasmatic odour that upon all occasions filled the edifice,
and day by day got worse instead of better. Scientific men, gentlemen of
the jury, were consulted with regard to this stench in the church, and
various very learned theories were broached upon the subject; but no one
thought of making an accurate examination of the vaults beneath the
church, until Sir Richard Blunt, the well-known magistrate, privately
undertook it.

"Gentlemen, Sir Richard Blunt found that almost every vault was full of
the fresh remains of the dead. He found that into old coffins, the
tenants of which had mouldered to dust, there had been thrust fresh
bodies with scarcely any flesh remaining upon them, but yet sufficient
to produce the stench in the church, by the effluvia arising from them,
and finding its way into the pews. In one vault, too, was found the
contents of which were too horrid for description; suffice it that it
contained what butchers, when speaking of slaughtered animals, call the
offal. The stench in St. Dunstan's Church was no longer a mystery.

"Well, gentlemen of the jury, Sir Richard Blunt persevered in his
investigations, and found that there was an underground connection from
exactly beneath the shaving shop of the prisoner at the bar, and the
cellarage of a house in Bell Yard, Temple-bar, which was his property;
and which was in the occupation of a female, named Lovett, who this day
would have stood at the bar by the side of the prisoner, had she not,
despite every vigilance used to prevent such an act, succeeded in
poisoning herself, while in prison in Newgate.

"Gentlemen of the jury, it will be shown in evidence that the way the
larger portion of the flesh of Todd's victims was got rid of was by
converting it into meat and pork pies upon the premises of Mrs. Lovett.

"Beneath Todd's shop was found a diabolical contrivance, by which he
could make any one he pleased fall through the floor upon the chair they
sat on to be shaved, while an empty chair, in all respects similar, took
the place of the one that had been occupied by the unfortunate victim.
If the unhappy man, thus betrayed in a moment of confidence, was not
killed by the fall, he would, at all events, be sufficiently stunned to
become an easy prey to Sweeney Todd, when he chose to go down and
despatch him.

"And now, gentlemen of the jury, and you, my lord, I may be told that
these wholesale murders have nothing to do with the indictment, which
simply charges the prisoner at the bar with the wilful murder of Francis
Thornhill; but I reply that it was impossible to make apparent to the
jury the mode by which Francis Thornhill came by his death, without
going into these painful details. Todd's house was found crammed with
property and clothing sufficient for one hundred and sixty people!"

A thrill of horror pervaded the court at this announcement.

"Yes, gentlemen of the jury; and among that clothing is the sleeve of a
jacket, which will be sworn to as having belonged to Francis Thornhill;
but we have yet more cogent evidence of the fact that Thornhill met his
death at the hands of the prisoner at the bar. His hat, gentlemen, will
be identified by the dog now in court. But, gentlemen, is that enough?
No, the law wisely looks for the body of a murdered man; and I do not
call to mind an instance of a conviction following from murder where
there has not been some satisfactory identification of the remains of
the murdered man. We will produce that proof. Among the skeletons found
contiguous to Todd's premises, was one which will be sworn to as being
that of the deceased, Mr. Thornhill. One bone of that skeleton will be
produced in court, and sworn to by a surgeon who had the care of it,
when once fractured on board ship, and who, from repeated examinations
such a surgeon only could make, knows it well."

This announcement on the part of the Attorney-General, produced an
enormous amount of excitement in court, for many persons had come,
prepossessed with the idea that the non-production of the dead body of
the alleged murdered man would be a serious hitch in the prosecution.

Todd looked up, and in a loud clear voice he cried--

"No! no!"

"Yes," added the Attorney-General. "Yes. Gentlemen of the jury, that is
all I have to say for the prosecution. The facts are as clear as light,
and you will hear from the mouths of creditable witnesses the various
particulars which it has been my duty on behalf of the prosecution to
lay before you this day."




                            CHAPTER CXXVIII.
           TODD'S TRIAL CONTINUES, AND GOES ALL AGAINST HIM.


The Attorney-General sat down.

It was quite clear now to the most superficial observer, that the case
against Todd had been just picked out for convenience sake, and was one
among many. From the moment that the Attorney-General had mentioned what
facts he could prove, the fate of the murderer was certain to the minds
of all. They looked upon him in every respect as a doomed man.

Of course the remarks of the Attorney-General occupied a much greater
space than we have felt that, in justice to the other portion of our
story, we could give to them; but what we have presented to the reader
was the essential portion of what he said.

All eyes were turned upon Todd, to note how he took the statement for
the prosecution; but there was little to be gleaned from his face. His
eyes seemed to be wandering over the sea of faces in the court, as if he
were in search of some one whom he was disappointed in not seeing. There
was a pause of some few moments duration, and then the Attorney-General
called his first witness, who was examined by the Junior Counsel for the
prosecution.

This witness's deposition was very simple and concise.

"I was master of the ship, Star," he said, "and arrived in the Port of
London on the day named in the indictment against the prisoner at the
bar. Mr. Francis Thornhill had mentioned to me and to Colonel Jeffery
that he had a valuable String of Pearls to take to a young lady, named
Johanna Oakley, and he left the ship with his dog, Hector, to deliver
them. I never saw him again from that hour to this. I was anxious about
him, and called at the barber's shop in Fleet Street, kept by the
prisoner at the bar. The prisoner readily admitted that such a person
had been shaved at his shop, and then had left it, but why the dog
remained he could not tell. The dog named Hector was at the door of the
prisoner's house. He had a hat with him. My name is Arthur Rose
Fletcher, and I am forty two years of age."

"Is this the hat that you saw with the dog in Fleet Street?"

The hat was produced.

"Yes, that is the hat. I will swear to it."

"Whose hat is it, or was it?"

"It belonged to Mr. Thornhill, who wore it on the day he left the ship
to go into the city with the String of Pearls."

"That is all then, Mr. Fletcher, that we need trouble you with at
present."

The judge now interposed; and in a mild voice addressing Todd, he said--

"It is not too late for you to consent to the appointment of counsel to
watch your case. I dare say some gentleman of the bar will volunteer to
do so."

"With the prisoner's consent," said a counsel, who was sitting at the
table below the judge, "I will attend to the case."

"Be it so," said Todd, gloomily.

Upon this the counsel rose, and addressing the captain of the ship, who
had not yet left the witness-box, he said to him--

"Mr. Fletcher, how is it that you can so positively identify this hat of
the alleged murdered Mr. Thornhill, after such a space of time?"

"By a remarkable flaw in the rim of it, sir. An accident occurred on
board the ship, by which Mr. Thornhill's hat was burnt, and this is the
same hat. When he left the ship we joked him about it, and he said that
perhaps he would buy a new one in the City."

"Indeed. Then he might have sold this one."

"He might, certainly."

"And so the dog seeing it left at some place where it was sold or given
away, and not comprehending such transaction, might have taken
possession of it."

"Of that I can say nothing."

"Very well, Mr. Fletcher. I don't think I need trouble you any further.
This affair of the hat seems to fall to the ground most completely."

The Attorney-General did not say a word aloud, but he whispered
something to the junior, who nodded in reply. The next witness called,
was John Figgs, the groom at the coach office, who had rescued Hector
from Todd's malevolence. His testimony was as follows:--

"I saw a crowd of people round the door of Todd's shop, and I went over
to see what it was all about. The dog as I calls Pison, but as everybody
else calls Hector, was trying to get into the shop. Some one opened the
door, and then he came out with a hat in his mouth, after rummaging all
over the shop and upsetting no end of things. I tried to coax him away,
but he would not come by no means. At last, the next day I found him
very bad, and that he had been pisoned, and so I calls him Pison, and
took him to the stables and got him over it."

"What is it he says he calls the dog?" asked the judge, with a very
perplexed look.

"Pison, my lord."

"But what is Pison?"

"He means Poison."

"Oh, is that it; then why don't he say Poison? It's very absurd for
anybody to say Pison, when they mean Poison all the while."

"It's all the same," said the groom. "Pison is my way, and the t'other
is yourn, that's all!"

"What became of the hat?" asked the junior counsel for the prosecution.

"I don't know. When I found the dog, in a wery bad state indeed, it was
gone."

"Now, John Figgs," said Todd's counsel, "could you identify that hat
again among five hundred hats like it?"

"Five hundred?"

"Yes, or a thousand."

"Well, I should say not. It wouldn't be an easy matter to do that, I
take it. I could tell you a particular horse among any lot, but I ain't
so well known in the way of hats."

"Is this the hat? Can you deliberately swear that this is the hat in
question?"

"I shouldn't like to swear it."

"Very well, that will do."

John Figgs was permitted to go down upon this, and it was quite evident
that some faint hope was beginning to quicken in the eye of Sweeney
Todd, as he found that his self-appointed counsel began to make so light
of the evidence of the hat. For the moment he quite forgot what proofs
were still to come to fix the deed of murder upon him.

Colonel Jeffery was now called. He deposed clearly and distinctly as
follows:--

"I knew Mr. Thornhill, and much regretted his loss. In company with Mr.
Fletcher I went to Todd's shop to make some inquiry about him, to the
effect that he had been shaved there, and had then left. I did not feel
satisfied, and when Mr. Fletcher was found to be in London, I got the
assistance of a friend of mine, named Rathbone, and together we
prosecuted what inquiries we could. I picked up a hat from Todd's
passage, and after putting myself into communication with Sir Richard
Blunt, I delivered the hat to him. I have been in constant communication
with Sir Richard Blunt upon the subject of this inquiry for a long time.
We found that the prisoner at the bar had a sort of apprentice or errand
boy in his shop, named Tobias Ragg, and we endeavoured to get some
disclosures from that boy, when he suddenly disappeared. I found him
again on a doorstep in the City, and he has made certain disclosures
which he will repeat in evidence to the court to-day. On the 4th of last
month I accompanied Sir Richard Blunt to a cellar beneath Todd's shop,
and he showed me a contrivance in the roof by which any one could be let
down. We took workmen with us and made certain alterations. I afterwards
accompanied Doctor Steers of the ship Star to the vaults of St.
Dunstan's, and I saw Doctor Steers take a bone from there."

"Pray look at that hat, Colonel Jeffery. Is it the same you found at
Todd's door?"

"It is."

"Did you mark the bone that Doctor Steers took from the vaults of St.
Dunstan's?"

"I did, and I may state to save trouble, that I placed upon the hat a
private mark by which I am enabled to swear to it."

Todd's counsel rose, and in a very respectful voice, he said--

"Did you ever see this String of Pearls, about which so much fuss is
made, colonel?"

"Yes; Mr. Thornhill showed it to me."

"Oh. Do you know a young lady named Johanna Oakley?"

"I had that pleasure."

"You had? Have you not now?"

"I have the honour of her acquaintance since her marriage; she is now
Mrs. Ingestrie."

The counsel seemed to be a little staggered by this answer, but after a
moment or two, he resumed saying--

"Do you know a young lady named Arabella Wilmot?"

"I did."

"What, colonel, did again? Is she married?"

"Yes; that young lady is now Mrs. Jeffery, my wife."

The counsel had evidently intended to make some point against the
colonel's evidence, which was completely destroyed by the fact of the
two marriages. But he resumed the attack by changing his ground.

"Colonel," he said, "do you know a boy named Tobias Ragg?"

"I do. He is a resident in my house."

"Will you take upon your self to swear that that boy, or lad, or
whatever he may be called, is in his right senses?"

"I will."

"Will you swear that he was never confined in a lunatic asylum, from
which he made his escape raving mad, and that since then you have not
kept him to listen to his wild conjectures and dreamy charges against
the prisoner at the bar?"

"I will swear that he is not mad, and--"

"Come, sir, I want an answer, yes or no."

"Then you will not get one. Your question involves three or four
propositions, some of which may be answered in the negative, and some in
the affirmative; so how can you get a reply of yes or no?"

"Come--come, sir. Remember where you are. We want no roundabout speeches
here, but direct answers."

"It is impossible to give a direct answer to such a speech as you made.
Nothing but ignorance or trickery could induce you to ask such a thing."

"We cannot allow such language here, sir. I call upon the court for its
protection against the insolence of this witness."

"The court does not think proper to interfere," said the judge, quietly.

"Oh, very well. Then I am done."

"But I am not," said the colonel. "I can inform you, and all whom it may
concern, that the proprietor of the lunatic asylum, in which the boy,
Ragg, was so unjustly confined, is now in Newgate, awaiting his trial
for that and other offences, and that I have succeeded in completely
breaking up the establishment."

The counsel did not think proper to say anything more to the colonel,
who was permitted, after firing this last shot at the enemy, to quit the
witness-box.

Sir Richard Blunt was the next witness called, and as his evidence was
expected to be very important indeed, all attention was paid to it.

There was that buzz of expectation throughout the court, which is always
to be heard upon such occasions, when anything very important is about
to take place, and every one shifted his place, in order the more
correctly to hear what was going on.

The Attorney-General himself arose to pursue the examination of Sir
Richard Blunt.

It was evident that the appearance of this witness roused Sweeney Todd
more than anything else had done since the commencement of the
proceedings. His eye lighted up, and setting his teeth hard, he prepared
himself, with his left hand up to his ear, to catch every word that
should fall from the lips of the man who had been his great enemy, and
who had wound around him the web in which he had been caught at last.

The appearance of Sir Richard Blunt was very attractive. There was
always about him an air of great candour, and the expression of his
features denoted generosity and boldness in a most astonishing degree.




                             CHAPTER CXXIX.
                  THE TRIAL OF SWEENEY TODD CONTINUED.


The peculiar circumstances under which Sir Richard Blunt had found out
all the villany of Todd, and overtook him and Mrs. Lovett in the midst
of their iniquities, were well-known to the people assembled in the
court, and some slight manifestations of applause greeted him as he
stood up in the witness-box.

This exhibition of feeling was not noticed by the court, and the
Attorney-General at once began his examination in chief.

"Sir Richard," he said, "will you have the kindness to put into the form
of a narration, what you have to say concerning the charge upon which
the prisoner at the bar is arraigned?"

"I will do so," replied Sir Richard, and then after a moment's pause,
during which you might have heard a pin drop in the court, so intense
was the stillness, the magistrate gave his important testimony against
the now trembling wretch at the bar of that solemn court.

"A considerable time ago," he said, "my attention was drawn to the
circumstance that a number of persons had disappeared, who were
residents about the neighbourhood of Fleet Street, and its vicinity.
Such disappearances were totally and perfectly unaccountable. Not a
trace could be found of very many respectable men, who had left their
houses upon various objects, and never returned to them.

"The most striking peculiarity of this affair was, that the men who
disappeared were for the most part great substantial citizens, who were
far from likely to have yielded to any of those temptations that at
times bring the young and the heedless in this great City into fearful
dangers.

"I saw the Secretary of State upon the subject; and it was agreed that I
was to have a _carte blanche_, as regarded expenses, and that I was to
give nearly the whole of my time and attention to the unravelling of the
mystery. It was then, that after my careful inquiry I found that out of
thirteen disappearances no less than ten had declared their intention to
be to get shaved, or their hair dressed, or to go through some process
which required them to visit a barber. I then, personally, called at all
the barber's shops in the neighbourhood, but never alone. To this fact
of having some one waiting for me in the shop, I no doubt owe my life,
for I have been eight times shaved and dressed by the prisoner at the
bar."

Todd uttered a deep groan, and looked at Sir Richard as though he would
have said--

"Oh, that I had you the ninth time so much at my mercy!"

There was quite a sensation, and a shudder through the court, as Sir
Richard then stated how many times he had run the fearful risk of death
at the hands of such a man as Todd; and then Sir Richard went on with
his narration, which deeply and powerfully interested the judge,
counsel, jury, and spectators.

"I did not find anything suspicious in the shop itself of the prisoner
at the bar; although each of these times that I was within it, I looked
at it narrowly; but I did find that he always made an effort to get the
person who was with me to leave the shop upon some pretext or another,
which, of course, never succeeded; and then without, in the least,
appearing vexed at the failure, he would go on with his shaving in the
coolest possible manner.

"This, however, was only suspicion, and I could take no advantage of it,
unless something else developed itself likewise; but that was not long
in happening. My attention was directed to the peculiar odour in St.
Dunstan's Church, and from the moment that it was so, I in my own mind
connected it with Sweeney Todd, and the disappearances of the persons
who had so unaccountably been lost in the immediate neighbourhood of
Fleet Street. In the midst of all this then, I had a formal application
made to me concerning the disappearance of Mr. Francis Thornhill, who
had been clearly traced to the shop of the prisoner at the bar, and
never seen by any one to leave it.

"From that moment I felt that it was in the prisoner's shop that the
parties disappeared, but the means by which they were murdered remained
a profound mystery, and I felt, that unless these means could be very
distinctly proved, a conviction would be difficult. I instituted a
careful search of the vaults beneath St. Dunstan's Church, and I found a
secret passage communicating with the cellar of the pie shop in Bell
Yard, and afterwards I found a similar passage communicating with the
cellar under the prisoner's shop.

"Upon reaching the latter cellar, the first object that presented itself
to me was, a chair fixed to the roof by its legs. That chair I at once
recognised as identically like the one in the shop, in which I had so
frequently sat, and in a moment the whole truth burst upon me. The plank
upon which the shaving chair rested, turned upon a centre, and could be
so made to turn by a simple contrivance above, so that any unfortunate
person could be let down in a moment, and the vacant or supplementary
chair would come up and take the place of the one that had been above.

"Prosecuting my researches, I found the skeleton of many persons in the
vaults, and much putrid flesh, which fully accounted for the odour in
St. Dunstan's Church. I found likewise that no meat from any butcher or
salesman ever found its way to the pie-shop in Bell Yard. So upon
research actuated by that fact, I found that the supply of flesh was
human, and that was the way the prisoner at the bar got rid of a great
portion of his victims.

"Measures were taken to prevent any more murders, by some persons in my
pay always following any one into the shop; and then, when the evidence
was all ready by the finding and identification of Mr. Francis
Thornhill's leg bone, I took measures to apprehend the prisoner at the
bar. I shall, of course, be happy to answer any questions that may be
asked of me."

The Attorney-General then spoke, saying--

"Have you found out by what means the shaving-chair in the shop of the
prisoner was prevented from falling at the moment any one sat in it?"

"Yes. By a simple piece of mechanism which communicated with the
parlour, he could release the swinging board or keep it firm at his
pleasure. I have had a model of the whole of the apparatus and building,
which will be laid before the jury. It is here in the hands of an
officer."

"Here you is," said Crotchet, coming forward with a large parcel in his
hands, which, upon being taken from its case, was found to be an
accurate representation of Todd's house, with the diabolical
contrivances he had got together for the purpose of murder.

The model was handed to the jury, and excited immense and well deserved
commendation.

"I have no further questions to ask of you, Sir Richard," said the
Attorney-General; "but I am sure the court and jury cannot but feel much
indebted to you for the very lucid manner in which you have given your
evidence."

"One moment, Sir Richard, if you please," said Todd's counsel as the
magistrate was about to leave the witness box. "I will not detain you
for long."

"I am quite at your service, sir," said Sir Richard Blunt.

"How was it then that after you felt convinced of the guilt of the
prisoner at the bar, as you state that you were, although I think upon
very insufficient grounds, that you did not at once arrest him? Does it
not seem very strange that you permitted him for some weeks to go on
just as usual?"

"I did not permit him to go on just as usual. I took every precaution to
prevent him from adding to the list of his offences. It is well known
that a person in my situation must not act upon his own convictions of
the guilt of any party. It was absolutely necessary that I should be
able to bring satisfactory proof before a jury of the guilt of the
prisoner at the bar, and it would have been quite premature to arrest
him until I had that proof."

"And pray, Sir Richard, when did you consider you had that proof?"

"When the surgeon was able to swear to a portion of the remains of Mr.
Francis Thornhill."

"Oh, then I am to understand that you rest the case for the prosecution
upon a bone?"

"I do not prosecute."

"But you took the prisoner into custody, sir; and am I to believe that
you did so solely on account of the finding a bone in some of the vaults
of St. Dunstan's?"

"You can conclude so."

"Oh, I can conclude so? Very well then. Gentleman of the jury, it
appears that the whole case against the prisoner at the bar, my worthy
and exemplary client, rests upon a bone. That will do, Sir Richard; we
will not trouble you any further. Perhaps the court will stop the case,
as it only rests upon a bone."

"Not exactly," said the judge.

The next witness was the surgeon, and his evidence was listened to with
great attention. He said--

"I was in the vaults of St. Dunstan's church, and I looked over a great
quantity of osteological remains. Among those remains I found a male
femur."

"A what, sir?" said Todd's counsel.

"It would be better," said the judge, mildly, "if the witness would be
so good as to give the vulgar names to what he may have to speak of, as
the jury may well be excused for not being in possession of anatomical
and scientific nomenclature."

"I will endeavour to do so," said the surgeon. "I beg to assure the
court, that it was from no feeling of pedantry that I used the
scientific terms; but they are so common professionally, that they are
used without thinking that they are other than the terms in common use."

"That is just the way I view it," said the judge, "and the court had not
the least idea of anything else. Pray go on, sir, with your evidence."

"I found, then, a large quantity of human bones," said the surgeon, "in
the vaults of St. Dunstan's, and among them a male thigh-bone, which I
have with me."

Here he produced from his great-coat pocket the bone he spoke of,
wrapped up in paper, and deliberately untying the string which bound the
paper to it, he handed it to the jury. One of that body, more bold than
the rest, took it, but several of the jurymen shrunk from it.

"Now, sir," said the Attorney-General, "can you upon your oath, without
the slightest reservation, take upon yourself to say whose thigh-bone
this was?"

"I can. It was the thigh-bone of Mr. Francis Thornhill."

"Will you state to the court and jury, the grounds upon which you arrive
at that conclusion?"

"I will, sir. Mr. Thornhill met with an accident of a tedious and
painful nature. The external condyle or projection on the outer end of
the thigh-bone, which makes part of the knee joint, was broken off, and
there was a diagonal fracture about three inches higher up upon the
bone. I had the sole care of the case, and although a cure was effected,
it was not without considerable distortion of the bone, and general
disarrangement of the parts adjacent. From my frequent examination I was
perfectly well acquainted with the case, and I can swear that the bone
in the hands of the jury was the one so broken, and to which I
attended."

"Very well, sir; that is all I wish to trouble you with."

The Attorney-General sat down, but Todd's counsel rose, and said--

"Did you ever have a similar case to that of Mr. Thornhill's under your
treatment?"

"Never a precisely similar one."

"But you have heard of such cases?"

"Certainly."

"They are sufficiently common, not to be positively rare and curious in
the profession?"

"They are not common, but still they do occur sufficiently often to lose
the character of rarity."

"Of course. You have no other means of identifying the bone, but by its
having been fractured in the way you describe?"

"Certainly not."

"Then, it may be the thigh-bone of any one who has suffered a similar
injury."

With this remark, the counsel sat down, and the surgeon was permitted to
retire. The bone was laid upon the counsel's table, and there it reposed
a sad memento of poor Thornhill, and a mute but eloquent piece of
evidence against the prisoner at the bar. Todd, however, did not seem to
be at all moved at the sight of the relict of the murdered victim.
Probably he had for too long a time been intimate with the remains of
mortality, during the frightful trade he had carried on, for such a
circumstance to touch him in any perceptible way.

The next witness called, was another medical man, who merely
corroborated the ship's-surgeon, as to the fact of the bone produced
having been fractured in the way described.




                             CHAPTER CXXX.
              TODD ENTERTAINS SOME HOPES OF AN ACQUITTAL.


The next witness was the sexton of St. Dunstan's.

"Will you state to the jury, when the last entombment took place in the
vaults of St. Dunstan's?" was the question asked of him.

"On the 30th. of January, five years ago," he replied, "a gentleman
named Shaw, from Chancery Lane, was placed in a vault, but no one since
then. The vaults were considered offensive to the living, and was not
used."

"Let the medical men be called again," said the Attorney-General.

They were so called; and the question put to them was, as to the age of
the bone produced in court. They both swore that it could not have been
six months in its present condition. It had all the aspect of a fresh
bone, and they entertained no sort of doubt upon the subject, but that
the flesh had been roughly taken off it, and then the slight remainder
had rapidly dried and decayed.

This, then, was the case for the prosecution, and it will be seen that
the evidence or confession of Mrs. Lovett was not at all made use of or
attended to, so that even in her dying hope of doing vast injury to
Todd, she failed. The case was considered to be good enough without such
testimony, and the lawyers, too, were of opinion that it would not be
received by the judge, even if tendered, under all the circumstances.

The Attorney-General rose again, and said--

"That is the case, my lord, and gentlemen of the jury, for the
prosecution; and we leave it in your hands to deal with as you shall
think fit."

Todd's counsel now rose to commence the speech for the defence, and he
spoke rather ingeniously, as follows--

"My lord, and gentlemen of the jury--

"I have, upon the part of my client, the prisoner at the bar, most
seriously to complain of the vast amount of extraneous matter that has
been mixed up with this case. To one grain of wheat, we have had whole
bushels of chaff; and gentlemen have been brought here surely to amuse
the court with long-winded romances.

"Gentlemen, the prisoner at the bar is clearly and distinctly charged
with the murder of one Francis Thornhill, and instead of any evidence,
near or remote, fixing that deed upon him, we have nothing but long
stories about vaults, and bad odours in churches, and moveable
floor-boards, and chairs standing on their heads, and vaults, and secret
passages, and pork pies! Really, gentlemen of the jury, I do think that
the manner in which this prosecution has been got up against my virtuous
and pious client, is an outrage to your common-sense."

Todd rather looked up at this. It was something to hear even an Old
Bailey counsel call him virtuous and pious; and a gleam of hope shot
across his heart that things might not be quite so hard with him after
all.

"This, gentlemen of the jury," continued the counsel, "is an attempt, I
must say, to take the life of a man from a variety of circumstances
external to the real charge to which he is called upon here to plead.
Let us examine the sort of evidence upon which it has been thought
proper to put a fellow-creature to this bar upon a charge affecting his
life.

"In the first place, we are told that a number of very respectable men
went out from their various respectable houses, and never went back
again. Pray, what has that to do with the death of one Francis
Thornhill? Then we are told that the respectable men went to get shaved;
and then that Sir Richard Blunt had a shave no less than eight times at
the prisoner's shop, and yet here he is quite alive and well to give his
evidence here to-day, and no one will say that Sir Richard Blunt is not
a respectable man. Then we have a bad smell in the church of St.
Dunstan's. Really, gentlemen of the jury, you might as well say that the
prisoner at the bar committed felony, because this court was not well
ventilated.

"We are told, to come more particularly to the evidence, such as it is,
bearing upon the case, that Francis Thornhill left a certain shop
intending to go into the City to a Miss Oakley, and that on the road he
went into the prisoner's shop to be shaved, and from that we are asked
to infer that he was murdered there, because nobody saw him come out.
Really, this is too bad! Hundreds of people may have seen him come out,
and no doubt did do so, but they happened not to know him, and so just
because no one was passing who could say, 'Ah! Mr. Thornhill, how do you
do? I see, you have had a clean shave to-day,' the prisoner at the bar
is to be declared guilty of murder.

"Then we are told a long story about a bone, and that is declared to be
a bone of the deceased. Gentlemen of the jury, what would you think of a
man who should produce a brick, and swear that it belonged to a certain
house? But this bone is to be identified on account of having been
fractured, when the medical witness swears that such fractures are far
from rare.

"Then again, a hat said to be the hat of the deceased is sworn to, as
belonging to him, because of some injury it had received. Granted that
it did belong to him. No doubt he sold it in Fleet Street and bought a
new one, and there is no proof that that hat produced is the same one
that is said to have been taken out of the prisoner's shop.

"I do think, gentlemen, that you will see upon what a string of
sophistry the evidence against the prisoner at the bar rests. Who shall
take upon himself to say that Mr. Thornhill is not now alive and well
somewhere? We all know that persons connected with the sea are rather
uncertain in their movements. But, gentlemen, the prisoner at the bar
has a plain unvarnished tale to tell, which will clear him from any
suspicions."

At this point, the learned counsel hitched up his gown upon his
shoulders, and settled his wig upon his head, as though preparing for a
grand effort, and then he continued--

"Gentlemen of the jury, my client is a religious man, as any one may see
by the mild and gentlemanly look of his amiable countenance. He took the
premises in Fleet Street in the pursuit of his highly useful calling;
and he had no more idea that there was a moveable board in his shop, and
that his shaving-chair would go down with any one, than the child
unborn. Is it likely that a man who could stoop to such baseness as to
make money by murder would occupy himself with such a trivial employment
as shaving for a penny? The deceased gentleman, Mr. Francis Thornhill,
if he be deceased at all, came into my worthy client's shop to be
shaved, and was, at that time, a little the worse for some small drops
that he had indulged himself with, no doubt, as he came along. The
prisoner at the bar did shave him; and then he said that he had to go
and see a young lady, and that he should buy a new hat as he went along.
The dog, about which so much has been said, came into the shop along
with his master, and while the shaving was going on found out, and
actually devoured, half a pound of tripe, off which the prisoner at the
bar was going to make his humble dinner.

"Oh! gentlemen of the jury, ask yourselves if a murderer is likely to
make half a pound of tripe satisfy him for dinner! Ask your own
consciences, and your own common-sense, that question.

"Well, gentlemen of the jury, when he was shaved, and after my client
had had to turn this dog twice out of his shop, Mr. Thornhill left and
went towards Fleet Market. The prisoner watched him from his door, and
actually saw him begin fighting with a porter at the top of the market;
and then as another person came in to be shaved, the prisoner at the bar
returned into his shop to attend to that customer, and saw no more of
Mr. Thornhill. In the course of a quarter of an hour, however, the dog
pushed the door of the shop open, and brought in a hat in his mouth, but
the prisoner turned him out again, and that is all he knows of the
transaction.

"Gentlemen of the jury, the prisoner at the bar is well known for his
benevolence and his piety. Even at a time when the bad odour in St.
Dunstan's induced many of the parishioners to go elsewhere, he always
attended his own church, and in the most pious and exemplary manner made
the responses. I ask you as men, gentlemen of the jury, if you could do
that with the consciousness that you had committed a murder?

"Gentlemen, it is for my client a most unfortunate thing that a person
named Lovett, who kept the pie-shop in Bell Yard, is not now in the land
of the living. If she were so, there is no doubt but that she would have
told some true tale of how the vaults beneath the old church connected
with her shop, and so have cleared the prisoner at the bar of all
participation in her crimes.

"That murder has been committed in conjunction with that woman, who
committed suicide rather than come forward and clear the prisoner at the
bar, against whom she had a spite, there can be no doubt; but,
gentlemen, it is the wrong man who now stands at this bar. The real
murderer has yet to be discovered; and therefore it is that I call upon
you, in the sacred name of justice, to acquit my client."

With this the counsel sat down, and Todd looked positively hopeful. He
drew a long breath or two, and ventured a keen glance towards the
jury-box.

"Do you call any witnesses," asked the junior counsel, "for the
prosecution?"

"No--no--no. Witnesses! Innocence is its own best safeguard."

"I waive my right of reply, my lord," said the Attorney-General.

Upon this, nothing remained for the judge to do but to sum up the
evidence; and after arranging his notes, he proceeded to do so, in that
clear and lucid style, for which some of our judges are so famous.

"The prisoner at the bar, Sweeney Todd, stands charged with the wilful
murder of Francis Thornhill. It appears that Francis Thornhill left a
certain ship for the purpose of proceeding to a Miss Oakley in the City
of London, with a String of Pearls, which had been confided to him to
deliver to that lady by a Mr. Mark Ingestrie.

"We have it in evidence, that Francis Thornhill on his route down or
along the northern side of Fleet Street, went into the shaving shop,
kept by the prisoner at the bar, and from that instant he is not again
seen alive. The prisoner at the bar takes a String of Pearls, similar to
those which were in the possession of Francis Thornhill, and raises upon
them a considerable sum of money of a man named John Mundell. It appears
then, that the hat of Mr. Francis Thornhill is taken from the premises
of the prisoner by a dog; and it further appears, upon the clear
testimony of respectable persons, that beneath the prisoner's shop is a
contrivance by which people might be killed; and there or thereabouts
contiguous to that contrivance, a certain bone is found, which is proved
to be the thigh-bone of Francis Thornhill.

"Gentlemen of the jury, the sequence of evidence by which it is
attempted to bring this crime home to the prisoner at the bar, lies in a
very small compass indeed. Firstly, there is the tracing of Francis
Thornhill to the prisoner's shop, and his disappearance from thence.
Then there is the hat found there or taken from there, and then there is
the thigh-bone sworn to be that of Francis Thornhill, and certainly
found in such contiguity to his premises, as to warrant a belief that he
placed it there.

"Gentlemen of the jury, the case is in your hands."

This was a very short summing up, but the bar quite understood it to
mean that the guilt of the prisoner was so clear and transparent, that
it was not at all necessary for the judge to go elaborately through the
evidence, but merely as a matter of form, leave the facts in evidence to
the jury.

And now came that awful moment to Todd, when the question of guilty or
not guilty hovered on the lips of those twelve men, who were to decide
upon his fate. The jury laid their heads together for a few moments
only, and then they turned round and faced the court again.

The clerk of the arraigns rose, and spoke--

"Gentleman of the jury. How say you? Do you find the prisoner at the bar
guilty or not guilty of the crime laid to his charge in the indictment?"

"Guilty!" said the foreman.

A cheer burst from the auditors, and the judge raised his hand, saying--

"Officers, repress this unmanly exultation that a fellow-creature is
found guilty of a dreadful crime. I beg that any person so offending may
be brought before me at once."

The officer could not or would not find anybody so offending, but the
judge's words had the effect of calming the tumult at all events, and
then all eyes were turned upon Sweeney Todd, who stood in the dock
glaring at the foreman of the jury, as though he had only imperfectly
heard what he had said, or if he had perfectly heard him, doubting the
evidence of his own senses, as regarded the real, full, and true meaning
of the dreadful word "guilty!"




                             CHAPTER CXXXI.
                TODD MAKES AN ATTEMPT UPON HIS OWN LIFE.


In the course of a few minutes the tumult in the court was effectually
suppressed, and then as it was known that the judge would sentence Todd
at once, all eyes were turned upon the criminal, to note the effect
which that awful moment was likely to have upon him.

The judge spoke.

"Sweeney Todd, you have been by an impartial and patient jury, convicted
upon the clearest evidence of the murder of Francis Thornhill. Have you
anything to say why sentence of death, according to the law, should not
be passed forthwith upon you?"

Todd did not seem to understand the question, and the Governor of
Newgate repeated it to him. He started then, and glared at the judge, as
in a deep hollow voice, he said--

"Death! death!--Did you say death?"

"Such says the law--not I. If you have anything to say why that sentence
should not be pronounced against you, now is your only time in which to
say it."

Todd passed his hand twice across his brow before he spoke, and then, in
a vehement voice, he said--

"It is false--all false. I did not kill the man. There is a vile
conspiracy against me. I say I did not do it. Who saw me--what eye was
upon me? I was at chapel--at prayers, when you say among you that I did
it. It is a plot--nothing but a plot from first to last. You would make
me the victim of it among you. Who saw me kill him? I know nothing of
hidden places in the old house. It is not true, I say. A plot--a vile
plot for my destruction."

"Have you finished?" said the judge.

"Have I not said enough? I know nothing of it. I am a poor man, and
strive to get a living as best I might, and among you now you bring a
bone from some churchyard to kill me with. You swear anything--I know
you all well. If the man you say I killed be really dead, I here at this
moment summon his spirit from another world, to come and bear witness
for me that I did not kill him!"

These last words Todd yelled out in such a tone of frantic passion, that
everybody looked aghast; and more than once, more than commonly
superstitious spectators thought that the appeal to the beings of a
supernatural world might yet be answered in some way.

There was a death-like stillness in the court for some few moments, and
then the Governor of Newgate in a whisper, said to Todd--

"Have you finished?"

"Finished what?" he cried, in a startling tone. "Finished
what?--Finished pleading for my life? Yes, I have, for I know that they
have made up their minds to murder me. I have no witnesses--they are all
in the grave now. That woman, Lovett, who is dead, you tell me--I cannot
say if she be dead or not, she is hard to kill--that woman could
exculpate me; but, as I say, my witnesses are in the grave, and there is
no truth in spirits visiting this world again, or she and the man you
say I murdered would appear here, and yell in your ears, all of you,
that I did not do it."

The judge sat quite patiently. He was evidently resolved to hear quietly
what Todd chose to say. It could but occupy a little more time; and as
his fate was fixed, it did not matter.

"If you have finished your observations, prisoner," said the judge, "it
will now be my duty to proceed to pass upon you the sentence of the
law."

"But I have said I did not do it. I am not guilty."

"It does not lie within my power to decide that question. The jury have
found you guilty, and all I have to do in my capacity here is, in
accordance with that finding, to sentence you according to law. If you
could have stated any legal impediment to the passing of the sentence,
it would have had effect; but now it is my painful duty to--"

"Hold! I will, and can state a legal impediment."

"What is it?"

"I am mad!"

The judge opened his eyes rather wider than usual at this statement, and
the jury looked at each other in wonder and amazement. Among the
spectators there was a general movement, too, of surprise.

"Mad!" said the judge.

"Yes," added Todd, holding up his arms, "I am mad--quite mad. Do you
think any other but a madman would have done the deeds with which you
charge me? I either did not do them, and am saved, or I did do all these
murders, the consequences of which you would heap upon my head, and am
mad. What is there in the wide world would compensate a man for acting
as you say I have acted? Could he ever know peace again? What is madness
but an affliction of providence? and dare you take the life of a man,
who has acted in a certain way, in consequence of a disease with which
the Almighty has thought proper to visit him? I tell you you dare not,
and that I am mad!"

This speech was uttered with a vehemence that made it wonderfully
effective; and at its conclusion Todd still held up his arms, and glared
upon the judge with the look of one who had advanced something that was
utterly and completely unanswerable.

The judge leant over to the recorder, and whispered something to him,
and the recorder whispered to the judge.

"Mad! Mad!" shrieked Todd again.

The Attorney-General now whispered something to the judge, who nodded;
and then addressing Todd, he said in calm and measured tones--

"However great the novelty of a plea of insanity, put in by the party
himself, may be, it will yet meet with every attention. I shall now
proceed to pass sentence of death upon you; and after you are removed to
the jail of Newgate, certain physicians will see you, and report upon
your mental condition to the Secretary of State, who will act
accordingly."

Todd dropped his arms.

The judge put on the black cap, and continued--

"Sweeney Todd, you have been convicted of the crime of murder; and
certain circumstances, which it would have been improper to produce
before this court in the progress of your trial, lead irresistibly to
the belief that your life for years past has been one frightful scene of
murder; and that not only the unhappy gentleman for whose murder you now
stand here in so awful a position has suffered from your frightful
practices, but many others. It will be a satisfaction, too, to the court
and the jury to know that the woman named Lovett, who you say would and
could have proved your innocence, had she been in life, made, shortly
before her death, a full confession, wherein she inculpated you most
fearfully."

"False! False!" cried Todd.

The judge took not the slightest notice of the interruption, but
continued his speech--

"It is now my painful duty to pass upon you the sentence of the law,
which is, that you be hanged by the neck until dead, and may Heaven have
mercy upon you, for you cannot expect that society can do otherwise than
put out of life one who, like yourself, has been a terror and a
scourge."

"Quite mad!" cried Todd. "Quite mad!"

"Officers, remove the prisoner," said the judge, who was much disgusted
by the attempt of Todd upon their credulity, by stating that he was mad.

The Governor of Newgate laid hold of him by the arm, but Todd raised his
voice again, saying--

"One moment. Only one moment. Before I leave this court, I have a great
desire to say something to Sir Richard Blunt."

"If Sir Richard Blunt has no objection," said the judge, "the court can
have none. Is that gentleman present?"

"I am here," said Sir Richard, as he made his way towards the dock, in
which Todd was. "What is it you have to say to me, Sweeney Todd?"

"It is for your private ear."

"Then, I decline to hear it. If you have anything to say to me, say it
out, and openly. I decline any private communications."

"Nay, but it really interests those whom you love. Come a little closer
to me, and I will speak it."

"Now," said Sir Richard, as he reached the front of the dock, "speak at
once, and say what it is. The court is too indulgent to you."

"Is it, really!"

With the rapidity of thought, Todd drew a small table knife from the
breast of his apparel, and made a stab at Sir Richard's neck with it;
but the magistrate had had by far too long experience with such men as
Todd to be so taken at unawares, and he dropped to the floor of the
court before the point of the knife reached him. The Governor of Newgate
sprung upon Todd, and disarmed him in a moment.

[Illustration: Todd, On His Trial, Attempts To Kill Sir Richard Blunt.]

From seeing Sir Richard Blunt drop, the general impression in the court
was, that he was killed, or seriously injured, by Todd; and in a moment
a scene of unparalleled confusion arose. Everybody got up from their
seats, and the place was full of cries.

"Kill him!" cried some.--"Down with him!" shouted others.--"Hang him at
once! A surgeon for Sir Richard!"

Amid this Babel of confusion, Sir Richard Blunt rose again, and sprung
upon the barrister's table, calling out in a loud voice that rose above
every other sound--

"I am perfectly unhurt."

Upon this such a cheer arose in the court, that the judge saw that it
was perfectly hopeless to attempt to stop it by any ordinary means, and
he only held up his hand deprecatingly. The cheer was thrice repeated,
and then Sir Richard dismounted from the table, and a death-like
stillness ensued in the court as the judge spoke.

"How was it possible," he said, "that the prisoner at the bar could be
furnished with such a weapon at a time like this?"

The Governor of Newgate felt that this question was addressed to him,
and he tremblingly spoke, saying--

"My lord, I have not the most distant idea upon the subject. He was
searched this morning carefully before leaving his cell. It is beyond my
comprehension."

"My lord," said a counsel at the table, rising, "there was a very
similar case about five years since, when a notorious criminal attacked
a witness for the prosecution with a fork, and it appeared afterwards
that as he was brought through some of the day-rooms of Newgate to the
bar, he had hastily snatched it up from a table that he passed without
the officers noticing him."

"This is very likely a similar case," said the judge.

"It may be so my lord," said the Governor.

Todd yelled with rage, when he found that Sir Richard Blunt had escaped
his malice. If he could but have taken his life or inflicted upon him
some very serious injury, he would have been satisfied almost to have
gone to death; but to fail was almost enough to drive him really mad.

"Curses on ye all!" he cried; and then he burst into a torrent of such
frightful invectives, that everybody shrunk aghast from it, and it is
quite impossible that we should transfer it to our pages. How long he
would have proceeded in such a storm, there is no knowing, had not the
officers rushed upon him, and by main force dragged him from the dock
and the court into the dark passages leading to Newgate.

His voice was yet heard for several moments, uttering the most dreadful
and diabolical curses!

It may be supposed that after what had happened, the officials of the
prison were not over tender in the treatment of Sweeney Todd, for they
well knew that they would be some time before they heard the last of the
knife business, and indeed it was a piece of gross carelessness to allow
a man in Todd's situation, and such a man as Todd too, to have an
opportunity of doing such very serious mischief in a moment as he might
have done.

There can be very little doubt, that if he had been content to do an
injury to any other witness but Sir Richard Blunt, he would really have
succeeded; but that personage was too wary to fall in such a way.

It was not thought advisable by the prison authorities to take Todd back
to the same cell from which they had brought him. It was an idea of the
Governor, and by no means a bad one, that desperate criminals were
caused to change their cells now and then, as it baffled and cut up
completely any combination they might in their own minds have made for
an attempted escape; so Todd found himself in a new place.

"Why is this?" he said. "Why am I placed here? This cell is darker than
the one I before occupied."

"It's quite light enough for you," growled a turnkey.

"Yes," added one of the officers who had been in court. "Folks who are
keen and bright enough to pick up knives, and nobody see 'em, mustn't
have too much light in their cell. Oh, won't it be a mercy when you are
settled next Monday morning."

"The fetters hurt me," said Todd.

"Oh, they are too light," said the officer; "and for your satisfaction,
I have to tell you that the Governor has ordered you another pair."

At this moment a couple of blacksmiths came into the cell, carrying with
them the heaviest set of irons in the whole prison, which the Governor
had determined Sweeney Todd should be accommodated with. Without a word
they proceeded to knock off the fetters that he wore.

"So you are not contented," said Todd, "to cage me as though I were some
wild animal, but you must load me with irons?"

"And a good job too."

"And you think to hang me?"

"Rather!"

"Then thus I disappoint you, and be my own executioner!"

As he spoke, he snatched up one of the smith's hammers, and made a blow
at his own forehead with it, which if it had taken effect, would
unquestionably have fractured his skull, and killed him instantly; but
one of the officers just managed to strike his arm at the moment and
confuse his aim, so that although he did strike himself, it was not with
anything like sufficient force to do himself any hurt.

The hammer was wrested from him in a moment, and he was thrown to the
floor of the cell, and the heavy irons placed upon him.

[Illustration: Todd's Second Attempt At Suicide In The Condemned Cell At
Newgate.]




                            CHAPTER CXXXII.
      TODD MAKES AN ACQUAINTANCE IN NEWGATE, AND TRIES AN ESCAPE.


In the course of a quarter of an hour more, Todd was left alone. The
irons he wore weighed upwards of a hundredweight, and it was with some
difficulty that he managed to get up, and sit upon the stone seat that
was in the cell.

It was close upon evening, and the cell was getting very dark indeed, so
that the walls, close as they were together, were only very dimly
discernable indeed.

Todd rested his head upon his hands, and thought.

"Has it then really come to this?" he said. "Am I truly doomed to die?
Oh, what a dreadful thing it is for me now to begin to doubt of what I
always thought myself so sure, namely, that there was no world beyond
the grave. Oh, if I could only still please myself with an assurance of
that! But I cannot--I cannot now. Oh, no--no--no."

He started, for the cell door opened, and the turnkey brought him in his
food for the night, which he placed on the floor. It was not then the
custom to sit up with condemned prisoners.

"There," said the man, "it's more than you deserve. Good-night, and be
hanged to you. Here's the sheriff been kicking up the devil's delight in
the prison about that knife affair."

"I hope he will discharge you all," said Todd.

"Do you?"

"Oh, yes. I wish you had all one neck only, and I a knife at it. With
what a pleasant gash I would force it in--in--in!"

"Well, you are a nice article, I must say."

"Bring me two candles, and pens, ink, and paper."

The turnkey stared with astonishment.

"Anything else," he said, "in a small way that you'd like? Buttered
rolls, perhaps, and a glass of something good? Perhaps a blunderbuss
would suit you? I tell you what it is, old fellow, it ain't very often
that anybody goes out from here on a Monday morning to be scragged, that
we don't feel a little sorry for them, but I don't think we shall any of
us cry after you. You may sleep or do what you like now until to-morrow
morning, for you have got it all to yourself. Two candles, indeed! Well
I'm sure--what next? Two candles!--Oh, my eye!"

The turnkey banged shut the door of the cell, and barred and bolted it
in a passion; and then away he went to the lobby, which was the great
gossiping place, to relate the cool demands of Sweeney Todd.

Once more the prisoner was alone. For some time he set in silence, and
then he muttered--

"All the night to myself. He will not visit this cell until the morning.
A long--long night; many hours of solitude. Well, I may chance to
improve them. It was well in that scuffle for the hammer, when they
threw me down, that I contrived to grasp a handful of tools from the
smith's basket, and hid them among my clothing. Let me see what I
have--ay, let me see, or rather feel, for by this light, or rather by
this darkness, I can only judge of them by the feel."

The tools that Sweeney Todd had been clever enough to abstract from the
smith's basket, consisted of two files and a chisel. He ran his fingers
over them with some feeling of satisfaction.

"Now," he muttered, "if the feeling to die were upon me, here are the
means; but it has passed away, and even with these small weapons, and in
a cell of Newgate, I do not feel quite so helpless as I was. It will be
time to die if all should fail else, but yet if I could only for a time
live for revenge, what a glorious thing it would be! How I should like
yet to throttle Tobias. What a pleasure it would be to me to hold that
girl by the throat, who so hoodwinked me as to impose herself upon me
for a boy, and hear and see her choking. How I should like to see the
blood of Sir Richard Blunt weltering forth while his colour faded, and
he expired gradually!"

Todd ground his teeth together in his rage.

"Yes," he added, while he moved with difficulty under the weight of his
iron. "Yes, I have bidden adieu to wealth and the power that wealth
would have given me. I have carried on my life of crimes for nothing,
and in blood I have waded to accomplish only this world of danger that
now surrounds me--to give to myself the poor privilege of suicide; but
yet how fain I would live for vengeance!"

His chains rattled upon his limbs.

"Yes, for revenge. I would fain live for revenge. There are some five or
six that I would like to kill! Yes, and I would gloat over their
death-agonies, and shriek in their ears, 'I did it! I, Sweeney Todd, did
it!'"

The fetters entangled about his legs, and threw him heavily to the floor
of the cell.

He raved and cursed frightfully, until he was too much exhausted to
continue such a course, and then he sat upon the floor, and with one of
the files he began working away assiduously at the iron, in order to
free himself from those clogs to his movements.

As he so worked, he heard the prison clock strike ten.

"Ten," he said. "Ten already. Of a truth I did not think it was so late.
I must be quick. Others have escaped from Newgate, and why should not I?
The attempt will and shall be made; and who knows but that it may be
successful? A man may do much when he is resolved that he will do all he
wishes or die."

Todd filed away at the chains.

"Who will stop me," he said, "with the feeling that will possess me? Who
will say, 'I will stop this man, or he shall kill me?' No one--no one!"

The file was a good one, and it bit fairly into the iron. In the course
of a quarter of an hour Todd had one wrist at liberty, and that was a
great thing. He was tired, however, of the comparatively slow progress
of the file, and he made a great effort to break the chains from his
ankles; but he only bruised himself in the attempt to do so without
succeeding.

With a feeling of exhaustion, he paused.

"Oh, that I could find an opportunity of exerting so much force against
those whom I hate!" he said.

At this moment he fancied he heard a slight noise not far from him, and
every faculty was immediately strained to assist in listening for a
repetition of it. It did not come again then.

"It must have been imagination," he said, "or some sound far off in the
prison conveyed by echoes to this spot. I will not suffer myself to be
alarmed or turned from my purpose. It is nothing--nothing. I will use
the file again."

He commenced now upon the other wrist, and by the little experience he
had gathered from his practice at the one which he had already filed in
two, he got on more quickly with this one. He found that a long light
movement of the file did more work than a rapid grating process. In much
less time, then, this other wrist manacle was off, and he could lift up
both his arm in freedom.

"This is something," he said, "Nay, it is much, very much indeed. I feel
it, and accept it as a kind of earnest of success. Where is the
man--where are the two or three men, that will dare to stand in my
desperate way, when I have one of these files in each hand, and are free
from fetters. They will need be mad to do it. Such an amount of zeal is
not to be found. No, they will step aside and let me pass."

It now became a matter of great importance with him, to get the other
two fetters that bound his ankles undone. He felt as if he should go
mad, if he did not quickly release himself from them now.

Sitting upon the floor of the cell, he set to work; but he found that
the file he had been using did not bite very well. The work it had done
already had dulled its powers; but the other was fresh and keen, and
with it he made great progress.

The left-hand shackle was entirely removed, and now only by his right
ankle was he connected with that hundredweight of iron, which held him
to the ground.

"I shall be free!" he muttered. "I shall be free! Did they think to hold
me with these chains? Ha! ha! No. It may be, that there is a dark spirit
of evil that aids men, such as I am; and if it be so, I will consent to
be wholly his, if--"

Todd started, for the same noise that had before come upon his ears, now
attracted him. It was plainer though than before; and at the moment he
thought that it must be in his cell. A cry of terror rose to his lips,
but he smothered it in the utterance, and bent again all his faculties
to listen.

The sound did not now pass away like an echo as it had done before, but
it went on steadily, and he could trace it as localising itself against
one of the walls of the cell.

It was a profound mystery. He could not make out what it meant. It was a
strange dull scraping noise. At times he thought it was some animal in
the cell--a rat, probably; but then the sound was too continuous, and
although he stamped once, and said 'Hush!' several times, it steadily
continued.

The darkness in the cell was now so intense, that it was in vain to
attempt to pierce it. Any straining of the eyes only peopled the
palpable black atmosphere with all sorts of strange shapes, conjured up
by the imagination; so Todd was glad to close his eyes after a few
moments' experience of that character.

"I will know what this is," he said. "I must know what this is, and I
will know!"

He held out his arms, and he slowly advanced towards the side of the
cell from whence the sound came.

"Speak," he said, "if you are mortal, speak. If immortal, I fear you
not. I am now past all such terrors. You can but kill me."

His hands touched the cold stone wall; and then he felt it from the
floor upwards, but nothing but the chill surface of the stones was
perceptible; and yet the scraping noise continued, and at last he felt
convinced that it came from the other side of the wall.

Now he did not know what to think, for he had no means of knowing what
was upon the other side of that wall. It might be a corridor of the
prison. It might be a room belonging to one of the officials, who was
about some work that, if explained, would not appear singular at all.

He placed his ear to the exact spot from whence the noise came, and he
listened attentively.

As he so listened, Todd began to have other notions about that noise,
and for more than once the square block of stone, against which his ear
reposed, shook in its place.

"It must be a cell like this," he said, "that is on the other side of
the wall, and that, no doubt, is some prisoner at work, trying to effect
his escape. If so, it is fortunate. He must be a bold man, and we can
help each other."

Still Todd hesitated what he should do, notwithstanding the hypothesis
regarding the noise he heard appeared so very probable. He was resolved
to spend a little more time in listening, for he felt that once to
commit himself would possibly be to spoil his own chances of escape. He
kept his ear to the stone of the wall, then which shook more and more
each passing moment.

Suddenly he heard a voice. In a drawling accent, it sang a few lines of
a popular thieves' song--

    "The beak looked big, and shook his head,
                        Heigho, the beak!
    He wished such family cares were dead,
    That honest folks might get their bread,
                        Heigho, the beak!
    The family cove, he grinned a grin,
                        Heigho, the cove!
    Says he, to prig I think no sin;
    For sure a Romany must have tin:
                        Heigho, the cove!"

"It must be all right," thought Todd, "or he would not sing that song;
but what good it can do him to get from his own cell into this, I cannot
imagine. He would be equally confined here as there, and all his labour
thrown away. But together, we may do something. I will speak to him.
Yes, I think I will speak to him."

Todd still waited and lingered before he gave any intimation of his
presence and knowledge of what was going on, and then the song ceased,
and by the renewed vigour with which the tenant of the next cell worked
at the stone, it would seem that he had got very impatient at the length
of time it took him.

Suddenly, the stone, which was about a foot square, shook so, that Todd
withdrew from it, thinking that it would come out of its place
altogether; and as it was evidently the object of the prisoner at the
other side to push it through into Todd's cell, he thought it better to
stand on one side, and let it come.

Suddenly, with a crash, it fell through, and then Todd spoke, for the
first time, to the prisoner.




                            CHAPTER CXXXIII.
         THE PROGRESS OF THE OPERATIONS TO ESCAPE FROM NEWGATE.


"Who's there? Who are you?" cried Todd.

"The deuce!" said a voice, from the adjoining cell. "Sold at last, after
all my trouble. Confound you, why didn't you speak before, and save me
the last hour's work?"

"What do you mean?" cried Todd. "I am a desperate man. Do not tamper
with me. Do you belong to the prison, or do you not?"

"I belong to the prison! I should think not. Don't you?"

"Oh, no--no--no--no."

"Why, you don't mean to say that you are a prisoner?"

"I am, indeed, and condemned to die."

"All's right then. Bravo! This is capital. I thought I was in the end
cell, do you know, and that by working through the wall by the
assistance of Providence always--Bah! I can't get out of the old trade.
I mean to say, that I thought I was working through a wall that would
have taken me into one of the corridors of Newgate, and then there would
have been a chance of getting off, you know."

"I do not know, and did not know," said Todd; "but if there be really
any chance of escape, I am a desperate man, and will risk anything for
it. Only say that you will help me."

"Help you? Of course I will. Do you think I am in love with these cold
walls? No, I will get a light in a moment, and we can then have a look
at each other. Are you in fetters?"

"I was, but I have a file, and have succeeded in freeing myself from
them completely. Are you?"

"Yes, but I have muffled them with some pieces of my clothing that I
have torn up for the purpose, and please the Lord they will make no
noise."

Todd was rather amazed at the religious expressions of the other
prisoner; but he forbore to make any remark concerning them, and as
something had been said about getting a light, he resolved to wait
patiently until it was procured, when he would be able to see who it was
that chance had so very strangely thrown him into companionship with.

"You see," added the other prisoner, "a religious lady left me some
tracts, and as I told her they did not allow light here, she was kind
enough to smuggle me in some phosphorous matches, in case in the night I
should wish to read."

"Very kind of her," said Todd.

"Oh, very. Let us praise the--Bother, I shall never get out of the habit
of chaunting, I do believe."

In a moment, now, a faint blue light illumed the cell adjoining to
Todd's, and as the religious lady had been kind enough to bring some
little wax ends of candles, the prisoner lit one, and placing it upon
the ledge left by the displaced brick in the wall, he put his face close
to it, and looked at Todd.

Todd did the same thing, and looked at him.

"Humph," said the prisoner. "They are not going to hang you for your
beauty, whoever you are, my friend."

"Nor you," said Todd, who was a little stung by this cool remark, "for I
must say a more villanous looking countenance than yours I never saw in
all my life."

"Then you certainly never looked in a glass."

"Hark you, my friend," said Todd. "If we are to aid each other in
getting out of Newgate, it will not be by railing at each other through
a square hole in the wall of our cells. We had better leave all remarks
about our looks to other folks, and at once set to work about what is
much more important, namely, breaking our way out of this most
detestable of all places."

"Truly," said the other; "you speak wisdom, and the Lord--Pho! The deuce
take it, when shall I get rid of the cant of the conventicle? My dear
sir, you see before you a man who has been a great victim."

"What is your name?"

"Lupin they used to call me. The Reverend Josiah Lupin."

"Ah," said Todd. "I heard something of your case. I believe you murdered
a woman, did you not?"

"Why, my friend," said Mrs. Oakley's old acquaintance, for indeed it was
no other, "I don't mind confessing to you, that a woman met with a
slight accident at my place, and they say I did it. But now that I have
been so candid, pray who are you?"

"They call me Todd."

The Reverend Mr. Lupin screwed up his mouth, and whistled.

"Humph," he said. "The religious lady only this morning told me all
about you. You used to polish the people off in your barber's shop, and
then make them into pork pies, I believe?"

"Ha! ha!" said Todd.

"And you had a charming assistant in the shape of a lady, named Lovett,
I have been informed, who used to help you to scrape the bones of the
poor devils who had only just slipped in for a shave, and by no means
expected such a scrape."

"Ha! ha!" said Todd.

"Stop a bit," said Mr. Lupin, "don't come that sort of laugh again. It
don't sound at all pleasant. Well, I think we may manage to get out of
Newgate, do you know, by a little hard work, if you are willing; but
mind you, I don't want to be made a pork or a veal pie of, if you
please."

"I never ate them myself," said Todd, "so there is no temptation; but I
sincerely hope, my friend, that you do not believe one word of the many
calumnies that have been heaped upon my character?"

"Oh, dear no; and you, too, are well aware that I am the most falsely
accused and innocent clergyman that ever lived."

"Perfectly."

"My dear, sir, you are a very reasonable man, and I don't see any reason
on earth that we should not be capital friends from this moment. Just
help me to move another of these stones and I shall be able to creep
through the opening into your cell."

Todd very kindly assisted the Reverend Mr. Lupin, and in the course of a
few minutes, another of these large square blocks of stone that formed
the wall of the cell being removed, he was able to creep through the
aperture with the assistance of Todd.

"All's right," said Lupin, as he shook himself. "And now, my new friend,
I will borrow the same file with which you released yourself from your
fetters, and git rid of mine."

"Here it is," said Todd; "you work upon one leg, and I will work upon
the other, for I have two files here, although one of them is a little
blunted by the work it has already done. Yet it will help, and time is
everything."

"It is," said Lupin. "Work away, for I am not able to think of anything
until I am free of these confounded irons."

They worked in real earnest, and to such purpose, that in a much less
space of time than anybody would have thought it possible to accomplish
the process in, the fetters of Mr. Lupin dropped from him, and, like
Todd, he stood so far free from restraint.

"Now," he said, "I have some first-rate picklocks, and if
providence--Tush! tush! I mean if we are lucky, we shall get on
capitally. The next thing we have to do is, to get out of here, and by
far the shortest way is to work through the wall. Have you any other
tools beside the files, for they are not much use now to us?"

"Yes, a chisel."

"A chisel? Oh, my friend, you are indeed a wonderful man. A chisel? What
may not be done with a chisel! A strong, good chisel, too. Oh, if we do
not chisel our way out of Newgate now, it will be very hard indeed.
Come, you shall see an old hand at work. Perhaps you have not had much
experience at prison-breaking?"

"Certainly not," said Todd.

"Well, this will be a good lesson to you. Now you will see how nicely I
will get one of these old square blocks of stone out of its place."

Todd smiled grimly. Perhaps he thought he could have given the Reverend
Josiah Lupin a good lesson in some things; but at that time he was only
too happy to meet with a companion who promised such great things in the
way of immediate escape.

Certainly Mr. Lupin showed great dexterity in handling the chisel, with
which he had been furnished by Todd; and in a much less space of time
than any one would have thought the work could have been performed in,
he had loosened the stone in the wall that he wished to dislodge.

"Let us both push it," he said, "and we shall get it through easily."

"But its fall will make an alarm," said Todd.

"Oh, no. The distance is too short, and it will go down easy. Now for
it."

They pressed upon the stone both of them, and by a skilful joggling
movement, Lupin got it to move along until it was beyond its centre of
gravity, and then, with a heavy bump, down it went on the other side.
They both now paused for some moments, and spoke not a word, for they
were anxious to discover if the fall of the stone into the passage
beyond the cells had made any noise sufficient to attract the attention
of the prison officials.

All was still.

"It's as right as possible," said Lupin. "They are asleep, the greater
part of them. The pretended vigilance in this place, and the sleepless
watchfulness, is all a fudge. Turnkeys, and police officers, and
Governors of Newgate, are but flesh and blood, and they will take things
easy if they can."

"You are quite a man of the world," said Todd.

"Oh, yes; I have seen a little of it. But I say, Master Todd, deal
candidly with me now. Have you not some secret hoard of cash, upon which
we can make ourselves comfortable, when we get out of this mousetrap? I
have not a penny piece; but you ought to have something, I should say. I
don't mean to say but that I had money, but it was not hidden, and the
police have got hold of that. If I were acquitted, they kindly said they
would let me have it. But if found guilty, of which they did not
entertain the smallest doubt, I could not want it."

"Curses on them!" said Todd; "they had enough of mine to have made us
both rich men--very rich men. Oh, that I had been off a month ago!"

"Don't fret about that. We are all in the hands of a gracious
provi--Psha! I am forgetting again. Whatever you do, Todd, in this
world, don't turn parson to a parcel of old women, for the phraseology
will stick to you as long as you live, if you do. But come--tell me now.
You do know where to lay your hand upon money?"

Todd thought that it would be very indiscreet to say no to this little
proposition, so with a nod and a smile he replied--

"Only a few hundreds. That's all."

"A few hundreds? That is a pretty good all, and will do very well
indeed, my dear friend. Is it an understanding that we go halves?"

"Quite, quite."

"Then, if we don't get out of the stone-jug pretty soon, it will be a
strange thing to me. Now let us work away like bricks, and we will show
them that two determined men can laugh at their bolts, and bars, and
stone walls."

"How confident you are," said Todd. "You surely forget that we must go
through much, before we can see the outside of the walls of this
dreadful place. I wish I could be as sure of the result as you are, or
as you seem to be."

"It is one-half the battle to make sure; there goes another of the
stones. Now follow me through this opening in the wall. It leads to a
passage from which we can reach one of the smaller inner courts; and
from that we shall get on through the chapel to the Governor's house,
and if we can't get out there, it's a bad case."

Mr. Lupin, who had, in a great measure, now that he no longer had any
sanctified character to keep up, thrown of his timid nature, ventured to
scramble through the opening in the wall, and he assisted Todd to follow
him.

[Illustration: The Two Murderers, Todd And Lupin, Escaping From The Cell
Of Newgate.]

They both now stood in a narrow vaulted passage, and then they paused
again for several minutes to listen if any noise in the prison gave
intimation that any one was stirring; but everything was perfectly
still, and so death-like was the silence, that, but that they well knew
to the contrary, they might have supposed that they were the only living
persons within that gloomy pile of building.

The little bit of wax candle that had been brought to Lupin by the pious
lady, and which he had lit in his own cell, for the purpose, at first,
of having a good look at Todd, was now upon the point of going out; but
he was very well provided with wax candle-ends, and he speedily lighted
another, as he said in a tone of irony--

"The sheriffs will write a letter of threats to the pious lady, when
they find how much she aided us in escaping."

"They ought," said Todd. "We will pray for her."

Lupin laughed, as he with a light step now crept along the vaulted
passage, and reached a massive door at the end of it, up and down which
he passed the light several times. Then he muttered to himself--

"Good! Only the lock, and it will need to be a good one if it resist me.
I used to be rather an adept at this sort of thing."

"Then you are," said Todd, "a professional--"

He paused, for he did not like to say thief; but Lupin himself added the
word, cracksman, and Todd nodded.

"Yes," added Lupin, "I was a cracksman, but I got known, so I thought
the chapel dodge would suit me, and it did for a time, and would for
some time longer, but that the little accident of which you have heard
something took place in the chapel, and that idiot Mrs. Oakley found me
out. Ah! you never after all can be a match for a crafty old woman. They
will have you at some moment when you least expect it. She regularly
sold me."




                            CHAPTER CXXXIV.
          THE ESCAPE, AND THE RETREAT IN CAEN WOOD, HAMPSTEAD.


While Mr. Lupin talked, he did not lose time, but he was working away at
the lock of the door at the end of the passage. After a few moments
there was a crackling sound, and then the lock yielded to the exertion
of Mr. Lupin, and went back into its home. The door, with a wheezing
sound, slowly opened.

"All's right," whispered Lupin. "The less we say now, Todd, the better,
for our voices will go farther now that we shall be clear of this
passage. Come on. Follow me!"

They both emerged into the night air; and crouching down, Lupin ran
along the little yard in which they were, and which was not above
half-a-dozen yards across. He paused at a door, and then suddenly
starting away from it, he muttered--

"It is not this one. Ah! this is it! Stand quite close up against the
wall, and then there will be the less chance of any one seeing you. I
must work away at this door."

"Where does it lead to?" whispered Todd.

"To the chapel."

Todd screwed himself up into the smallest space that he possibly could
against the wall, close to the door, while Lupin tried to open it. That
door for more than ten minutes baffled him. Probably that fact was owing
in some degree to the circumstance of his being in the dark, for of
course, before emerging from the vaulted passage, he had thought it
prudent to extinguish the little light he had.

"It baffles you," said Todd, in a voice of great anxiety.

"As yet, yes. No. It is open."

Todd breathed more freely.

"Come in," said Lupin. "Come in. We have done wonders as yet, my friend,
and we will do wonders yet, I think, if Providence only looks with a
gracious--There I go again. When shall I forget that chapel, I wonder?"

"It don't matter," said Todd. "I used to find a little religion answer
very well myself."

"Not a doubt of it. Now, then, that the door is fast, we may muster up a
light again."

With the aid of one of his matches, Lupin again illuminated the little
wax end of the candle, and then Todd found that he was in a small kind
of vestibule from which a green baize door led directly into the chapel.
In fact, that was the entrance by which the lower class of offenders
confined in Newgate were brought to the chapel on Sundays. The little
building looked much larger by the faint light of that one candle than
it really was, and Todd glared around him with a feeling of terror, as
he had not felt since he had left his cell. Perhaps, after all, a good
deal of that was owing to the low temperature of the chapel, that lent a
chill to his system.

"Look at that seat," said Lupin, pointing to one. "Do you know what it
is?"

"Only a seat," said Todd. "Is there anything particular in it?"

"Nothing, except the kind of interest it might have for you, as being
the one upon which the condemned prisoners sit, on the Sunday previous
to their execution, that is all."

Todd turned aside with a shudder.

"Enough," he said. "Enough. That is enough. Let us get on, and not waste
time in idle talking about such idle matters as these. I do not feel
very well."

"And I," said Lupin, "would give a few bright pieces out of those
hundreds that you have hidden, for a glass of brandy. But that's not to
be thought of now. This is a door that leads from the chapel to the
Governor's house, through which the parson, and the Governor and
Sheriffs come on the occasion of Sunday service here. It is by that we
must attempt an escape in this place."

Sweeney Todd, and Mr. Lupin looked like two spectres, as they crept
noiselessly through the chapel of Newgate; but Lupin appeared to know
perfectly well the route which it was necessary for him to take, and he
soon went up three small steps, and applied his ear to the panel of a
door to listen, as he said--

"Through here lies our route."

"Is all still?" said Todd.

"Quite. I don't believe, except ourselves, there is any one up and about
in Newgate except a couple of lazy fellows in the vestibule; but we are
too far off them to be in any danger of their overhearing us. This door
will not give any trouble. Ah!"

"What is the matter?"

"It is bolted on the other side."

"Then we are foiled?"

"Not at all. It will take us a little time to unbolt it, that's all.
Hand me the chisel."

Todd handed it to him; and then holding the light for Lupin, the latter
set to work upon the panelling of the door, to cut away sufficient of it
to enable him to get his head through, to draw back the bolts, one of
which was at the top of the door and another at the bottom of it.

The door, though, was not built for strength, for it was scarcely
imagined that it would ever be attacked, so that the panelling was only
of an ordinary character; and as the chisel was a good one, and Mr.
Lupin was tolerably expert in its use, the chips from the wood soon
began noiselessly to fall about him. He worked in a circle, so that when
he should get fairly through the panel, there would be quite space
enough for him to get his arm through, and unfasten both the bolts; and
this he completed in about ten minutes.

"I should never have got on without you," said Todd. "The only notion I
had of the affair, was to try and fight my way out of the prison, and if
I fell in doing so, I was no worse off than I should be on Monday
morning--or, indeed, rather better, for I could not endure the agony of
waiting for death."

"They would not have killed you."

"They must."

"Nay, they will go through fire and water here, and suffer anything,
rather than that a man should escape the gallows. They would have flung
themselves upon you, and overpowered you by numbers, and on Monday
morning, if you had a breath of life left in you, you would have been
dragged out to death."

Todd shuddered.

"And you so innocent, too," added Lupin. "But it is the innocent that in
this world, verily, are chastened alway."

"You are getting into your old habit of preaching again," said Todd,
roughly.

"So I am. I am much obliged to you, my friend, to put me in mind of it.
Very much obliged. I was for a moment preaching; but here is the door
open, and now I beg that you will tread as though you trod upon a mine,
for we do not know what persons in this portion of this confounded
building may be upon the alert."

"Oh, that we were only in the open air!" said Todd.

"Hush! hush!"

The villain Lupin, almost as bad in his way as Todd was in his, now
shaded the little light with his hands, and crept on slowly and
cautiously, until he reached the staircase, which was nicely empanelled,
and up that he slowly took his way. Before he got to the top of it, he
blew out the light, and waiting there until Todd was close to him, he
said, in the smallest possible whisper--

"Follow me, and be careful, I am afraid the light might gleam through
some key-hole, and betray us. Come on, and recollect that a slip or a
stumble may be fatal. Think that the rope is about your neck."

"I will," said Todd. "I will. I almost seem to feel it actually. Oh,
yes, I will be very careful."

"Hush! hush! Are you mad to go on talking so?"

Todd said no more, and Lupin crept on until he got right to the top of
the stairs. Then holding by a balustrade that was continued along the
landing, he reached the head of another flight of steps, which led
directly down to the hall or passage of the Governor's house. Lupin was
terribly afraid that Todd would come upon these second stairs at
unawares, and stumble down some of them, so he waited at the head of
them, until Todd touched him, and then he whispered the one word,
"Stairs."

"Yes," replied Todd, and then Lupin commenced the descent, followed by
his trembling companion, and for the matter of that, Lupin himself shook
now like an aspen leaf.

The steps were fourteen in number, and then, by the feel of a mat at the
foot of them, Lupin was satisfied that he had actually gained the hall
of the Governor's house. Todd was close behind him.

"Stop!" whispered Lupin, and Todd stopped as suddenly as though he had
been some piece of machinery that could be in a moment arrested in its
progress.

Lupin well knew now that without a light it would be folly to attempt
opening the door of the Governor's house, which, as a matter of course,
was well secured; and very reluctantly he lit another match, and ignited
the wax candle-end again. He placed Todd in such a position on the mat
at the foot of the stairs, that his bulky tall form acted as a screen
against the rays of the light ascending the staircase, and then, with
something of his old nervousness and abject fear of manner and
expression, he narrowly scrutinized the door.

"Curses on all these precautions!" he muttered. "We may be detained here
until morning."

In good truth, the door of the Governor's house was very well fastened
up, and Mr. Lupin might well feel a little staggered at the sight of it.
A chain that was up across it, he easily removed, and the bolts offered
no obstacles; but what was the most serious consisted of a small, but
exquisitely made lock that was on the door, and the key of which, no
doubt, at such an hour was under the Governor's pillow.

Todd at that moment would have given anything to be able just to say--

"How are you getting on?" but in such a place, with, for all he knew to
the contrary, the Governor of Newgate within a dozen yards of him, he
dared not open his lips.

And now Lupin brought all his old skill to bear upon that one little
lock upon the Governor's door, and yet it resisted him. One five
minutes' attempt to pick it was to him pretty conclusive evidence that
it was not to be done.

He had the chisel in his pocket, and in despair he inserted it between
the door and the post. It broke short off by the handle. Lupin uttered a
groan, which was echoed by Todd, and then they both stood glaring at
each other in solemn silence. Todd crept towards Lupin, and leaning
forward he whispered faintly--

"It can't be done?"

"No," said Lupin, "that lock stops us."

"Lost--lost!" said Todd. "We are lost, then?"

"Hush. Let me think. The key of this lock is with the Governor, of
course. Now, Todd, you are a man of strong nerves, you know, or else it
would have been quite impossible for you to have gone through life in
the way you have done. What do you say to going and trying to get the
key?"

"I--I?"

"Yes, to be sure. I have, up to this moment, you know, done all the
work, and if this lock had not baffled me, I would have done the
remainder cheerfully; but could you not take one of these files--the end
of it is very sharp--and persuade the Governor to give up the key?"

"Kill him, you mean?"

"You may call it killing."

"If I thought it could be done with anything like a certainty of result,
I would make no more of the life of the Governor than--than--"

Todd was at a loss for a simile, and Lupin helped him out of the
difficulty by saying--

"Giving a man a clean shave for one penny, or eating a veal pie."

Todd nodded.

"Now, hark you," continued Lupin, speaking in the same very low whisper,
indeed, that he had conducted the conversation in. "It is quite a
maddening thing, you see, to find that there is nothing between us and
liberty but this door. Every moment is of the greatest possible
importance. Will you do it?"

"Are you mad?"

"No. I am quite sane, I confess, though that I have not the pluck to do
it. You ought to be a man of courage. What is it to you, if you were to
murder everybody in this house, so that you got this door open? That is
the great object, the only object; and to you, you know, three or four
more deaths will not make much consequence."

"My friend," said Todd, with a sickly smile, "I am afraid you believe
the calumnies that have been heaped upon my innocent head. But, if
nothing can be done, but what you say, I will make the attempt. There
are two files, though, and they are equally sharp. Do you take one, and
I will take the other."

"You want me with you?"

"I do, most, surely."

"Well--well; if it must be so, it must. I will come. Let us set about it
at once, and--"

Before Mr. Lupin could say another word, there came a sharp rap at the
door from the outside with the knocker; and so sudden and so utterly
unexpected was the sound at such an hour, that Lupin and Todd fell on
each other in their hurry to escape, they knew not where.




                             CHAPTER CXXXV.
             THE CHASE THROUGH SMITHFIELD, AND THE MURDER.


They were afraid to speak, were those two murderers, as they now stood
trembling in the passage of the Governor's house in Newgate. They could
only be conscious of each other's presence by the hard breathing which
their fears gave rise to, and as Lupin had extinguished the little
light, the most intense darkness reigned around them.

Bang--bang--bang! went the knocker upon the door of the Governor's house
again.

"Lost--lost!" said Todd.

If Lupin was not the most hardened villain of the two, he was certainly
at that moment the most courageous. He aimed a blow at Todd in the dark
to give effect to his admonition for silence; but it did not take
effect. Todd, however, was quite still now, and in the course of a few
moments the knock at the door was repeated a third time. Then Lupin
whispered to Todd--

"Keep yourself up as close against the wall as you can. Some one will
come to the door, and you can throttle whoever it is, while I take the
key of the little lock from them."

"Yes," said Todd, faintly.

The word had hardly escaped his lips, when a flash of light from above
came streaming down into the passage, and from each side of the door,
close to the passage wall, against which they screwed themselves into as
small a compass as possible, they saw a man approaching.

The person who came to answer the knock at the Governor's door was
evidently only just roused from sleep, for he was looking heavy, and
yawning as he came. The candle he carried swayed to and fro in his hand,
and it was very unlikely that he would see anything that was not
remarkably close to his nose.

"Ah, dear me" he yawned. "Can't people come at reasonable times? Who'd
be a Governor's clerk, I wonder, to--ah, dear!--get up at all hours of
the night in Newgate. Ah, heigho!"

Mr. Lupin wanted to say only two words to Todd, and those were "Kill
him;" but he was afraid even to whisper them, lest Todd should not be
equally discreet in reply. He knew he could whisper softly enough; but
he thought his companion might not be so accomplished in that
particular, so he was silent.

Before the individual who had announced himself to be the Governor's
clerk could get into the passage down the flight of stairs, the person
on the outside of the door got impatient, and executed another rather
startling rap.

"Oh, bother you," said the clerk. "I only wish you were at the bottom of
the Thames. I'm coming, stupid; don't you see the light through the
little bit of glass at the top of the door, that--ah, dear! how gapish I
am--you keep hammering away there, as if you thought we were all deaf or
stupid?"

The clerk was evidently wakening up, but as he carried the light right
in front of his eyes, he had not the smallest chance of seeing either
Mr. Todd or Lupin, and in that way he reached the passage, or hall it
might be called from courtesy.

To be sure, how could he for one moment suspect to find two of the most
notorious criminals in all Newgate snugly hidden in the hall? We must
consider how very improbable such a thing was, before we blame the clerk
for any imprudence in the matter.

The grand object of Lupin, who kept his sharp little ferret-looking eyes
upon the clerk as he descended, was to note if he had a key with him at
all; if he had, there could be no doubt of its being the key of the
little lock that had so baffled his, Lupin's, attempts to open it, upon
the door of the Governor's house. To his great satisfaction he saw that,
dangling from the clerk's finger by a piece of tape, he did carry a key,
and Lupin at once naturally concluded it was the one he wanted.

"Only just let me find out now," said the clerk, "that this is something
about nothing, and won't I make a riot about it in the morning. To rouse
a fellow out of his bed, it is really too bad, as if any kind of thing
could not be just as well done in the day time as in the middle of
night. Now stupid, who are you?"

These last words he addressed to the person outside, by placing his
mouth close to the keyhole.

A voice responded something, the only recognisable word of which was
"donkey."

"What do you say?" cried the clerk, again. "You are--a--a--donkey, do
you say?"

"No," said the voice from the outside through the key-hole. "But you
are."

"Oh, am I, you infernal vagabond? I'll soon let you know what's what, I
will, you rascal."

With this the clerk began to open the door, and the moment he got the
key in the little lock, so that Mr. Lupin was thoroughly aware it was
the one he wanted, he sprung upon the unfortunate clerk, and dashing his
head against the door, which was heavily plated with iron, he knocked
him insensible in a moment.

To open the lock was the work of an instant, and the door creaked upon
its hinges.

"Who are you?" said Lupin.

"A messenger from the Secretary of State," said the man on the outside,
"and I shall report your insolence."

"Don't," said Lupin.

"Indeed, I shall."

"Then take that."

With the file he dealt him a frightful wound in the face, and then they
both rolled down the whole flight of steps together, for Mr. Lupin had
overbalanced himself with that blow. Todd sprang over them both, and
gained the open street, just as a watchman who was opposite began to
spring his rattle at seeing such a scuffle going on at the Governor's
door. The messenger from the Secretary of State, notwithstanding his
wound, grappled with Lupin, but that rascal got hold of him by his hair,
and knocked his head against the pavement until he was quite dead. Then
rising, he cried--

"Through Smithfield, Todd! Follow me."

"I will," said Todd, and off they both set, pursued by the single
watchman, who had happened to be the sole witness to the whole affair,
and who, finding himself outstripped by the two men, wisely stopped at
the corner of Giltspur Street to spring his rattle, which he did with a
vengeance that soon brought others to his assistance.

"An escape from Newgate!" the watchman kept crying--"An escape from
Newgate! There they go--through Smithfield; two men, one very big and
the other not so big! An escape from Newgate!"

[Illustration: The Astonished Watchman.--Leaving Newgate Behind.]

These cries soon sent about a dozen persons on the trail of the
fugitives, and as the alarm was understood at the prison, four of the
most bold and skillful men upon the premises at once started in pursuit.
From the watchman who still stood at the end of Giltspur Street, they
heard in what direction the prisoners had gone, and they did not lose a
moment in dashing after them, calling out as they went--

"Fifty pounds reward for two prisoners escaped from Newgate! Fifty
pounds reward for them!"

These words summoned up many an idler who was trying to dream away the
night in the pens of Smithfield, and the officers soon got together a
rabble host for the pursuit of Todd and his villanous companion.

But these officers with their fifty pounds reward were rather late in
the field. It was the few persons who first heard the rattle and the
outcries of the watchman, who were close upon the heels of the men, and
they kept them well in sight right across Smithfield and so on towards
Barbican. Todd heard the shouts of the pursuers, but he did not look
back, for fear of losing time by so doing; and the fact was, that Mr.
Lupin was so fleet of foot that it required all the exertion of Todd to
keep up with him at all. Upon any less exciting occasion it is extremely
doubtful if Todd could have kept up such a race; but as it was, he
seemed to lose his wind, and then in some mysterious way to get on
without any at all. Mr. Lupin crossed Aldersgate Street, and dashed down
Barbican. He then turned down the first opening he came to on the right,
and he did so, not because he was making for any known place of safety,
but because he knew that a labyrinth of small streets were thereabouts,
amid the intricacies of which he hoped to baffle his pursuers; and it
was certainly under the circumstances very good policy in him to take
the course he did.

From the moment of so abruptly turning out of Barbican, they were both
out of sight of their pursuers, who had been able to keep them steadily
in view up to this; but although that was the case, they were not
without their perils, for a watchman met them both and aimed a blow at
Lupin's legs with his stick, crying in an Irish brogue--

"Stop that, my beauty--Stop that any way!"

Lupin sprang upon him like an enraged tiger, and turning the stick from
his hands, he laid him flat with one blow of it and on he rushed,
carrying it with him as a defence against the attack of any one else.

They now turned a corner and met a string of half-drunken gents of the
period, arm-in-arm, and occupying the whole breadth of the pavement.
Lupin avoided them by swerving into the road-way, but they caught hold
of Todd, crying--

"Here's the devil. Let's make him an offer for his tail!"

Certainly, Sweeney Todd was not at that moment disposed for trifling,
and he laid about him with his immense fists in such style that the
gents were all rolling in the kennel in a moment or two; and then,
however, before Todd could again reach Mr. Lupin so closely as he had
been, he heard a loud shout of--

"There's one of them. Come on!--Come on!"

That was no drunken shout, and Todd immediately felt that the danger was
imminent. He rushed on at increased speed, and just got up to Lupin at
the corner. They turned it together, and then Todd managed to say--

"They come--they come!"

"Officers?" said Lupin.

"Yes, I think so. On--on. Oh, push on!"

"This way."

Lupin crossed the road, and sprung down a narrow court; but even as he
did so, came that voice, crying--

"There they go. Stop them--stop them! There they go! Fifty pounds
reward!"

A frightful oath burst from Todd's lips, as he emerged from the court
still close upon the heels of Lupin. They were now in a tolerably wide
street, and they saw but one individual in it, and he was evidently, by
the curious manner in which he sometimes favoured the curb-stone by
walking upon it for a few paces, and then lumbered up against the house,
just a little gone in intoxication.

This individual, after some fumbling in his pocket, produced a latch
key, and having staggered up the steps of a house, he made some
ineffectual attempts to open the door.

"Hold!" said Todd to Lupin. "Anything is better than this race for life.
We can hide in the passage of that house until the pursuit is past.
Come."

"A good thought," said Lupin.

By this time the inebriated individual had succeeded in opening the
street-door with his latch-key, and he was so elated at having performed
the feat, that he stopped to laugh before he entered the house. The
moment, however, that he did get into the passage, Todd sprung up the
steps, and very adroitly placed his foot against the door, so that when
the person from within slammed it as he thought shut, it was a good two
inches off that condition. It was then amusing to hear him, with drunken
gravity and precision, as he thought, shooting the bolts into their
sockets, after which, often tumbling on his way, he went along the
passage, and up stairs.

Todd opened the door.

"Come," he said.

"All's right," said Lupin.

"Stop thief! Stop thief!" cried a chorus of voices at the corner of the
street.

"Indeed," said Lupin, "The Lord be good to you all."

He stepped into the house after Todd, and very quietly closed the door.
The passage was profoundly dark, and there they both stood, those two
convicted murderers, listening to what was taking place outside their
place of refuge. They heard the sounds of several voices, and it was
quite evident that just about that spot the pursuers were baffled, and
did not know now which course to take after the fugitives, who were so
snugly ensconced so near them.




                            CHAPTER CXXXVI.
                  TODD AND LUPIN ESCAPE TO CAEN WOOD.


"What's to be done?" said a voice.

"I'll be hanged if I know," said another, "and yet I feel sure that they
came this way. I thought how it would be when they took to all these
streets. Lord bless you, we might have passed them in some doorway easy
enough--a dozen times."

"So we might," said the other voice. "All we can do now, is to go round
to the different outlets of the city, and give an alarm."

"Well, I won't give it up yet," said a third person; "I feel quite sure
they are lingering somewhere about here, and I'll be on the watch yet
for a time, and hunt about quietly. You be off and give the notice to
the watch, and leave Johnson and I to do what we can."

"Very good--I wish you luck."

There was a scuffle of feet, and it was quite clear that some of the men
had gone off at a quick pace, leaving, no doubt, the two only in the
street.

"Well," whispered Lupin. "Well, my friend, what do you think of all
this?"

"I don't know what to think," said Todd. "I'm very tired."

"Ah, and so am I, but that can't be helped. I ain't used to such a run
as we have had. But it won't do us any harm. If we can get off, it will
be a world's wonder, I can tell you. It ain't now every day that a
fellow gives Newgate the go-by."

"No--no, and I must say that I did not myself expect it. But I was
prepared to cheat the hangman."

"Pho! That's a poor-enough look out."

"Yes, but it's a something. She did it."

"She? Who the deuce is she?"

"Mrs. Lovett."

"Oh, I recollect. I have heard of her--I have heard of her. She was the
nice creature who lived in Bell Yard, wasn't she, and accommodated the
folks with pies?"

"Yes," said Todd, and if Lupin had seen the horrible contortion of
visage with which he accompanied the word, even he, with all his nerve
in such matters, might well have been excused for a sudden accession of
terror. "Well," added Todd, after a pause, "you are a man of judgment
Mr. Lupin, and all I want to know now, is what you mean to do?"

"Get away from here as soon as possible. But it won't be quite safe to
try it yet. This house is very quiet, and no doubt everybody is in bed
and asleep, so I shall get a light and look about a little. It would be
quite a providential thing to find something to eat."

"Yes, and to drink," said Todd.

"Just so. I would give something handsome now, if I had it, for a good
glass of brandy. That run has made me first hot and then shivery all
over; but who knows what luck may be in store for us? Come now--here's a
light, and we shall soon, by the help of providence, see what sort of a
crib we have got into."

It was lucky for them both that Lupin had retained about him the means
of getting a light, for if he had not, they would have been left to
conjectures merely regarding their position. He ignited one of the
little pieces of wax-ends, and when the small flame rose and began to
burn steadily, he held up the piece of candle, so they both looked
curiously about them.

The hall of the house in which they were was well got up. A handsome
table and some old carved chairs were in it, with some crests upon the
backs, and upon numerous pegs hung hats, cloaks, and coats.

"Humph," said Lupin, "this is the very place for us, I shall take the
great liberty of making free with some gentleman's coat and hat, and I
think you had better do the same."

Todd at once practically acquiesced in the suggestion, by slipping on a
large cloak with sleeves, and placing upon his head a hat richly bound
with silver lace.

"Upon my word," said Lupin, "you almost look respectable."

"Do I?" said Todd. "It isn't then on account of the company I am in."

Lupin smiled, as he said--

"Very good--very good, but the less we cut at each other, my friend, the
better."

"You began it," said Todd.

"So I did, so we will say no more about it, as yours was the hardest
hit. How do I look in the cloak and hat?"

"Just nice," said Todd, making a frightful face.

Lupin laughed again.

"Come," he said. "Now that we have a little time to spare, let us see if
these people keep a good larder. If they do and they lock it up at
night, they will find that the cat has been at it by the morning, I
rather think. Tread as lightly as you can, Todd, and keep down your
voice as you have done. Sounds go so far in the night time."

"They do," said Todd. "I have heard them at odd times."

Lupin led the way along the hall, at the end of which was the staircase,
and to the right of that a door which was not fast, so that they passed
on quite easily to the domestic portion of the house, and soon found the
way to a kitchen, which was upon the same floor. Then they opened a door
that led into a little sort of outhouse, paved with red bricks, and in
one corner of that was a larder, or safe, well stocked with provisions.
Lupin took from it a magnificent quarter of venison, with scarcely a
quarter of a pound cut from it; and that, with some bread were the only
viands that he felt disposed to take from the larder.

"It will be wholesome," he said, "and do us a world of good, by the aid
of Providence; and we don't know what we may have to go through yet, in
this world of woe. Amen!"

"You fancy you are in the chapel again."

"Dear me; yes, I do--I do. Well, well, it don't matter--it don't matter.
Come, friend Todd. Let us recruit ourselves a little. Oh, that I could
find the way to the wine cellar of these people; and yet that should not
be a difficult matter. Let us think. It must be somewhere hereabouts."

"There is a door," said Todd, pointing to one at the end of the
outhouse. "It seems to be locked, and if so, it is no doubt that of the
cellar."

"We will try it," said Lupin.

With this he quickly opened the door, by the aid of his picklocks, which
no ordinary lock could withstand the fascinations of for a moment, and
then sure enough the supposition of Todd was found to be correct, for a
goodly collection of bottles in long rows presented themselves to the
eye. Lupin at once laid hold of a bottle, and breaking off the neck of
it he decanted a quantity of its contents into his throat, rubbing his
stomach as he did so in a most ludicrous kind of way, to indicate how
much he enjoyed the draught.

"Nectar," he said, when he took the bottle from his mouth to enable
himself to breathe; "nectar."

"Is it?" said Todd, as he seized upon another bottle. "I am partial
generally to something a trifle stronger than wine; but if it be really
good, I have no particular objection to a drop."

With this Todd finished off half a bottle of the rich and rare old port
that was in the cellar. They then worked away at the haunch of venison;
and having made a very hearty meal, they looked at each other as though
they would both say--"What next?"

"You say you have money?" said Lupin.

"True," said Todd.

"But not here of course, my friend; and who knows what difficulties we
may find in our way before we reach your nice little hoard? Where did
you say it was?"

"Hidden beneath a tree in Caen Wood, close to the village of Hampstead.
I went one night, and myself placed the cash there in case of
accidents."

"And how much do you suppose, my friend, there is?"

"I know what there is. I put away two thousand pounds, and that you know
will be a thousand pounds for you, and another for me. I purpose in that
manner equitably to share it, for I am not ungrateful for the great
assistance you have been to me in this escape from Newgate."

If Mr. Lupin had not swallowed two-thirds of a bottle of old port-wine,
the probability is that he would have detected that Todd was deceiving
him, by the whining canting tone in which he spoke. The fact was, that
Todd had not one farthing hidden in Caen Wood; but he thought it highly
desirable while there existed any danger, and while Mr. Lupin was likely
to be useful to him, to keep up such a delusion.

"Well," added Lupin, "you really are a liberal fellow; but as, I say,
there is no knowing what good a trifle may be to us before we reach your
snug two thousand pounds in Caen Wood, I propose to see what we can get
in this house. People who keep such a good cellar, and such a capital
larder, ought to have something in the place worth the taking in the way
of cash."

"Yes, but I am afraid it will be hazardous," said Todd.

"A little, perhaps; but with this carving knife, don't you think we
might make things pleasant?"

"That is possible. Well, if anything worth having is to be got, let us
set about it at once; for I think we have spent time enough in this
house; and no doubt our friends are upon the move off, if they have not
gone long before this."

"Come on, then."

They both left the kitchen, and each being armed with a knife, they
cautiously opened all the room doors on that floor; but they only found
the usual furniture of such apartments, and it was quite clear that no
cash was to be had in that portion of the premises.

"Come up stairs," said Lupin, with a look of savage determination. "Come
on, Todd; we will see what can be done up stairs."

They carefully ascended the staircase, but they only just peeped into
the drawing-room, and then they went up to the floor upon which the
bed-rooms were situated. They paused at the first door they came to, and
Lupin very carefully tried the lock. It was only on the latch, and in
the room a rushlight was burning. They both crept in, and their
footsteps made no noise upon the soft carpeting of the apartment. A bed
was in the room, and upon it lay a young lady. Lupin gave a hideous grin
as he looked at her, and then stooping down by the bed-side he said, in
a whisper--

"If you scream, everybody in this house will be murdered!--If you
scream, everybody in this house will be murdered! If you--Oh, that will
do."

The young lady awakened with a start, but the words that were twice
repeated still rung in her ears, and scream she did not, but she looked
half dead from fright.

"Now, my dear," said Lupin, "Providence has brought us to your bed-side,
and if you make any disturbance, we mean to submit you and the whole of
the family to the operation of a carving-knife, the Lord willing. All we
want is money, and if we can get that quietly, we will go and not so
much as ask your pretty little lips for a kiss."

[Illustration: The Murderers In The Young Lady's Chamber.]

"Oh, Heaven protect me!" said the young lady.

"A--men!" said Lupin. "Now my dear, who is in the house besides you?"

"My father, the alderman, and my mother, and the servants above
stairs.--Oh, spare my parents."

"Very good, where can any money be got hold of?"

"Will a hundred pounds content you?"

"Yes," said Todd, putting his head between the curtains at the foot of
the bed. The young lady gave a faint cry, and Mr. Lupin flourished the
carving-knife over her--"Where are the hundred pounds?" he said, "and we
will go."

"In my father's room. It is the next room. His purse is on the
dressing-table. If you will let me go and get it, I will give it to you
upon your promise then to leave the house."

"How are we to trust you not to say that we are here?"

"I swear by all that is holy--I use the name of the great God. Oh,
indeed you may trust me."

"Go," said Lupin.

The young lady got out of bed, and both Todd and Lupin followed her from
the room. She crossed the landing, and at once opened the door of a
room. Then they heard a man's voice say--"Who's that?" and the young
lady replied--"Only me, father. I want something out of your room. I
shall not be a minute." "Bless the girl," said a female voice--"What can
she want?"

In a minute or two the young lady came back to the landing where Todd
and Lupin were waiting for her.

"Now," said Lupin in a low voice--"Now, my little dear, have you got
it?"

"Quick--quick!" said Todd, "or you die. I am half a mind to cut your
throat as it is, just for the pleasure of the thing."

The young lady stood just upon the threshold of the door of her father's
room, and then as Lupin held up his light, she raised both her hands, in
each of which was a horse-pistol, and presenting one at Lupin's head and
one at Todd's, she said--

"Thieves! thieves! thieves!"




                            CHAPTER CXXXVII.
                  THE MURDER AT CAEN WOOD, HAMPSTEAD.


It would be quite impossible to describe the effect that was produced
upon Lupin and Sweeney Todd, by this heroic conduct on the part of the
young lady, from whom they did not in the least expect any such active
resistance to their proceedings.

Lupin was constitutionally, by far the greater coward of the two, and
when he saw the bright barrel of the pistol in such startling and
unexpected contiguity to his head, he at once stepped back, and missing
his footing, fell down the stairs to the landing-place immediately below
that flight.

Todd thought that there would be just a chance of dashing in upon the
young lady and disarming her of her pistols; but now that both of them
were levelled at him, and she began to cry out "Help! help! thieves!"
again, louder than before, he reluctantly abandoned the idea, and
turning, he bounded down the staircase.

The young lady leant over the stair-head and fired one of the pistols
after him, which so accelerated the movements of Todd, that he tumbled
right over Mr. Lupin, and fell down all the way to the hall with Lupin
after him.

Under any other circumstances than the dangerous and exciting ones in
which they were in, no doubt they would both of them have been too much
hurt to do anything but lie on their backs in the hall; but the feeling
that if they were taken it would be to death, was sufficient to rouse
them, and they both scrambled to their feet.

Lupin got the street-door open, and dashed out closely followed by Todd.
A watchman tried to stop them, but him they felled with a blow, and then
off went Lupin down a cross-street, that led him into Old-street Road,
and with Todd at his heels, who was very faint.

"Stop, stop!" panted Todd, "stop!"

"What for?" said Lupin.

"I cannot run so fast. Are you hurt? Oh, that I had a knife at that
girl's throat!"

Lupin paused, and held by a post at the corner of a street, and swore
dreadfully, as he too panted a little for breath, although he was by no
means so much used-up as Todd was. But then Lupin was a younger man, and
much lighter on his feet, than our old friend of murdering notoriety.

"Oh, dear," said Todd. "What's to be done now?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing, did you say? But, my dear friend, something must be done. We
have positively wasted half the night, and we are without money, and
half dead. I am covered with bruises from head to foot by the fall down
the staircase, and it will be daylight in another half hour or so at the
utmost."

"Ah," said Lupin, "we must breakfast somewhere, I'm thinking, my
friend."

"And so am I."

"Well, well, we have made certainly a mess of our adventure at the
alderman's; but it can't be helped now. The idea, only to think of it
now, Todd, of you and I, two such men as we are, and as the world
refutes us to be, being beaten back, and, you may say, thrown down two
pair of stairs, by a girl of sixteen or thereabouts."

Todd growled out some malediction.

"It was the will of Providence," said Lupin. "But who is this? Stand
aside, Todd, and let this old gentleman pass on. We may as well not be
seen and described by any one."

"Do you think he may likely have enough about him," whispered Todd, "to
pay our expenses for the day?"

"A lucky thought. It is more than likely that he has. Knock him down and
rob him, Todd. There's not a soul in sight. Give him one of the knocks
you used to give the poor devils you made the pies of, you know."

"Be quiet," said Todd, "I am amazed that a man of your profound sense
and sagacity, should give ear to such idle rumours about me! I am really
both shocked and surprised, Mr. Lupin!"

"Amen!" said Lupin. "You rob the old man, and we won't quarrel about any
such nonsense, Todd. Here he comes, grinning like an old polecat. What
business has a man of that age out at such a time as this?"

"None," said Todd, "except to provide us with a little money."

Todd cast a keen glance around him, and was convinced that the report of
Mr. Lupin that no one was in sight was quite correct, so he stepped up
to the old man, and said--

"Good morning, sir."

"Thieves! thieves!" cried the old man, and began to run, but Todd put
out one of his long legs and tripped him up. Then pouncing upon him, he
extracted a well-filled purse from his pocket, and holding it up to
Lupin, he said--

"This will do?"

"Rather," replied Lupin. "Come on."

Off set Lupin again on a run, rather to the discomfiture of Todd, who
had not had such a scampering about for a long time indeed; but yet he
felt the necessity of getting as soon as possible out of the immediate
vicinity of the old man whom they had just robbed, so they did not stop
until they got right away on the northern side of Finsbury Square.

That side of the ancient square of Finsbury was not built then; and
beyond it, where there is now such a squalid and uninviting
neighbourhood, there was nothing but fields.

"Now," said Lupin. "Let us look at the purse!"

"Here it is," said Todd.

"It's very light!"

The fact was, that notwithstanding the speed at which he was compelled
to run to keep up with Lupin, or rather to keep a few paces only behind
him, Todd had contrived to abstract the better part of the contents from
the purse, and to pocket them; for the story with which he had tickled
the ears of Lupin of his having any money concealed in Caen Wood,
Hampstead, was a mere delusion, got up for the purpose of making him,
Lupin, more than commonly solicitous concerning his, Todd's, safety in
the escape from Newgate.

"Yes," replied Todd, "it is light, but such as it is it may be of some
service to us. Take it, Mr. Lupin, and you can be the treasurer: you
know I can trust to you."

"Implicitly," said Lupin, as turning out the contents of the purse into
his hand, he said--"Here are four guineas and a half, and about six or
seven shillings in loose silver."

"Better than nothing," said Todd, with a look of great philosophy. "Our
first care now is to get a breakfast."

"I don't know," said Lupin. "I took quite enough at the alderman's to
last me some time. I should say, get out of London as quickly as we
possibly can; and when we are at Caen Wood, we can, at our ease,
consider what course we will feel inclined to take with our money in our
pockets."

"A couple of thousands," said Todd.

"Exactly so. I move that we strike across the fields now at once, and
make for Highgate and Hampstead, so that at each step we shall be
leaving some danger behind us."

"Agreed," said Todd. "Come on! For my part I should like very much to
find a conveyance of some sort; but that, I suppose, is impossible."

"Quite! Besides, on foot we are much less likely to be recognised and
described. Come on, Todd; you ought to be able to walk to Hampstead,
surely, after the little trifling exercise that you have had only."

"Trifling, do you call it?" said Todd, making one of his most hideous
faces. "Trifling! I have not a bone in my body that don't ache.
Trifling? I am one mass of bruises from top to toe, and I never, in all
my life, felt so exhausted; but yet the love of life and of liberty will
lend me strength; so, come on; I will go on to Hampstead, and I will
reach it, my friend, unless I drop by the way."

"Well spoke," said Lupin.

They now pursued a course which led them rapidly by the back of the City
Road, and through the now well-populated district called Hoxton; and
keeping on in that way they crossed the high-road near to Stamford Hill,
and soon began to get a good view of the heights of Highgate and
Hampstead in the distance.

"Brandy," said Todd, "brandy!"

"Why, what's the matter?"

"My good friend, I can't get on without some brandy. I am rather used to
a little stimulant at times, so I must have it. Then we have no risk now
to run by going into a public-house."

"I don't know that, Todd. But if you can't do without, some brandy you
must have. To be sure, we are in luck's way, so far, that we are
provided with hats and coats from the alderman's hall, and, therefore,
people cannot have a description of us. The first quiet little hotel we
come to, Todd, I promise you that I will not object to our stopping at,
so that you may have your drop."

"Yes," said Todd, "that will do. My good friend, it is the only thing
that keeps me up. When I used to feel a little down in spirits I poured
some other spirits down, and then I get up again."

"Exactly. Here we are, at an old roadside house called the Adam and Eve,
which will be the very thing. They may take you for Adam and me for Cain
or Abel.--Come along."

They halted at the door of the little public-house, but upon going in
they found the landlord and landlady bargaining with a man who was
hawking something, and the following words came upon the startled ears
of Todd.

"Only threepence, sir, I assure you, and the most exact likeness of
Sweeney Todd, the murderer; taken while he was on his trial at the Old
Bailey. You will see what a look he has, and the artist has been most
successful in the squint: and only threepence."

"He will be hanged on Monday, of course?" said the publican's wife.

"Oh yes, ma'am, in course, and there's expected such a crowd as never
was known at the execution."

"No doubt of it. Well, I'll give twopence."

"And a drop of ale," said the publican.

"Here you are, master, you shall have it. A capital likeness. If you was
only now to catch a sight of the original Todd, you'd know him in a
moment by the look of this picture, particularly the squint."

"Come in," whispered Lupin to Todd.

"Oh no--no--I don't want the brandy now."

"But I do. Your speaking about it, has got me into the mind of wanting
some now; so come on and let us have it, my friend, at once. Why, you
are not afraid that the portrait is too good a likeness, are you?"

"Oh dear, I don't know," said Todd. "I believe I have a remarkable nose,
and rather an engaging look about the eyes.--Come along."

"A quartern of the best brandy," said Lupin.

Todd felt that now the safest thing he could do, was to brave the matter
out, as anything in the shape of a retreat would be much worse than
actually making an appearance at the bar of the public-house; and then
it was truly ridiculous to see the manner in which Todd strove to alter
the cast of his features, by protruding one lip, and putting on what he
thought as a kind of satisfied smirking smile, extremely difficult,
indeed, for his usual expression of face.

There was only one slight comfort he felt, and that was in the
circumstance that the news of their escape from Newgate had not yet
reached that place.

"A nice, bracing morning, gentlemen," said the publican.

"Very, by the goodness of providence," said Lupin.

"Amen!" said Todd.

"I have just, gentlemen, been buying a portrait of the execrable Todd;
and if either of you have happened to see him in London, perhaps you can
tell me if it is at all like the villain. We frighten our children now,
if they misbehave themselves at all, and tell them that Todd is coming
to make them into pies, and then they are as quiet as possible. Ha! ha!"

"How funny," said Todd,

"Well," said Lupin, as he looked at the twopenny portrait of Todd, with
a pretended critical air, "I don't think it's like him at all. I saw him
at Newgate; and my friend here, is more like him than this picture."

"You don't say so, sir?" said the landlord.

"He! he!" laughed Todd--"ho! ho!"

How he wished at that moment that he could have taken Lupin by the
throat and strangled him!

The brandy was duly discussed, and Lupin having paid for it out of the
contents of the old gentleman's purse, took a courteous adieu of the
landlord, and with Todd left the house.

"Gracious goodness!" exclaimed Todd, "how could you dream of saying what
you did about me at the bar?"

"My good friend, that was for the express purpose of drowning suspicion
for you. I saw the landlady staring at you most fixedly, and so I said
it on purpose, for fear she should really begin to think you could be no
other than Todd the murderer--the execrable Todd, with whom they
frighten the children."

"Oh, well," said Todd, "don't say anything more about it. I am quite
satisfied. Indeed, I am more than satisfied, my dear friend."

"I thought you would be, when you come to think--"

"Oh, dear, yes."

"You may depend, Todd, that the greatest safety always runs alongside of
the greatest danger; and that when you think that your fortunes are at
the lowest, you may not unfrequently be upon the point of a highly
favourable change: and it's all by the goodness of Providence."

"Bother you!" said Todd. "I do believe, if you were to live for a
hundred years, you would not forget your chapel experience."

"Perhaps not; but I made a good bit of money that way, taking one thing
with another, Mr. Todd."




                           CHAPTER CXXXVIII.
               CAEN WOOD AND HAMPSTEAD IN THE OLD TIMES.


In such discourse as this, the precious pair beguiled the way to
Highgate, from which they proposed crossing to Hampstead.

Notwithstanding the liberal potations that they had taken at the
Alderman's house; and notwithstanding the brandy that had since been
discussed, they neither of them felt any the worse for the imbibition.
Probably, the active exercise they took carried off all bad effects.
But, certainly, when they reached Highgate, both Todd and Lupin were
hungry.

"Let us turn into the Old Gate-House Tavern," said Lupin.

"Don't you think a more obscure place," suggested Todd, "would be better
for us, as we do not by any means court popularity?"

"No; there is more safety in a large place like the Gate House, where
plenty of guests are coming and going continually, than in a little bit
of a public-house where we should be looked at, and scrutinised from top
to toe, from the moment we went in to the moment we came out."

"Very good," said Todd. "I think you reason well enough upon the point,
and I give in to your better judgment completely. Ah! my good friend, I
really don't know what I should have done at all without you."

"Been hanged!" said Lupin.

Todd gave a shudder, which was a tolerably convincing proof of how fully
he agreed in what Mr. Lupin said; and then they went into the Old
Gate-House Tavern, at Highgate, where they had a very plentiful
breakfast; and by getting into a corner of the room, in which they sat,
they did not attract any observation beyond the mere casual regards of
the visitors to the house.

Before they left though, Todd had the horror of hearing a great
confusion of voices in the passage, and in a few moments one of the
waiters came into the room, quite bursting with his news.

"Gentlemen," he said, "the notorious Todd, and a man named Lupin, who
was a murderer likewise, have escaped from Newgate!"

"Escaped?" said Lupin. "You don't say so?"

"Dear me, when?" said Todd.

"Last night, gentlemen, last night; and--coming--coming!"

The waiter was compelled to leave the room, as a bell rung violently.

"Let us go," said Todd.

"Yes, I think, now that the news has reached here, it will be wise to do
so."

"Come along, then."

Todd rose in a moment; but Lupin in a whisper strictly cautioned him not
to show any symptoms of hurry or alarm; and he was so far master of
himself to see the necessity of such a caution, so that they both got
safely out of the Gate-House Tavern, and took the route to Hampstead by
Swains Lane, without having anything said to them.

"This is an escape indeed," said Todd.

"Yes," said Lupin, "you may depend that in a very little time there will
be some officers at the Gate-House; but if we can get to the wood within
the next half hour, I think we are safe enough. What do you think?"

"I think that if our safety depends upon getting into Caen Wood in
half-an-hour, we ought to be there in half the time."

"Do you? Then come on for a run."

"Oh, dear," said Todd. "I am all aches and pains, and not at all fit for
running; but I suppose I must. Don't go very fast, Mr. Lupin, or I shall
never be able to keep up with you."

"Then you go first and run as fast as you can without greatly
distressing yourself, and I will adopt my speed to yours."

"That will be better," said Todd.

Off they both set down Swains Lane, and as the first part of that
well-known thoroughfare from Highgate to Hampstead goes down hill, they
got on speedily with very little exertion; but when the foot of the
little slope was reached it was quite another thing, and Todd was fast
subsiding into a walk, when Lupin cried to him--

"We are pursued!"

At these words, Todd fell flat in the roadway.

"Up--up!" said Lupin, "there is a turn in the lane just ahead of us, and
when we reach that we must get over the hedge and hide. I don't know
that they are actually after us, but there are horsemen in the lane
coming from Highgate."

Todd got up as far as his hands and knees, and then, as his ears were
close to the ground, he said--

"We are lost, for I can hear horsemen coming from the other direction
too."

"The deuce you can!"

Mr. Lupin stooped to listen, and in a moment he was assured of the fact.
He seized Mr. Todd by the collar, saying--

"Now, Todd, if you want to escape, rouse yourself and follow me; but if
you don't care about it, say so at once, and I will look after my own
safety."

"Care about it?" cried Todd, "what else do you suppose I care about in
all the world?"

"Come on, then."

"Here I am. Oh, yes I'm coming on--as quick as you like now, Lupin. The
dread of capture banishes all fatigue. I can now run like a hunted
hare."

"There is no occasion," said Lupin. "This way. We must hide now; speed
would do us but little good against horsemen.--This way."

Lupin ran on until he got to the turn of the lane, which hid the
horsemen from Highgate effectually from their view; and as the mounted
party coming from the direction of Hampstead had not got so far as to
appear, he thought it was just the place to halt at.

"Now, Todd," he said, "we must get over the hedge here, and our only
chance of safety, if these men are really on the look-out for us, is to
hide in the meadow."

Without waiting for Todd to make any remark upon the very doubtful means
of escape presented, Lupin scrambled through the hedge. Todd then
followed him, and the first care of Lupin's was to arrange the twigs
that had been displaced in the hedge by their passage through it, so
that there should not appear to be any gap at all there.

Immediately upon the other side of the hedge which they had thus crossed
there was a ditch, and a large heap of manure. Mr. Lupin, without the
slightest ceremony, laid himself down, and pulling a lot of the manure
heap over him, he nearly covered himself quite up.

"This is very shocking," said Todd.

"It's quite a luxury compared to a cell in Newgate," replied Lupin. "You
had better be quick."

The word Newgate acted upon the imagination of Todd as a very powerful
spell, and he at once lay down and began to follow the example of his
friend, Lupin; and indeed so very anxious was he while he was about it
to hide himself completely, that he nearly smothered himself outright in
the manure.

"I hope this will do," he moaned.

"Silence!" said Lupin.

Todd was as still as death in a moment.

As they now lay close to the earth, all sounds upon it were much more
clearly brought to their senses than when they were walking, so that
there was no sort of difficulty in distinguishing the tread of the
horses that were coming from Highgate from those that proceeded from the
other direction, and which latter ones were not quite so near as the
others.

Faintly, too, they could hear the hum of commotion, which showed that
the party consisted of three or four persons.

And now the mounted men from Highgate got right down into the hollow,
close to the bend in the lane, and they paused, while one said, in a
clear voice--

"We ought not to go any further. Those from Hampstead should meet us
now, I think."

"They are coming," said another.

"Ah! so they are. I wonder if they have seen anything of the rascals. I
do hope they will soon be nabbed, for this patrolling business is very
tiresome."

These words were quite sufficient, if any doubt had been upon the minds
of Lupin and Todd, to convince them that the mounted men were after
them, and of the great peril they would have been in if they had staid
in the lane.

To be sure there was nothing in what had been said to add to the
supposition that the horsemen had any knowledge of the fact that the
persons they sought were in that neighbourhood, and that might be
considered to decrease the danger a little; but yet it was sufficiently
great, under all circumstances.

In the course of the next two minutes the Hampstead party came up and
joined the others.

"Any luck?" said one.

"No, we came right on across the heath, but we neither saw nor heard
anything of them, and it is quite impossible to say, as yet, that they
have come in this direction at all. I don't myself think it at all
likely."

"Why not?"

"Because of all neighbourhoods close to London, it is the most high and
exposed, while at the same time it is not thickly peopled."

"Well, there may be something in that. We have heard nothing of them in
Highgate up to now, so I suppose we may go back again the way we came,
and you will do the same."

"Have you been in any of the meadows?"

"No. But it's easy to get over the gate yonder, and take a look all
round. The enclosures are not very numerous about here, and they would
find it difficult to hide. Hold my horse, George, and I'll get into the
meadows and take a look."

When Todd heard these words, he looked upon himself as lost, and could
hardly suppress a groan.

The man who had last spoken got over a gate that was at some little
distance off, and stood upon an elevated spot of the meadows to look
about him.

"There's nothing moving," he said.

"Come along, then," cried another. "Let's get on."

"Here's a compost heap; they are perhaps in the middle of that. Is it
worth looking at?"

"Not exactly. Come on."

The man retired to the road again and mounted, and in the course of a
few moments the two parties rode back again upon the way that they had
come.

"Todd?" said Lupin, "Todd?"

"Oh!" groaned Todd.

"Todd, I say, get up. Are you out of your mind? The danger is past now.
They are gone."

"Gone!" said Todd, looking up. "You don't say so? Didn't I hear one of
them say that he would look in this very place?"

"Yes; but that was only a joke."

"A joke?" said Todd with a deep groan. "A joke was it? Oh, how very
careful people should be when they make jokes, when other people are
hiding from their enemies. It might be very funny to him, but it was
quite the reverse to me."

"That's true enough; but get up now, and in the name of everything
that's safe and comfortable, let us get to the wood. These fellows are
evidently patrolling the road, and they will be back again in a little
while, and still come across us if we don't manage to get out of their
way before that time.--Come along. We can get to the wood now quickly."

"Ah, dear me!" said Todd, as he shook himself to get rid of as much of
the unsavoury mess he had lain in as possible. "Ah dear me! truly I have
now hit upon evil times; and fortune, that I thought petted me, has
slipped from me like a shadow, leaving me glad of a manure heap in a
field as a place of shelter."

"All that is very true," said Lupin, "but it don't get us on a bit."

"I'm ready--I'm quite ready," groaned Todd.

They were upon the point of going into the lane again, but they were
compelled--or rather thought it prudent--to wait until a man had passed,
who, by the box that he carried on his back, was evidently a hawker of
goods about the country. He soon trudged out of their way, and then they
both got through the hedge again into the lane.

The place of their destination was now close at hand, upon their left;
and watching a favourable spot by which to do so, they crossed the hedge
upon that side and got into the fields; but although a sharp run across
two or three meadows would have taken them at once to Caen Wood, they
did not think it at all prudent so to expose themselves to observation.

"Skirt the hedge, Todd," said Lupin, "and stoop down so as to keep your
head as much below the top of the hedgerow as possible. You are
inconveniently tall, just now."

Upon this instruction, Todd bent himself almost double, and in that
attitude he managed to scramble close to the hedge, and up to his knees,
at times, in the ditches and drains that he came across in such a
situation.

In this way, then, they got on until they reached the outskirts of Caen
Wood. Not a creature was to be seen, and the most profound and solemn
stillness, reigned around them. Todd was not used to that intense quiet
of the country and he shook at it rather, but Lupin took no notice of
his emotion.

"Here we are, at last," he said, "and all you have to do, Todd, is to
point out the spot where you have hidden your money, and then we will
divide it, and wait until nightfall before we venture out of this snug
place."

"Come along," said Todd; "it's all right."

And then they both dived amongst the trees, which, in some places, quite
shut out the daylight.




                            CHAPTER CXXXIX.
           THE ADVENTURES IN CAEN WOOD OF THE TWO MURDERERS.


Todd was so much exhausted by the time they reached the wood, that he at
once cast himself to the ground upon a heap of dry leaves, and he felt
that he was speaking only the truth when he said--

"I could not go a step further just now, if it were to save my life, I
feel that I could not; and here I must lie and rest."

"Dear me!" said Mr. Lupin; "what a poor creature you must be. How old
are you, Mr. Todd?"

"I don't know," said Todd. "The church I was christened at was burnt
down only the day after, and all the books burnt. My father and mother
are dead, and the nurse was hanged, and the doctor cut his throat."

"Upon my word," said Lupin, "they were a lively set. I suppose it was
remorse did all that?"

"Remorse! What do you mean by remorse?"

"Why that sort of feeling, you know, might be awakened in their minds,
by finding that you were not exactly the sort of baby that was expected.
You must have looked a beauty in long-clothes, Todd; and as for your
age, I should guess it about fifty-five."

"Guess your own age," said Todd, "and leave mine alone."

"Oh, if it's at all a sore subject I won't say another word about it.
But come now, Todd, you charming creature, could you not manage to crawl
a little way further?"

"What for? If we are safe in the wood at all, we are safe enough here
where we are now."

"But, my dear friend, you quite forget."

"What--what? What do I forget? Don't plague me, Lupin. It is enough just
now to remember that we have by almost a miracle made an escape from
Newgate; and as for forgetting, I would be right glad to forget if I
could that I had ever been there; but that will be impossible."

"It won't be very easy," said Lupin, "and if possible, it will take a
long time; but what I was just mildly going to remind you of was, that
in this wood your two thousand pounds, you know, are hidden, and that we
were to share the amount."

"Ah, my dear friend, yes, I had not forgotten that little affair. It is,
of course, very important; but let me rest a little, if you please."

"Oh, certainly--certainly."

"And then, my dear companion, it will be necessary to get a spade, you
know, to dig it up. Our nails decidedly are neither long enough or
strong enough, and I don't at all see how it is to be done without a
spade, or something that shall be a good substitute for one."

"Oh, nonsense," said Lupin. "How deep do you suppose it lies?"

"About two feet."

"Very good then, you need give yourself no uneasiness about the digging
it up. I have the chisel and the two files here; and if I can't dig two
feet into the earth with them, and my hands to shovel out the mould
with, I'm a Dutchman, that's all. Only you show me the spot, that's all,
and I won't ask you to tire yourself in the matter."

"In a little," said Todd, "in a little. Without being so old as you
would make me out, I am still older than you are Lupin, and cannot go
through the amount of fatigue that you can. Just let me recover myself a
little, and then instead of crawling to the spot where my money lies
hidden, I shall be well able to walk to it and show it to you."

"Very good--very good. Of course I don't want to hurry you too much
about the matter, only the sooner we do get a hold of the two thousand
pounds the better. I wonder, too, that you don't feel rather anxious to
see that it is quite safe, for some accident might have discovered it,
for all you know to the contrary."

"Oh no, my friend, nothing but an earthquake could do that. You may
depend it is quite safe where I put it. In a little time I shall be able
to show you the exact spot, which I have so accurately in my mind's eye,
that I can walk to it with the greatest of ease; of course I did not
trust such a valuable deposit to the ground without accurately marking
the spot that I had made my bank."

"Is it in gold?"

"All--all. I did think of hiding notes, but I was afraid that the damp,
if there should come any heavy rains, would have the effect of rotting
them, and I had no iron box sufficiently small to place them in; so I
brought all gold, and a good weight it was too."

"Ah, we will make that weight light by dividing it."

"Just so."

Lupin's mouth actually watered at the idea of getting possession of such
a sum, and as he turned his head aside, he muttered to himself--

"If I don't put Todd out of this world, and save the hangman the
trouble, it shall go hard with me, and then I shall have all the money
to myself, and I can get to America, and be a free and enlightened
citizen for the remainder of my days."

Mr. Lupin could hardly forbear an audible chuckle over this delightful
prospect; so that it will be seen that both of these villains meditated
evil intentions towards each other, from which it may be gathered how
much faith is to be put in the association of men for any guilty design.
Was it likely that such persons as Todd and Lupin, after being false and
ruffianly to all the world, should be true to each other, except so far
as their common interests dictated? No, Todd amused Lupin with the story
of the buried gold in the wood at Hampstead, because he, Lupin, was of
assistance in his escape from Newgate; and Lupin assisted him to escape
with the idea of murdering him in the wood, and securing for himself all
the money that he believed was there hidden!

It was quite evident that Lupin was desperately impatient at the rest
Todd was taking, previous to showing him where the money was hidden; and
he walked to and fro, looking as vexed as possible, and yet fearing to
say too much, lest he should get up a quarrel, the result of which might
be, that Todd would refuse to show him where the gold was at all.

"I think," he said, "if I were to manage to get a good thick stave off
some tree, it would help considerably in digging, would it not?"

"Without a doubt," said Todd.

"Then I will try, and by the time I have got it, perhaps you will be
rested enough, my dear friend, to make an effort to get up and show me
the spot where to dig for the gold."

"I shouldn't wonder," said Todd.

Mr. Lupin found that he was obliged to be contented with this doubtful
acquiescence of Todd's; and he busied himself, by the aid of the chisel
and the files, in getting off a stout strong bough from a sycamore-tree,
which he shaped to a tolerable point. It looked like a formidable
bludgeon; and as he eyed it, he thought what a capital knock on the head
it would give to Mr. Todd.

It was rather odd that the same idea crossed Todd's mind, and as he saw
the bit of wood, he muttered to himself--

"That would do it. One blow from that would do it."

Now, Todd had but one solitary incentive to the murder of Lupin, and
that was, that he feared when he found out how he had been deceived
regarding the money, he would find some mode of denouncing him to the
police, while he took care of himself; and, therefore, upon that mere
idea, Todd would take his life. But then, steeped in blood guiltiness as
Todd was, the taking the life of any one always seemed to him to be the
readiest way of solving any difficulty connected with them. It was his
motive to consider that that was the shortest and easiest mode of
settling the affair, if any one became at all troublesome; and he was
not all likely to make an exception in favour of such a personage as Mr.
Lupin.

"All ready?" said Lupin. "Are you rested now?"

"Yes," said Todd, as he rose. "Ah, dear me, yes, as much as I can
expect, until I get a regular night's repose, you know, friend Lupin.
But I don't expect that very soon."

"Oh, who knows? We are continually, in this world, getting what we don't
expect, and not getting what we do; so you may rest easy enough, Todd,
much sooner than you expect. Come, lean on my arm if you feel fatigued."

"Oh, no, thank you. Lend me the stick, it will help me on the best, for
it seems just about my height."

Lupin could not very well refuse Todd's request with any prospect of
keeping him in good humour at the same time, so he gave him the stick,
although it must be confessed he did not do so with the very best grace
in the world. But Todd did get it, and that satisfied him.

"Is it far off?" said Lupin.

"Oh dear, no. Quite close at hand--quite close. There's a small
chesnut-tree, and a large chesnut-tree, and there's a small fir-tree and
a large fir-tree, and a large oak-tree and a small oak-tree, and then
there is a blackberry bush and a little stream of water."

"Good gracious, is there anything else?" said Lupin.

"No, my dear friend, that is all."

"Well. I must confess, that your description would not have very
materially assisted me in finding the spot."

"Indeed, I thought nothing could possibly be more clear."

"Clear to you, Mr. Todd, it may be, but not to any one else; but that
don't matter a bit as you are here yourself to point out the exact spot.
Are we near it now?"

"Yes, you see that cluster of bushes?"

"Yes, oh yes."

"Well, the money lies hidden right in there, and you cannot miss it if
you scramble in."

"Lend me the stick to clear away the brambles and the nettles, and I
will creep in."

"My dear friend, I shall fall down if I lend you the stick. There is no
difficulty in getting in. Don't you see there is a gap that you have
only to push through, and there you are?"

"Well--well," said Lupin. "That's enough; I will get through. Come on,
let us secure the gold."

Lupin stooped to push his way through the gap in the hedge, for the
bushes grew so close together just there, that they resembled an
enclosure carefully planted on purpose. Then Todd took the heavy stick
that had been cut from the sycamore tree in both hands, and swinging it
in the air, he brought it down with a stunning crack on the back of
Lupin's head, just at the juncture of the neck.

"God!" said Lupin, and it was the first time in his life that, with true
sincerity, he had pronounced that sacred name. He then turned and sunk
to the ground, with his face towards Todd. He could not speak now, but
the look that he gave to his murderer was awful in the extreme. The
injury he had received had quite paralysed him, and his hands hung
helplessly. But the quality of mercy belonged not to Todd's composition.

Again the huge stick was raised, and this time it fell upon the top of
Lupin's head. The wretched man uttered one faint sigh and expired at
once.

"Dead!" said Todd, as he stood gaunt and erect before his victim, with
the stick stretched out in his hand. "Dead--quite dead. Ha!"

[Illustration: Todd Kills The Murderer, Lupin.]

Todd made one of his old faces. He must at that moment have fancied
himself engaged upon his ancient business in the cellars beneath his
house in Fleet Street, or he never could have made the sort of face
which had become so very incidental to him in that locality.

The body fell huddled up, and the change that rapidly took place in the
countenance, was something truly awful to behold; but it had not much
effect upon Todd. He had struck many a man down to rise no more, against
whom he had no cause of suspicion or of dread; and it was not likely
that he would scruple to do so to one whom he both feared and hated as
he did Mr. Lupin.

"That is done!" said Todd, as he slowly let his arm droop until the
stick touched the ground; and then relinquishing his grasp of it, he let
it fall entirely. "That is done!"

A slight noise close at hand made the murderer start, and caused the
blood to turn cold around his heart from very abject fear that there had
been some witness to his crime.

"What was that?" he said, "what was that?"

All was still again. It was but some wild bird taking flight from a low
branch of a neighbouring tree, not liking the vicinity of man, and
especially such a man as Mr. Todd; for we may well suppose even those
little feathered fragile things are gifted with some of that
physiognomical power that seems to be an attribute or an instinct of all
animals, with regard to the human race.

"It was nothing," said Todd very gently. "It was nothing at all. This
has been an easily done deed, and a safe one. Nearly noiseless, too. It
may be many a long day ere the body be discovered. I will drag it in
among the bushes, so as to hide it for as long a space as may be, else
if it were found early it would be a kind of index to my route, and
would, at all events, show that I had been here."

Full of this idea, Todd laid hold of the body and turned it back
upwards. He even did not like to look in the face more than he could
help. Then seizing the corpse by the collar of his coat, he dragged it
into the hollow space among the bushes, and cast it down, saying as he
did so--

"Rest you there, Mr. Lupin. I have only saved the hangman, after all,
the trouble of taking your life, for I can feel well assured, that such
would have been your end. You thought yourself a clever fellow, but
after all you were nothing to me. Rest there; you were useful up to the
moment that we reached the wood, and were in comparative safety. After
that, you became an encumbrance, and so I have got rid of you, as I am
in the habit of doing all such encumbrances to my views."

Sweeney Todd then crept out from among the bushes, and after having cast
the stick with which he had done the murder in among the bushes on top
of the body, he walked rapidly away to another part of the wood.

Ever and anon he stopped to listen if he could catch the slightest
indication of the presence of any one else in the wood; but all was
still, save now and then the song of some wild bird, as it lit for a few
moments upon the branch of some tree, to warble a few notes, and then
dart off again into the fresh and fragrant air.

"I am safe here," muttered Todd, "I am safe here for the present, and
until nightfall I will remain; but between this time and sunset, I must
determine what I shall do, and it must be done quickly, for on the
morrow the pursuit will be of a wider, as well as of a closer character
than what it has been to-day."




                              CHAPTER CXL.
   SHOWS HOW THE NEWS OF TODD'S ESCAPE WAS RECEIVED BY ALL CONCERNED.


Having traced Todd and Lupin thus far in their escape from the meshes in
which the law had so properly bound them, we will now for a time leave
the arch-villain Todd in Caen Wood, Hampstead Heath, while we take a
glance at what ensued in London, upon the escape of the two worthies
from Newgate.

It has often been remarked, that one person in London does not trouble
himself about his neighbour's affairs, as is done in smaller
communities, or know what is happening in his immediate vicinity; but it
is likewise true, that nowhere does news travel so fast, or acquire so
many exaggerations, as in London.

Thus, then, in the course of a few hours, there was scarcely a person in
the metropolis that was not aware of the escape of Sweeney Todd and Mr.
Josiah Lupin from Newgate. And not only were they aware of the mere fact
of the escape, but women had added so many extravagances to the whole
affair, that it was quite wonderful to think of the fertility of
invention of the illiterate persons who had added so many wonders and
exaggerations to the real facts of the case, which, after all, lay, as
the reader knows well, in a very small compass indeed, considering the
magnitude of the result.

Nor were the newspapers published on the ensuing morning at all backward
in pandering to popular taste by making the affair as striking and as
wonderful as they possibly could.

In one quarter of the town it was firmly believed that not only had Todd
and Lupin set Newgate on fire, but that they had murdered the governor
and half a dozen turnkeys, and then made their way into the Old Bailey
through the ruins of the prison over the dead bodies of their victims.

In another part of London it was currently reported that an infuriated
mob had attacked the prison, for the purpose of taking out Todd and
hanging him forthwith, and that in the midst of the confusion incidental
to such a scene, he had succeeded in making his escape in the disguise
of a turnkey, with a huge bunch of keys in his hand as a symbol of his
profession.

Then again, in the highly religious district of Islington, it was fully
believed, and, in fact, cried through the streets, that his Infernal
Majesty, in his own proper person, had called at Newgate at about half
past twelve at night, and taken away both the prisoners at once without
any further ceremony.

But all these idle rumours might be safely left to sink or swim as the
incredulity or the credulity of their authors and hearers might
determine, since it was after all only to a very few persons that the
escape of Sweeney Todd was of the smallest importance, and, to still
from that, the fate of Mr. Lupin was of any importance at all.

The persons with whose feelings and wishes we and our readers feel
interested, are those to whom the escape of Todd presented grounds for
some anxious and painful reflections; and it is to them and their
proceedings that we would now draw the attention of our readers.

One of the first persons to whom the news was taken in a clear and
compact unexaggerated form, was Sir Richard Blunt, and at an early hour
of the morning he was roused from his rest by a messenger, who presented
him with a brief note, containing only the following words from the
Secretary of Newgate--

    "Newgate.
    "SIR,

    "The prisoner, Sweeney Todd, has escaped from the jail, along with
    one Josiah Lupin.

    I am, Sir, Yours Obediently,
    "JOHN SMITH."

"The deuce he has!" cried Sir Richard, as he sprung out of bed and began
to dress himself with unusual speed, for Sir Richard seldom did anything
in a hurry, as experience had long since told him how very little was
gained by hurry and how much was sometimes lost.

As soon as he got his things on, he descended to his private room, and
there found an officer from the prison waiting to give him the
particulars of the escape, which was done in a very few words.

"And they are clear off?" said Sir Richard.

"Quite so sir."

"Well, after this, I rather think the Secretary of State will agree with
my opinion, that it is not bolts and locks and bars that are to be
trusted to, to keep notorious and bold malefactors in prison, but a
stout and watchful personal superintendence; and until that is the case,
there will be continual prison escapes. Such a man as Todd should not
have been allowed to be for five minutes quite alone."

"I think so, too," said the officer; "and there's another thing must be
put a stop to before any good is done in Newgate."

"What's that, my friend?"

"Why, Sir Richard, the religious ladies must be stopped from coming in.
The moment now that any notorious malefactor is cast for death, the
prison is besieged by religious ladies, who, if they had their own way,
would eat, drink, and sleep with him in his cell; and they bring in all
sorts of things that are quite enough to help the fellow out of limbo.
Why, Sir Richard, there was Michael Richardson that was cast for death
for murdering his wife; a religious lady came to pray with him, and
brought him in files and tools enough for him to get out of the stone
jug, and off they both went together to America."

"It is a serious evil."

"I believe you, Sir Richard; and, I think, the only way will be to let
'em all know that before they pass the lobby they will be well searched
by a couple of turnkeys."

"That ought to stop them," said Sir Richard, as he rung the bell
sharply. "You may depend upon it I will mention your suggestion to the
Secretary of State."

One of the magistrate's servants now made his appearance in answers to
the summons by the bell.

"My horse directly, Jones," said Sir Richard Blunt.

"Yes, sir."

In the course of ten minutes, Sir Richard Blunt was mounted, and off at
a good trot to the City. Any one would have thought that he was going to
Newgate; but such was not the case. The prisoners had flown, and he felt
that by going to the prison he could only gratify his curiosity by
seeing the precise mode in which they had effected their escape, when by
going where he did go, he might do some good.

He did not halt until he found himself at the shop of old Mr. Oakley,
and then, although the hour was a very early one, he knocked at the
door. Mr. Oakley put his head out at the window, and Sir Richard said--

"Don't be alarmed; I only want to speak to you for a few moments."

"Oh, dear me, yes," said the old man. "I'm coming down stairs
directly--I'm coming."

In a few moments the old spectacle-maker opened the door, and came out
to the side of the horse, from which the magistrate did not dismount,
but leaning down to Mr. Oakley, he said, in an earnest tone--

"There's no occasion for any alarm, but I have come to tell you that
Sweeney Todd has escaped from prison."

"Oh, Lord!"

"Hush! It is of no great moment. Where is your daughter and Mr.
Ingestrie? I must put them upon their guard against anything that may
arise, for there is no exactly saying what that rascal, Todd, may be
at."

"Oh, he will murder everybody."

"I think, Mr. Oakley that is going just a little too far, for I will
take good care that he don't murder me, nor any one else, if I can by
any possibility help it. I will soon have him, I think. Where is Mr.
Ingestrie, Mr. Oakley?"

"Oh, dear, they are at the new house in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. It's just
opposite to the water if you go--"

"I know all about it, thank you, Mr. Oakley. All's right. Be under no
apprehension, and above all things, don't you believe one word of
anything you hear about Todd from popular rumour or from the newspapers.
I will let you know everything that is of any consequence, personally or
by letter. Good morning. I hope Mrs. Oakley is quite well this morning?"

"Yes, charming; but, dear me!"

"Yes, it is dear me. Good morning."

Away rode the magistrate, and now he put his horse, which was a good
one, to a smart trot, and made his way to Colonel Jeffery's house in a
very short space of time; for London was not quite so large as it is
now, and it was not a day's journey to go from one house to another if
your friends happened to reside at different ends of the town. The
colonel, at that hour of the morning, was up and walking in his garden.
When Sir Richard Blunt was announced, he guessed at once that something
very unusual had taken place; and after shaking hands, he said--

"I know there's some news. Sir Richard. Is it pleasant, or the other
way?"

"In truth," said Sir Richard, "that is a question I can scarcely answer
you yet. All I have got to say is, that you had better look out, for
they have let Todd get out of Newgate."

"Escaped?"

"Exactly so."

"Now that is too bad. One would really have thought they would have
taken care of such a fellow as that. How in the name of all that's
abominable is it, that if any one escapes from Newgate, it is sure to be
some notorious rascal who ought by all means to be the most carefully
kept in it."

"Ah! that I don't know, but I quite agree with you that it is a fact
nevertheless."

"It's a very awkward thing, and I am particularly obliged to you for
coming to let me know."

"Why, the fact is, colonel, my opinion of Todd is just this: that now he
has lost all his money he is just like a wild beast, and that revenge
against all and every one who has been instrumental in bringing him to
his present condition, will be the dominant feeling in his breast."

"Not a doubt of it."

"Then by awaking you to a sense of this danger both to yourself and to
your _protege_, young Tobias, I am doing my duty. It is not courage that
will protect any one from Sweeney Todd. If that had been the case, this
is the last house I should have dreamt of coming to with a warning; but
it will be only by the greatest circumspection that his attempt to
assassinate may be avoided, and the villain foiled."

"I thank you with all my heart, and feel the truth of your observation.
I will not mention the matter to poor Tobias, for I feel that it would
drive him half mad with terror; but I will take care to keep such a
watch upon him, that no harm can come to him from Todd, now that I know
that there is danger. He may, of course, hear of the affair from other
sources, but he shall not from me."

"That is right. Mind you, colonel, I don't think this state of alarm
must last long, and as regards Tobias, I am in hope that at the same
time he hears of Todd's escape, he may hear of his recapture, for I am
going to set about that as soon as I possibly can, after I have warned
every one interested to keep themselves on the look-out concerning the
rascal."

"You think you will have him again?"

"Oh, yes. He must be without resources, or, at all events, comparatively
so; and under such circumstances, we shall soon trace him. Besides, he
is rather a remarkable man, and one who, once seen, is not only easily
known again, but easily described; so that when I set all the agencies
on foot which I have at my command to find him out, he cannot for long
elude me."

"I sincerely wish you every success."

"Thank you, colonel, for I must now be off, for I have to get to Chelsea
to warn the Ingestries of the possible, if not the probable danger of
Todd trying some delectable scheme of revenge against them, for he is
most furious I know against Johanna."

"Off with you, Sir Richard, at once. Do not let me detain you, when you
are upon such an errand. I would not have any harm come to Mrs.
Ingestrie for worlds."

"Nor I. Good morning."

The magistrate mounted his horse again, and waving his hand to the
colonel, he again started at a good round trot, and made the best of his
way by the nearest possible route he could to Chelsea, where Mr. and
Mrs. Ingestrie had set up housekeeping in Cheyne Walk.

That portion of Chelsea was then very fashionable, and from the
appearance of the houses even now, it is very easy to see that it must
have been a very desirable place at one time. All the evidences of
wealthy ease meet you on every hand, as you look at those broad,
well-put together, aristocratic residences, with their pretty bit of
highly cultivated garden in front of them, and their massive doorways.

It was in one of these houses that Johanna and her young husband had
taken up their residence. The string of pearls had been actually
purchased by royalty of Johanna, and had produced a sum of money that
had not only placed the young couple above all the ordinary pecuniary
accidents of life, but had enabled them to surround Mr. and Mrs. Oakley
with comforts, although the old spectacle-maker, from very habit, would
stick to his shop, declaring, and no doubt with great truth, that his
daily labour was now such a thing of habit that he would be miserable
without it.

It was a very different thing, though, for old Mr. Oakley now to work at
the bench in his shop, when he felt that he was placed above the real
necessity for doing so, to when he had worked very hard indeed to
support himself and Johanna, during the period, too, when in consequence
of Mrs. Oakley's rather insane predilection for the Reverend Josiah
Lupin, there was no comfort in the house, and, but for Johanna, all
would have gone to rack and ruin.

The frightfully dirty ditch that lies before and beyond Cheyne Walk,
Chelsea, was not then in existence, so that the really handsome row of
residences was not destroyed--as it is now--by such dubious
companionship. The river, too, was much clearer than now of craft, and
likewise much sweeter, so that really at times, when the sun shone upon
its ripples, it really deserved the title of "The Silver Thames."

It was still an early hour when Sir Richard Blunt reached Chelsea--that
is to say, it was what then was considered an early hour, for all the
world was not in the hurry that is the fashion now, and people did
everything in a much more easy and deliberate way than they do now.

What is gained, or pretended to be gained, by all the hurry-skurry and
jostling and driving that characterises society at present? We must
confess ourselves at a loss to imagine, and we are decidedly of opinion
that people were both happier and better when everything was taken in an
easy way, and when folks did not disturb their dignities by all sorts of
frantic manoeuvres to save time, as if the whole end and aim of life was
to get through as much of what is called business as possible, and as if
the principal business of everybody was not to be as quiet and
comfortable as possible.

The magistrate could not but pause for a moment as he reached Cheyne
Walk and saw the bright sun shining upon the water, and gilding with
beauty the sails of some small craft that were taking advantage of a
light pleasant breeze to get along without labour.

"A pretty enough place this," he said, "and I don't know any that I
should prefer to idle away my life in, if I had nothing to do, as I hope
to have some of these odd days--but not yet."




                             CHAPTER CXLI.
             SHOWS HOW TODD MADE UP HIS MIND TO VENGEANCE.


Sir Richard drew bridle opposite the house of Mr. Ingestrie, and called
to an urchin who was passing to ring the bell for him.

The boy complied and in a few moments a servant made an appearance, to
whom Sir Richard said--

"If your master is stirring, pray tell him that a gentleman wishes to
speak to him for a few moments."

These words were hardly past the lips of the magistrate, when some one,
with a bunch of flowers in her hand, and one of the prettiest of pretty
morning dresses, came to the door. It was our old, dear, young, kind
friend, Johanna! We cannot help calling her Johanna still, although,
perhaps, it would be more proper for us to name her Mrs. Ingestrie; but
it seems so odd to append that title of "Mrs." to our gentle, youthful
Johanna, whose dangers in Todd's shop we have watched and trembled at so
often in times past.

"Ah! my dear friend," she cried, when she saw who it was. "I am so glad
to see you!"

"And I am equally glad to see you," said Sir Richard, "particularly as
you look so well and so happy."

[Illustration: Sir Richard Blunt Pays A Visit To Johanna, At Chelsea.]

"Yes, I am happy. Mark! Mark! here is Sir Richard come to breakfast with
us."

"Nay, I did not think of dismounting."

"Oh, but you must. I will hold the bridle of the horse, and you will
have to ride over me if you attempt to go away. Mark--Mark! where are
you!"

Upon these repeated calls, Mark Ingestrie make his appearance at the
door, and looked pleased enough to see Sir Richard, who, finding that
they would take no sort of denial, he felt that he could not do
otherwise than dismount and enter the house. A servant of the Ingestries
took charge of his horse, and he was soon in the breakfast-room of the
pretty house, inhabited by the young couple.

It did not escape the observation of Johanna that there was a cloud of
seriousness upon the countenance of Sir Richard Blunt; but she did not
make any remark, although each moment she felt more and more convinced
that it was some matter of business that called the magistrate to their
abode so early; for it will be remembered that although he had
transacted a good quantity of business, the day was yet very young.

Mark Ingestrie did not appear to have any idea beyond the fact that it
was very kind of the magistrate to visit them; but the reader will
easily excuse him for not being so acute an observer as Johanna.

"I hope," said Mark, "that you will often take a canter over here, Sir
Richard, before the business of the day commences, and breakfast with
us. I know how very hopeless it is to expect you often at any other
time."

"It is rather so," replied Sir Richard, "and my stay now must be very
limited indeed. How do you both like your new house?"

"It is charming," said Johanna, "and the view from the windows is full
of animation for the greater part of the day."

"It's the view in-doors," smiled Mark, "that to me is so delightful and
so full of animation."

"That is just what I should have supposed," said the magistrate,
glancing at Johanna with a smile.

"Now, positively, I must go and take my breakfast in some other room,"
said Johanna, "if there are to be any compliments. They are quite
absurd, you know, among married folks."

"And a little unfair," said Sir Richard, "at meal times, I think, above
all others."

"Indeed?" said Mark.

"Yes, to be sure," added Johanna, "for you know one is either obliged to
hear the compliments, which feed no one but with false viands, or leave
the table upon which there may be something much more substantial and
decidedly more palatable."

"I give in," said Mark, "I give in. I don't for one moment profess to be
a match for you alone, my dear; but when you get Sir Richard to side
with you, I feel that I had better say as little as possible."

"A graceful defeat," said Sir Richard, "is almost as good as a clumsy
victory."

"Much better," said Johanna, "a great deal better. But now, Sir Richard,
you have not ridden over here to help us at our breakfast, or to talk
badinage."

Mark opened his eyes very wide indeed, and looked from Johanna to the
magistrate, and from the magistrate to Johanna, with evident surprise.
An expression of great anxiety was each moment gathering over the face
of Johanna, which Sir Richard saw, and with all that tact which with him
was a kind of second nature, he said--

"I have had the pleasure of seeing your father this morning, and they
are all well at the old house, and as comfortable as can be."

Johanna drew a long breath of relief, and then Mark Ingestrie cried in a
voice of surprise--

"What? Do you mean to say you have been in the city before you came
here, sir?"

"I have, my friend, and I have been to Colonel Jeffery's, too, before I
came here. If I had not, I should not be able to indulge myself with the
pleasure of staying here for even the short time that I have been
beneath your roof. I must, however, go."

"Something has happened!" said Johanna.

"So there has," said the magistrate with a smile, "but it cannot be
anything very serious, you know, as all our dear friends are well.
Anything falls light in comparison with the health and happiness of
those whom we love."

"Oh, yes--yes," said Johanna. "You are right, and you are very good to
preface bad news in so kind a manner, Sir Richard. It is good, and kind,
and grateful, and like you in all respects. I thank you from my heart."

"But what's it all about?" cried Mark Ingestrie. "Good gracious, what's
it all about? Who talks of bad news? If all our friends are well, how
can there be bad news? Do not keep us in suspense, Sir Richard!"

"No--no," said Johanna.

"I will not."

Both Johanna and Mark Ingestrie looked most intently at the magistrate,
as he said in his quiet way--

"Sweeney Todd has escaped from Newgate, and is now at large!"

Mark Ingestrie sprang to his feet, and Johanna, for a moment, turned
rather pale.

"The villain!" cried Mark.

"Hush!" said Johanna. "Oh, hush, Mark!"

"It was of the utmost importance," continued Sir Richard Blunt, speaking
quite calmly, "that all who were in any way comprehended in the list of
what Sweeney Todd would call his enemies, should be speedily informed of
this fact, and that is what has brought me to Chelsea at so early an
hour in the morning."

"We thank you from our hearts," said Johanna.

"We do, indeed," said Mark. "But let him beware of me. He dare not,
villain as he is, come within the reach of my arm. The spirit of my poor
murdered friend, Thornhill, will cry aloud for vengeance, and nothing
should save the murderer from death."

"Oh, Mark--Mark!" said Johanna, "do not speak in such a strain. You do
not know Todd. You know nothing of the character and of the capabilities
of that man. He is not only one of the most wicked, but he is likewise
one of the most crafty and unscrupulous."

"That is true," said the magistrate. "He does not know him. Do you
suppose for one moment, Mr. Ingestrie, that I would have ridden over
here to give you such a special warning concerning this man, if I
apprehended any open attack? No--that I could have trusted to you to
ward off. Your life has been one of danger and adventure; but not you,
nor I, nor all the world, can be prepared against what Todd may, in the
profound depths of his imagination, attempt."

"All that is true," said Johanna, "most true."

"You now really alarm me!" said Mark.

"Then I did not mean to do so. All I wished was that you should be made
aware of the real extent of the possible danger. For myself, I look upon
all such men as Sweeney Todd as mad men, to a certain extent; and now
that he is deprived of his money, there is no knowing but he may be
willing to sacrifice his life for the gratification of, no doubt, one of
the most powerful feelings of his mind, which is revenge!"

"No doubt," said Johanna.

A flush of colour came over the cheek of the young husband, and he took
the hand of Johanna in his, as he said--

"Oh, Sir Richard, only tell me now I may best secure this treasure
against the machinations of that monster in human shape."

"Nay, now, Mr. Ingestrie," said Sir Richard, "do not fall into the other
extreme, and make too much of this danger. We are very apt to pet some
peril, until we make it to our imagination assume a much larger shape
than really belongs to it. I hope that Todd will be in custody again
soon."

"Is it likely, sir?"

"I fancy so. From this day I abandon all other objects and pursuits, and
devote myself to that task alone."

"Then there is a hope," said Johanna.

"Yes," added Sir Richard. "My impression is that he has no money, and
that I shall soon apprehend him; but if, unknown to me, he has any
secret funds, he may make an attempt to leave the kingdom, and so foil
me."

"And if he does?"

"I follow him, for I am determined that sooner or later, dead or alive,
Todd shall be given up to the law."

"But you will advise us what to do," said Mark Ingestrie. "In your
experience you can suggest to us the best mode of proceeding in this
emergency."

"I have been thinking of that as I came along, and my advice is that you
leave London immediately. I do not think that the danger, admitting that
there is any at all, is immediate. Todd for some days will be far too
intent upon evading pursuit and recognition to think of much else,
besides his personal safety, so that you will have ample time to leave."

"We will do so," said Johanna, "at once. Where would you advise us to
go?"

"There is a little fishing village on the south coast, called
Brighthelmstone. It lies in a pleasant enough valley stretching to the
sea. There you can remain quite unsuspected of Todd, and enjoy the fair
sea breezes that make the place delightful, without a thought of danger,
for it is not that way he will go, as the place is not a port from which
he could take shipping if he wished to leave England; and if he did not
wish to leave at all, nothing could be further from his thoughts than
going so far from London, and the spot upon which all his revenge could
alone be attempted to be gratified."

"We will go," said Johanna, appealingly looking at Mark Ingestrie as she
spoke.

"Certainly," he replied.

"Well, then," said Sir Richard, "since that is so far settled, I have a
favour to ask of you both."

"You have but to name it," said Ingestrie. "You ought rather to say that
you have a command to give us both."

"Yes," said Johanna, "that is so."

"No. If I thought that, I should not like to mention it. But I appeal to
your candour to say 'yes,' or 'no,' to the request, according as you
really feel inclined when you hear it. You know how anxious Todd has
been to take the life of the poor lad, Tobias, who has suffered so much
at his hands."

"Oh, yes--yes," said Johanna.

"Well. Have you any objection to take him with you?"

"None in the least," cried Mark.

Johanna turned to him with a smile, as she said--

"Mark, I thank you with all my heart for that ready reply and
acquiescence with the proposal of Sir Richard Blunt, and I echo it by
likewise saying, 'None in the least.'"

"You have met the proposal as I anticipated you both would," said the
magistrate, "or I should not have made it. You will find poor Tobias one
of the most gentle and inoffensive of beings; but his nature has been so
acted upon by Todd, that it would drive him to the verge of madness if
he thought that the villain were at large; so I do not wish that he
should know as much until it can be coupled with information of his
recapture."

"The secret shall be kept."

"Then my business is concluded, and I am sorry to say my pleasure also;
for it has been a real one to visit you both; and I must be off at once.
I will communicate with Colonel Jeffery about Tobias, and manage how he
shall come to you. A post-chaise will take you in six hours to the place
I have mentioned, which you will find marked on the map."

"I know it," said Ingestrie.

"That is well. And now good-day."

The Ingestries took a warm and affectionate leave of Sir Richard, who,
in ten minutes more, was on his road to London.




                             CHAPTER CXLII.
               RETURNS TO TODD IN THE WOOD AT HAMPSTEAD.


While all this was going on, contingent upon his elopement from Newgate,
Todd was still in the wood at Hampstead--that wood in which he had
committed so barbarous a murder, in ridding the world of almost as great
a rascal as himself, in the shape of Mr. Lupin.

Todd was as anxious as possible to leave the wood, but he felt that to
do so in daylight would be jeopardising himself much too seriously. He
was not without money, as the reader is aware; and after placing some
distance between himself and the dead body of Mr. Lupin, he sat down
upon the roots of an old tree to think.

It was not that Todd had any particular terrors connected with the dead
body of Mr. Lupin that induced him to get away from the neighbourhood of
the body, but he thought it was just possible some people might come
into the wood, and in such a case he did not wish to be connected with
the deed in consequence of any contiguity to it.

"What shall I do?" said Todd, after he had rested for some time with his
head upon his hand. "That is the question--what shall I do? I have some
money, but not enough. Oh, that I had but a tithe of the amount that
once was mine! I would yet leave England for ever, and forego all my
thoughts of vengeance, unless I could contrive from a great distance to
do some mischief, and that might be done if very cunningly contrived;
but they have taken from me all--all!"

Here Mr. Todd indulged in a few expletives, with which we do not think
proper to encumber our pages; and after swearing himself into a state of
comparative calmness again, he held up his left hand, and separating the
fingers, he began to count upon them the names of people.

"Let me see," he said. "Let me see, how many throats now it would give
me a very special pleasure to cut--Humph--Ha. Sir Richard Blunt--one;
Tobias Ragg--two; Colonel Jeffery--three; Johanna Oakley--four; and her
husband, that is, I suppose, by this time, five--confound him! Ah! those
make up the five that I most specially should like to sacrifice! A whole
handful of victims! After they were comfortably despatched, no doubt, I
could think of a few more; but it is better to confine one's attention
to the principals for a time. The others may drop in afterwards, when
one has nothing more important to do."

He thought he heard a noise in the wood, and he stooped his head to
listen. It was nothing, or if it had been anything, it quickly ceased
again, and he was tolerably satisfied that he was alone.

"What a delightful thing, now, it would be," he muttered, "if I could
poison the whole lot of them at once, with some drug that would give
them the most excruciating agony! And then I should like to go round to
them all, and shout in their ears--'I did it!--I, Sweeney Todd, did it!'
That would be glorious, indeed! Ha! ha!"

"Ha!" said a voice behind him, following up his hideous laugh most
closely in point of tone.

It was almost with what might be called a yell of terror that Todd
sprang to his feet, and turned round, fully expecting to see some one;
but not the slightest vestige of the presence of any human being met his
eyes.

After gazing for a moment or two, he thought that surely some one must
be hiding behind one of the trees, and he sprang forward, crying--

"Disclose yourself, villain! Crafty wretch, you or I must die!"

There was no reply to this; and he could find no one, although he looked
narrowly about, for the next quarter of an hour, all over the spot. He
felt quite convinced that no one could have slipped away without him
hearing something of the footfall, however light it might be; and he was
left, by this extraordinary circumstance, in a complete maze of
terrified conjecture. He trembled in every limb from positive fright.

No man was probably more generally free from what might be called
superstitious terrors, than Sweeney Todd. At least, we may certainly
say, that no guilty man ever could be more free from them. Had such not
been the case, it is quite impossible that he could have carried on the
career that he did; but of late, two or three things had happened to him
to give his imagination a kind of jog upon such subjects.

He might well be excused for a little kind of nervousness now, when he
felt quite confident that a laugh from no mortal lungs had sounded
within a few inches of his ears, at so strange a moment.

"What can it be?" he said, in a voice of terror. "What can it be? Have I
all along been mistaken; and is there such a thing as an invisible world
of spirits about us? Oh, what can I think?--what excuse can I now give
myself for an unbelief, without which I should have gone quite mad
long--long ago?"

The heavy drops stood upon his brow, and he was forced to stagger back,
and hold by a tree for support. After a few moments of this condition,
however, the determined spirit of the man triumphed over the fears that
beset him, and raising his voice, he said--

"No--no; I will never be the slave of such wild fancies! This is no time
for me to give way to a belief in these things, which all my life I have
laughed to scorn! If I had believed what the world pretends to believe,
I must have been stark staring mad to load my soul with guilt in the way
I have done, if my recompense had been the accumulated wealth of all the
kingdoms of the earth; for death would, despite all that, come and rob
me of all, leaving me poor as any beggar who lays him down by the road
side to die!"

While he spoke, he glared nervously and apprehensively about him, and
then he drew a long breath, as he added--

"I take shame to myself now to have one particle of fear. Have not I, at
the hour of midnight, many and many a time threaded the mazes of the
dark vaults of St. Dunstan's, when I knew that I was all but surrounded
by the festering, gaunt remains of heaps of my victims? and shall I
here, with the open sky above me, and only the known neighbourhood of
one dead villain, shake in such a way? No--no!"

He stamped upon the ground to reassure himself; and then, as though
willing to taunt the unseen laugher into a repetition of the mocking
sound, he again cried--

"Ha!--ha!"

There was no response to this, and it was rather a disappointment to
Todd that there was not, for a hope had been growing upon his mind to
the effect, that it was only some echo in the wood, to which he had been
indebted for his fright; but now, when it did not occur again as it
ought to have done, if it had been a result from any natural cause, he
was thrown back upon his strength of mind merely to shake it off as best
he might.

"Fancy! fancy!" he cried. "It was but fancy after all;" but he did not
believe himself when he so spoke.

Todd remained in the wood tolerably free from any more alarms, until the
sun sunk in the west; and while there was positive darkness in that
place where he was hiding, a sweet twilight still lingered over the fair
face of nature.

"I must not venture forth yet," he said, "but in another hour it will be
dark alike upon the heath as in the wood, and then I will go into the
village and get some refreshment, after which, I rather think, that
London, with all its dangers, will be the best place for me. I have
heard of people hiding there for many a day. I wonder, now, if a lodging
in the Old Bailey would be a good thing? Surely they would never think
of looking for me there."

Todd rather chuckled over this pleasant idea of a lodging in the Old
Bailey. It was just one of the notions that, for its practical
extravagance, rather pleased him than otherwise, but although it had
something to recommend it, it required rather more boldness than even he
was master of to carry it out.

But such thoughts sufficed to amuse him until darkness was upon the face
of the land, and to withdraw his thoughts from other and more tormenting
matters; so that for a time he even forgot the seemingly supernatural
laugh that had sounded so oddly behind him, and produced in him such a
world of alarm.

He heard the clock of Hampstead Church proclaim the hour of nine, and
then he thought that he might venture from his place of concealment; and
yet it will be seen that Todd had not been able to concoct any definite
plan of operations. Then he was wishing to do many things, and yet
unable in that anxious state of his fortunes to do anything at all.

Truly, Sir Richard Blunt was right enough, when he said that Todd, for a
time, would be much too busy with his own affairs to take any active
step for the accomplishment of any of his revenges.

In the wood, now, the darkness was so great, that literally you could
not see your hand before your face; and the only plan by which he could
leave it was by blundering right on, and trusting to get out at any
point to which his chance steps might lead him. In about a quarter of an
hour he came to a rather precipitous bank, which he clambered up, and
then he found himself on the outskirts of the wood, and not far from the
village.

He heard some one coming along the road-way, and whistling as he came.
The moon was struggling against the shadowing influence of a mass of
clouds in the horizon, and Todd felt that in a little time the whole
place would be light enough.

"Am I sufficiently unlike myself," he said, "to trust an appearance in
the village? I want food, and most of all, I want drink. Yes, now more
than ever; I cannot pretend to live without stimulants. Yes, I will risk
it, and then I will go to London."

He sprang down into the road, and in as careless a manner as he could,
he walked on in the direction that he thought would take him to the
village.

The man who was whistling as he came along, rather increased his pace,
and to the great alarm of Todd, overtook him, and said--

"A fine night, sir, we shall have? The moon is getting up nicely now,
sir!"

Todd breathed a little more freely. After all, it was not an enemy, but
only one of those people so common in places a little way out of town,
who are talkative to any one they may meet, for the mere love of
talking. For once in his life, Todd determined upon being wonderfully
gracious, and he replied quite in a tone of serenity--

"Yes, it is a nice night; and, as you say, the moon is rising
beautifully."

"Yes, sir," added the man, who was carrying something that Todd could
not, for the life of him, make out. "Yes, sir, and I am not sorry to get
home, now. I have been all round by Hendon, Golders Green, and Finchley,
sticking bills."

"Bills?"

"Yes, sir, about the murderer Todd, you know!"

"Oh, ah!"

"You know, sir, he has got out of Newgate, and there's five hundred
pounds reward offered by the _guvment_ for him. A nice little set up
that would be, sir, for any one, wouldn't it, sir?"

"Very."

"All the bill-stickers round London have had a job in putting up the
bills, and they say that if it costs a million of money they intend to
have him."

"And very proper too," said Todd. "Can you spare a bill, my friend?"

"Oh, yes. There's hand ones as well as posters. Here's one, sir, and
you'll find a description of him. Oh, don't I only wish I could come
across him, that's all; I'd make rather a tidy day's work then, I think.
That would be a little better, sir, than the paste-pot, wouldn't it?"

"Rather," said Todd; "but he might be rather a dear bargain; for such a
man, I should think, would not be very easily taken!"

"There's something in that, sir, as you say, but yet I would have a try.
Five hundred pounds, you know, sir, is not to be picked up everyday on
the road-side."

"Certainly not! Is that Hampstead where the lights are, to the left,
there?"

"Yes, right on. I live at west-end, and my way lays this way. Good
night, sir!"

"Good night," said Todd. "I hope you may have the luck of meeting with
this Todd, and so earning the five hundred pounds you mention; but I am
afraid, after all, there is not much chance, for I heard he had gone
down to the coast, and had got on board a vessel and was off by this
time. That may not be true, though. Goodnight!"




                            CHAPTER CXLIII.
         TODD TAKES A LOOK AT HIS OLD QUARTERS IN FLEET STREET.


The village of Hampstead was, at the time of which we write, really a
village. It still retains many of its old houses and picturesque
beauties, but it is not quite such a little retired spot as it was. If
ever any one walked through Hampstead, however, who was less inclined
than another to pause and speculate upon its beauties, certainly that
man was our doubtful acquaintance, Sweeney Todd.

He did not think it quite prudent to stop in the High Street to solace
himself with any worldly comforts, although he saw several public-houses
very temptingly open, but passing right on, he descended Red Lion Hill,
and paused at a little inn at the foot of it, that is to say, on the
London side of the pretty village.

Brandy was Todd's request, and he was met by a prompt, "Yes, sir;" but
Todd had, among his varied experiences, to find out what Hampstead
brandy was, and the moment he placed a portion of it in his mouth, his
eyes goggled furiously, and spitting it out, he said, in a voice of
anger--

"This is some mistake."

"Mistake, sir?"

"Yes; I asked for brandy, and you have given me the rinsings of some
bottles and dirty glasses."

"Oh, dear no, sir; that brandy is the very best that you will get in all
Hampstead."

"The best in all Hampstead!" repeated Todd, with a groan; "what must the
worst be, I wonder?"

"I assure you, sir, it is considered to be very good."

"Considered?" said Todd. "Then, my friend, there's your money, and as
the brandy is considered to be so good, you can drink it; but having
some respect, from old companionship, for my inside, I decline it. Good
evening."

With these words, Todd laid a shilling upon the bar, and strode away.

"Well," said the publican, "how singular! that's the eighth person who
has refused that one quartern of brandy and paid for it. Here, wife, put
this back into the bottle again, and shake it up well."

Todd pursued his route down Haverstock Hill, until he came to the then
straggling district of Camden Town, and there he did find a house at
which he got just a tolerable glass of brandy, and feeling very much
invigorated by the drop, he walked on more rapidly still; and a thought
took possession of him, which, although it was perhaps not unattended
with danger, might turn out to be a very felicitous one.

During his career in the shop in Fleet Street, he had collected a number
of watches from the pockets of the murdered persons, but he had always
been afraid to attempt the disposal of the best of them.

The fact was, that at that time everybody had not a watch as at present.
It was an expensive article, and Mr. So-and-so's watch was as well known
as Mr. So-and-so himself; so that it would have been one of the most
hazardous things possible for Todd to have brought suspicion upon
himself by going about disposing of the watches of his victims. It was
the same, too, with some other costly articles, such as rings, lockets,
and so on; and as he had realised as much money as he could previous to
his arrangements for leaving England, Todd had left some of this
description of property to perish in the fire, which he hoped to be the
means of igniting in old Fleet Street upon his departure.

Now, as he crept along by Tottenham-Court-Road, he mused upon the state
of things.

"If," he muttered, "I could only get into my late house in Fleet Street,
I know where to lay my hand upon portable property, which was not worth
my consideration while I had thousands of pounds in gold, but which now
would be a fortune to me in my reduced circumstances. If I could but lay
my hand upon it!"

The more Todd thought over this proposition, the more pleased he was
with it; and by the time he had indulged himself with two more glasses
of brandy, it began to assume, to his mind, a much more tangible shape.

"It may be done," he said, "it surely may be done. If I could only make
my way in the church it might be done well, and surely one of these
picklocks that I have about me might enable me to do that."

The picklock he alluded to was one that he had put in his pocket to
accommodate Mr. Lupin, when they were both so intent upon their escape
from Newgate, and when Mr. Lupin was foolish enough to believe that Todd
really had two thousand pounds buried in Caen Wood, Hampstead. There was
one thing, however, which made Todd pause. He did not think he was
sufficiently disguised to venture into the locality of his old
residence, and, unfortunately for him, he was rather a peculiar-looking
man. His great chance, however, was, that in Fleet Street surely no one
would now think of looking for Sweeney Todd.

"I must be bold," he said, "I must be bold and resolute. It will not do
to shrink now. I will buy a knife."

This was a pleasant idea to Todd. Buying a knife seemed almost like
getting half-way to his revenge, and he went into an obscure cutler's
shop, and bought a long double-edged knife, for which he gave two
shillings. He then carefully concealed it in his clothing.

After this, he hit upon a plan of operations which he thought would have
the effect of disguising him. At that period, wigs were so commonly worn
that it was nothing at all particular for a person to go into a
wig-makers, and select one--put it on--pay for it--and go away!

"Yes," said Todd, "I will buy a wig; for I have art enough and knowledge
of wigs to enable me to do so--as shall produce the greatest possible
change in my appearance. A wig, a wig will be the thing."

Todd had hardly well made this declaration than he came upon a
wig-makers, and in he went. Pointing to a wig that was on a block, and
which had a very clerical kind of look, he inquired the price of it.

"Oh, my dear sir," said the wig-maker, "that is much too old looking a
perriwig for you. Let me recommend you a much younger wig. Now, sir,
here's one that will take a matter of ten years off your age in a
moment."

Todd had discretion enough to know well that he could not make up young,
so he merely pointed to the wig again and enquired the price.

"Well, sir, it is a couple of guineas, but--"

Without another word, Todd laid down the couple of guineas, and putting
the wig upon his head he left the shop, certainly having given the
wig-maker an impression that he was the oddest customer he had had for
some time; but little did he suspect that that odd customer was the
criminal with whose name all London was ringing, and upon whose
head--with or without a wig--so heavy a price was set.

After this, Todd made his way to a shop where second-hand clothing was
bought and sold, and there he got accommodated with an old gray coat
that reached down to the calves of his legs, and he bought likewise a
very voluminous white cravat; and when he got into the street with these
articles, and purchased at another shop a walking cane, with a great
silver top to it, and put one hand behind his back and stooped very
much, and moved along as if he were afflicted with all the corns and
bunions that his toes could carry, and by bending his knees, decreased
his height six inches, no one could have known him.

At least, so Todd flattered himself.

In this way he tottered on until he got to the immediate neighbourhood
of Fleet Street. To be sure, with all his coolness and courage, he could
not help shaking a little when he came to that well remembered
neighbourhood.

"And I," he thought to himself, "and I by this time hoped and expected
to be far over the sea, instead of being such a wretch as I am now,
crawling about, as it were, amid pitfalls and all sorts of dangers!
Alas! alas!"

He really shook now, and it was quite astonishing how, with his old wig,
and his old gray coat and his stick, and his stooping posture, old and
venerable, yes, positively venerable, Sweeney Todd actually looked.

"Ain't you well, sir?" said a respectable man, stepping up to him. "Can
I assist you?"

Todd perpetrated about half a dozen wheezing coughs, and then, not sorry
for an opportunity of trying his powers of imitation of age, he replied
in a tremulous voice--

"Ah, sir! Yes--old age--old age, sir--eugh!--eugh!--oh, dear me, I feel
that I am on my last legs, and that they are on the shake--old age, sir,
will come on; but it's a comfort to look back upon a long life well
spent in deeds of charity!"

"Not a doubt of it," said the stranger. "I was only afraid, sir, you
were taken suddenly ill, as you stood there."

"Oh, no--no--eugh!--no. Thank you, sir."

"Good evening, sir."

"Good evening, my good sir. Oh, if I had you only in my old shop with a
razor at your throat, wouldn't I polish you off!" muttered Todd, as the
stranger left him.

In the course of another minute, Todd was on the Fleet Street side of
Temple Bar.

He could almost see his old house--that house in which he had passed
years of deep iniquity, and which he had hoped, ere that time, would
have been a heap of ruins. There it was, tall, dismal, and gaunt
looking. The clock of St. Dunstan's struck eleven.

"Eleven," he muttered. "A good hour. The streets are getting deserted
now, and no one will know me. I will stoop yet more, and try to look
older--older still."

Todd a little over acted his part, as he tottered down Fleet Street, so
that some individuals turned to look after him, which was a thing he
certainly did not wish, as his great object was to escape all
observation if possibly he could; so he corrected that, and went on
rather more strongly; and finally he came exactly opposite to his own
house, and getting partially into a door-way, he looked long and fixedly
at it.

What thoughts, at that time, chased each other through the guilty mind
of that man, it is hard to say; but he stood like a statue, fixing his
regards upon the house for the space of about a quarter of an hour.

Once only he clapped his teeth together, and gave a sort of savage
growl.

It was lucky for Todd that no one saw him just then, or they would have
thought him rather an extraordinary old man.

The house was perfectly dark from top to bottom. The shutters of the
shop, of course, were all up, and the shutters of the first-floor
windows were likewise closed. The other windows had their old dingy
blinds all down; and, to all outward appearance, that den of murder was
deserted.

But Todd could not believe such to be the case. In his own mind, he felt
fully sure, that Sir Richard Blunt was not the man to leave the house
without some sort of custody; and he quite settled with himself, that
there was some one or more persons minding it, and, no doubt, by order,
sitting there in one of the back rooms, so that no light should show in
front.

"Curses on them all!" he muttered.

"Ah! you are looking at old Todd's house, sir?" said a voice.

Todd started; and close to him was a person smoking a pipe, and looking
as jolly as possible.

"Yes--yes," stammered Todd, for he was taken by surprise rather. "Oh,
yes, sir. I am amazed at the great wickedness of human nature."

"You may well, sir--you may well! Lord bless me! I never thought him a
good looking man, but I never thought any ill of him neither, and I have
seen him lots of times."

"Indeed, sir? Pray, what sort of man was he? I never saw him, as I live
in Soho; and I am so much in years now, that in the bustling day-time I
don't care to come into streets like this; for you see, sir, I can't
move about as I could sixty years ago; and the people--God help
them--are all in such a hurry now, and they push me here and there in
such a way, that my failing breath and limbs won't stand it;
and--and--eugh!--eugh! Oh, dear."

"Poor old gentleman! I don't wonder at your not liking the crowds. How
old may you be, sir?'"

"A matter of eighty-nine, sir. It's an old age to get to, but I--I am
younger than my brother, yet--Ha! ha! Oh dear, if it wasn't now for the
rheumatism and the lumbago and a pain in my shoulder, and a few other
little things, I should get on very well."

"Not a doubt of it. But you asked me what Todd was like, and I'll tell
you, sir. He was nigh upon six feet high, and his face was two feet of
it. He was just as ugly as any one you would wish to see for a pattern
in that way, and that's his house where he murdered all the people."

"Peace be to their souls!"

"Amen! And there are underground places that lead right away through the
vaults of St. Dunstan's to Bell-yard, where Mrs. Lovett's pie-shop was,
you know, sir."

"I have heard. Ah, dear--dear, I have heard. A very wicked woman,
indeed--very wicked; and yet, sir, it is to be hoped she has found mercy
in another world."

"There would need be plenty of it," said the man with the pipe, "if Mrs.
Lovett is to be accommodated with any."

"My friend," said Todd, "don't be profane; and now I must go, as I don't
like being out late."

"And so must I, for my pipe's out. I shall turn in, now. Good night,
sir, and a pleasant walk home to you."

"Thank you, sir, thank you--eugh! eugh! I think if it were not for my
cough, I should do very well."

Todd hobbled away, and the man, who lived in Bouverie Street, went home.
Todd had not got any real information from this man; but the brief
conversation he had had with him, had given him a sort of confidence in
his disguise, and in his power of acting, that he had not had before, so
that, upon the whole, he was not sorry for the little incident.

And now it was quite evident that the streets were getting very much
deserted. During the whole length of Fleet Street there was not half a
dozen persons to be seen at all, and Todd, after casting a rapid glance
around him to note if he were observed, suddenly crossed the way, and
boldly went up to the door of old St. Dunstan's Church.

When once close to the door of the old building, he was so much in
shadow that he felt tolerably secure from observation, but still he
lingered a little, for he did not want to do anything so hastily as to
rob it of its caution.

With his back against the church-door he glanced right and left, and
then for the space of five minutes he bent all his faculties to the one
task of ascertaining if any one was sufficiently near to watch him, and
he got perfectly satisfied that such was not the case. He stood securely
against the old church-door.

"So far," he muttered, "I am safe--quite safe."




                             CHAPTER CXLIV.
                 TODD MAKES HIS WAY INTO HIS OWN HOUSE.


When Todd was satisfied that he was not watched or even observed by any
one, he turned and commenced operations upon the door of the church. The
cunning person who had put on the lock, had had a notion in his
necromantic head, that the larger you made a lock the better it was, and
the less likely to be picked; and the consequence of this was, that Todd
found no difficulty in opening the church-door.

The moment he felt the lock yield to the false key he employed, he took
another keen glance around him, and, seeing no one, slipped into the
sacred edifice and closed the door behind him. Feeling, then, up and
down the door until his hand touched a bolt, he shot it into its socket,
and then a feeling of great security took possession of him, although
the interior of the church was most profoundly dark, and any one would
have thought that such a man as Todd--in such a place--could hardly have
been free from some superstitious terrors. An overbearing selfishness,
however, mingled with the most vengeful and angry feelings, kept Todd
above all these sensations, which are mostly the result of vacant
mindedness.

The church felt cold, and the silence had about it a character such as
the silence of no other kind of place has. It may be imagination, but
the silence of a church deserted, always appears to us to be a silence
different from any other, as the silence in a wood is entirely different
from any other description of stillness.

"All is quiet enough here," whispered Todd. "I and the dead have this
place to ourselves now, and so we have often had it. Many a time have I
waded about this building in the still hours of the night, when all
London slept, and opened some little window, with the hope of letting
out the stench from the dead bodies before the morning should bring
people to the building; but it would not do. The smell of decomposition
lingered in the air, and it is here still, though not so bad. Yes, it is
here still! I can smell it now, and I know the odour well."

Todd was sufficiently familiar with St. Dunstan's church almost to go
over it even at that hour, and amid that darkness, without running
against anything; but yet he was very careful as he went, and kept his
arms outstretched before him. He dreaded to get a light, although he had
the means of doing so, for Mr. Lupin had, at his request, given him some
of the matches and little wax-candle-ends that the pious lady had
supplied him with. Yet Todd knew how small a light would suffice to
shine through some of the richly stained glass windows of the church,
and therefore he dreaded to give himself a light.

He felt confident that he should have no sort of difficulty in getting
into the vaults, for in consequence of recent events the stone that
covered up the entrance could not be fast, and he knew from past
experience that his strength was sufficient to raise it if he once got
hold of it, and if it were not fastened down by cement, which, no doubt,
was not the case now.

"I shall yet get," he said, "into my old house. The time has been rather
short, and the goods there deposited by me in old times may there
remain; and if so, I will carry away enough with me to keep me far above
the necessities of life, and when once I have achieved that much, I will
from some obscure place meditate upon my revenge."

In the course of about ten minutes he found the flat stone that led into
the vaults, and to his satisfaction he found that it was merely laid
crosswise over the aperture, in order to prevent any one in day time
from heedlessly tumbling in, but at night it was not, of course,
expected that any one would be there to fall into such a danger.

With one effort Todd removed it.

"Good," he said. "Now I can make my way, and once below the level of the
floor of the church, there will be no danger in at once accommodating
myself with a light, which will be useful enough in the vaults."

Getting upon his hands and knees now, Todd, for fear of a fall down the
stone steps, cautiously got down the first few of them, and then he
paused to light one of the bits of taper with which he was provided. In
the course of a few moments the tiny flame was clear and bright, and
shading it with his hand, Todd carefully descended the remainder of the
stairs.

How still everything was in those vaults of old St. Dunstan's. Were
there no spirits from another world--spirits of the murdered, to flit in
horrible palpability before the eyes of that man who had cut short their
thread of life? Surely if ever a visitant from another world could have
been expected, it would have been to appear to Todd to convince him that
there was more beyond the grave than a forgotten name and a mouldering
skeleton.

When he reached the foot of the stairs and was satisfied that the little
light was burning well, he held it up above his head and bent a keen
glance around him.

"Ha! ha!" he laughed, "so they have been doing their best--poor fools as
they are to meddle with such rubbish--to rid the family vaults of some
of the new tenants that I took occasion to introduce into them. Well,
let them, let them! I did play a little havoc with the gentility of the
dead, I must admit!"

With this highly jocose remark, Todd passed on, taking a route well
known to him, which would conduct him to the cellar that it will be
recollected was immediately underneath his shop. It was from this that
he hoped to get into the house.

[Illustration: Todd In The Scene Of His Murders.]

It took Todd much less time than it would have taken any one else to
make his way to that cellar; but then no one was or could be so well
acquainted with all the windings and turnings of the excavation that led
to it as he, and finally he reached it, just as he found the necessity
of lighting up another little piece of wax candle, as the one he had
already lit had burnt right to his hand. He found a piece of wood, into
which he stuck the new one securely, so that it was much handier to
hold.

Todd now felt the absolute necessity of being much more cautious than
before, for he did know who might be in the shop above, and he did know
that a very small sound below would make itself heard. Holding up the
light, he saw that his nice little mechanical arrangement regarding the
two chairs, remained just as it had been as he used to use it.

"Ah!" he cried, "it will be some time in London again before people will
sit down in a barber's chair with anything like confidence, particularly
if it should chance to be a fixture. Ha!"

Todd was getting quite merry now. The sight of the old familiar objects
of that place had certainly raised his spirits very considerably, and no
doubt the brandy had helped a little. Setting the light down in a corner
of the cellar, he placed himself in an attitude of intense listening,
which he kept up for about five minutes, at the end of which time he
gave a nod, and muttered--

"There may be some one in the parlour--that I will not pretend to say no
to; but the shop is free of human occupants. And now for the means of
getting into it. If anybody can, I can, and that with tolerable ease,
too."

The apparatus by which Todd had been in the habit of letting down his
customers, consisted of a slight system of lever, which he could move
from the parlour, but provided he could reach so high, he could just as
easily release the loose plank from where he was; in which case the
chair that was above would have a preponderating influence, as that was
on the heaviest arm of the plank from the centre upon which it turned.

"I can manage that," he said; and then taking the knife from his pocket,
he found that by its aid he could just reach high enough to touch the
lever that acted as a kind of bolt to keep the plank in its place. The
moment he removed that bolt the plank slowly moved, and then Todd caught
the end of it in his hand, and pulled it right down, so that it assumed
a perpendicular aspect completely. Holding then the piece of wood to
which he had attached the wax light in his mouth, he climbed carefully
and noiselessly up into his old shop; and when there he replaced the
plank, and on the end of the board which was the counterpoise to the
chair, he placed a weight, which he knew where to lay his hands upon,
and which kept the chair in its place, although a very little would have
overcome the counterpoise, and sent it down to the cellar below.

Todd extinguished his light, and the moment he did so, he saw a very
faint illumination coming from the parlour through a portion of the
door, into which a square of glass was let in, and through which he,
Todd, used to glare at poor Tobias.

The sound of voices, too, came upon his ears, and he laid himself flat
down on the floor, close to the wall, under a kind of bench that ran
along it for a considerable distance.

"I am certain I heard something," said a voice, and then the
parlour-door was opened, and a broad flash of light came into the shop.
"I am quite sure I heard an odd noise."

"Oh, nonsense," said some one else. "Nonsense."

"But I did, I tell you."

"Yes, you fancied it half-an-hour ago, and it turned out to be nothing
at all. Lord bless you, if I were to go on fancying things out of what I
have heard since I have been in this house, minding it for Sir Richard
Blunt, I should have been out of my mind long before this, I can tell
you."

"But it was very odd."

"Well, the shop is not so large: you can soon see if Todd is in it. Ha!
ha! ha!"

"No, no, I don't expect to see Todd there exactly, I confess; it would
not be a very likely place in which to find him."

"Well, is there anything now?"

"No--no. It all seems much as usual, and yet I thought I did hear a
noise; but I suppose it was nothing, or a rat, perhaps, for there are
lots, they say, below. It might have been a rat. I did not think that
before, and I feel all the easier now at the idea."

"Then, come and finish our game."

"Very good--all's right. You make a little drop of brandy-and-water, and
we will just have this game out before we go to rest, for I am getting
tired and it's late."

"Not quite twelve yet."

"Ain't it? There it goes by St. Dunstan's clock."

Todd counted the strokes of the clock, and by the time they ceased to
reverberate in the night air, the man who most unquestionably had heard
a noise in the shop, had gone into the parlour again, half satisfied
that it was a rat, and sat down to the game at cards that had been
interrupted.

These were two men that had been put into the house to mind it, until
the authorities should determine what to do with it, by Sir Richard
Blunt. They were not officers of any skill or repute, although they were
both constables; but then Sir Richard did not consider that anything in
the shape of great intelligence was required in merely taking care of an
empty house--for the idea of Todd ever visiting that place again, had
certainly been one that did not even enter the far-seeing brain of the
magistrate.

"It's my deal," Todd heard one of them say, "but you go on, while I mix
the brandy-and-water."

"Indeed!" muttered Todd, as he gathered up his gaunt form from under the
bench. "Indeed! So there are two of you, are there? Well, if there is
another world, you can keep each other company on your road to it, for I
am not going to let your lives stand in the way of my projects. No--no,
I shall yet polish off somebody in my old place, and it is a pleasure
that it should be two friends of that man Blunt, whom I so hate, that I
have no words in which to express it!"

Todd crept up to the parlour door with the long knife in his hand that
he had bought at the cutler's in Camden Town, and putting his eyes close
to the pane of glass in the door, he looked in at the two men.

They really seemed to be quite comfortable, those two men. A bright fire
was burning in the grate, and a kettle was singing away upon the hob at
a great rate. A pack of cards, some pipes, and some glasses, were upon
the table that they had dragged up close to the fire-side; and they
were, take them altogether, about as comfortable as anybody could well
expect to be in that gloomy parlour of Todd's, at his house of murder in
Fleet Street.

They were stout strong men though, and as Todd looked, he thought to
himself, that with all his strength, and with all his desperate fighting
for life, as he would do, it was not a desirable thing for him to come
into personal contact with them.

"Cunning," he muttered, "will do more than strength. I must bide my
time--but I will kill them both if they are in my way, and that they
will be, is nearly past a doubt!"

"There," said the man who was mixing the brandy-and-water, "there, you
will find that a stiff comfortable glass; lots of brandy, and lots of
sugar, and only water enough to make it hot and steamy."

"You know how to mix, Bill," said the other, as he took a drop and then
was obliged to cough and wink again, it was so strong and hot.

"Ah!" thought Todd, "if it would only choke you!"

The other man then took his drink at the brandy, and he too coughed and
winked, and then they both laughed and declared how precious strong it
was, and one of them said--

"The fun of it is, that it was old Todd's; and when he laid in such good
stuff as this, he little thought that we would be enjoying it. I wonder
where he is?"

"Oh, he's far enough off by this time, poking about at some of the
sea-ports to try to get away, you may depend."

"Is he," muttered Todd; "you will find, my kind friend, that I am near
enough to cut your throat, I hope."




                             CHAPTER CXLV.
          TODD HAS A NARROW ESCAPE, AND HAS A BIT OF REVENGE.


It was quite a provoking thing, and gall and wormwood to Todd in a
manner of speaking, to see those two boisterous men enjoying themselves
in his parlour. There could be no doubt in the world, but that if he had
had the means then and there to do so, he would have hurled destruction
upon them both forthwith; but he could only look at them now, and wait
for a better opportunity.

The fact was, that now, for the first time, Todd found that the
architecture of his old place of residence was far from being of the
most convenient order; inasmuch as you could not reach the staircase
leading to the upper part of the residence, without going through the
parlour; so that he was a prisoner in the shop.

"I tell you what it is, Bill," said one of the men, assuming quite a
philosophical look. "That fellow, Todd, as used to live here, after all,
was some use to society."

"Was he?"

"Yes, to be sure. Can't you guess?"

"Not I. I can't see what use a fellow can be to society who cuts folks'
throats."

"Can't you?"

"No, nor you neither, if you come to that."

"Yes I can. Don't it make folks careful of going into a strange barber's
shop, let me ask you that?"

"Oh, you idiot. That's always the way with you. You begins with looking
as wise as an owl as has found out something wonderful, and then when
one comes to find out what it is, it's just nothing at all to nobody. I
tell you what it is, old fellow, it strikes me you are getting a drop
too much."

"No--no; but I have got something on my mind."

"It stands on a very small place, then. What is it?"

"Just you listen and I'll tell you. I did think of not saying anything
about it, because you see I thought, that is to say, I was afraid if I
did, you would go off at once."

"Off? Off?"

"I don't mean dead--I mean out of this place, that's all, not out of
this world; but now I feel as if I ought to tell you all about it, you
know, and then you can judge for yourself. You know you slept here last
night on that large sofa in the corner?"

"Yes, in course."

"Very good; you had had what one may call just the other drop you know,
and so--"

"No I hadn't, but you had. I recollect quite well you dropped your
light, and had no end of trouble to get it lighted again, and kept
knocking your head against the mantel-shelf and saying 'Don't' as if
somebody was doing it to you."

"Go along with you. Will you listen, or won't you, while I tell the
horrid anecdote?"

"Horrid, is it?"

"Above a bit. It's enough to make all your hair stand on end, like
quills on a guinea hen, as the man says in the play; and I expect you'll
dream of it all night; so here goes, and don't you interrupt me any
more, now."

"Go on. I won't."

"Well, you know we had a pretty good fire here, as we have now; and as
twelve o'clock went ding-dong by old St. Dunstan's, we thought it was
time to have some sleep, and you lay down on the sofa, saying as you
could see by the fire light, while I took the candle to go up stairs to
bed with, you know--old Todd's bed, I suppose it is, on the
second-floor, and rather damp and thin, you know."

"Goodness, gracious! tell me something I don't know, will you? Do you
want to drive a fellow out of his mind?"

"Well--well, don't be hasty! I'm getting on. I took the light, and
shading it with one hand, for there's always a furious draught upon the
stairs of this house; up I went, thinking of nothing at all. Well, in
course, I had to pass the first-floor, which is shut up, you know, and
has all sorts of things in it."

"Yes; go on--go on!"

"Is it interesting?"

"It is; only you go on. I'll warrant now it's a ghost you are coming
to."

"No, it ain't; but don't percipitate, and you shall hear all about it.
Let me see, where was I?--Oh, on the first-floor landing: But, as I say,
I was thinking of nothing at all, when, all of a sudden, I heard a very
odd kind of noise in the front room of the first-floor."

"I wonder you didn't fall headlong down stairs with fright, candle and
all."

"No, I didn't. It sounded like the murmur of people talking a long way
off. Then I began to think it must be in the next house; and I thought
of going up to bed, and paying no attention to it, and I did get up two
or three steps of the second-floor stairs, but still I heard it; and it
got such a hold of my mind, do you know, that I couldn't leave it, but
down I went again, and listened. I thought of coming to you; but,
somehow, I didn't do so."

"Now, go on!"

"Well, after listening with my ear against the door for some time, I was
certain that the sound was in the room; and I don't know how I screwed
up courage enough to open the door very gently, and look in!"

"You did?"

"I did; and the very moment I did so, out went the light as clean as if
you had taken your fingers and snuffed it out; but in the room there was
a strange pale kind of light, that wasn't exactly like twilight, nor
like moonlight, nor like any light that I ever saw, but you could see
everything by it as plain as possible."

"Well--well?"

"The room was crammed full of people, all dressed, and looking at each
other; and some of them were speaking; and upon all their clothes and
faces there was blood, sometimes more, and sometimes less; and all their
eyes looked like the eyes of the dead; and then one voice more loud than
the rest said--'All murdered!--All murdered by Todd! The Lord have mercy
upon his soul!'"

"Oh, gracious! What did you do?"

"I felt as if my breath was going from me, and my heart kept swelling
and swelling till I thought it would burst, and then I dropped the
candle; and the next time I come to my senses, I found myself lying on
the bed in the second floor, with all my clothes on!"

"You dreamt it?"

"Oh, no--no. It's no use telling me that. I only wish I thought so,
that's all."

"But, I tell you, you did."

"You may tell me as much as you like; but in the morning when I came
down, there was the candle on the first-floor landing, just as I had
dropped it. What do you think of that? Of course, after I drew out my
head again from the first-floor front room I must have gone up stairs in
the middle of my fright, and I dare say I fainted away, and didn't come
to myself again till the morning."

"Oh, stuff! Don't try to make me believe in your ghost stories. If--if I
thought it was true, I should bolt out of the house this minute."

"You would, really?"

"Yes, to be sure; is a fellow to stay in a place with his hair
continually standing on end, I should like to know? Hardly. But it's all
stuff. Take another drop of brandy! Now I tell you what, if you have the
courage to go with me, I will take the light now and go up to the
first-floor, and have a good look all about it! What do you say to that,
now? Will you do it?"

"I don't much mind."

"Only say the word, and I am quite ready."

"Well, I will. If so be they are there, they won't do us any harm, for
they took no more notice of me than as if I had been nothing at all. But
how you do shake!"

"I shake? You never were more mistaken in all your life. It's you that's
shaking, and that makes you think I am. You are shaking, if you please;
and if you don't like the job of going up stairs, only say so; I won't
press it upon you!"

"Oh, I'll go."

"You are sure of it, now? You don't think it will make you ill? because
I shouldn't like that. Come now, only say at once that you would rather
not go, and there's an end to it."

"Yes, but I rather would."

"Come on, then--come on. Courage, my friend, courage. Look at me, and be
courageous. You don't see me shivering and shaking and shrinking. Keep
up your heart, and come on!"

"You wretches," muttered Todd. "It shall go hard with me, now, but I
will play you some trick that shall go right to drive you out of your
shallow wits. Go! It is the very thing I would, of all others, have
wished you to do."

It was quite clear that the man who had proposed going up stairs to
explore the first-floor, was much the more alarmed of the two; and now
that he had made the proposal, he would gladly have seized upon any
excuse for backing out of it, short of actually confessing that his
fears had got the better of him. No doubt he had been greatly in hopes
that his companion, who had told the ghost story, would have shrunk from
such an ordeal; but as he did not do so, there was no resource but to
carry it out or confess that it was but a piece of braggadocio, which he
wanted the firmness to carry out. He strove now to talk himself out of
his fears.

"Come on--come on! Ghosts, indeed! There are no such things, of course,
as any reasonable man knows; and if there are, why, what harm can they
do us? I say, what harm can they do us?"

"I don't know!"

"You don't know? No, nor nobody else! Come on, I say. Of course
providence is providence, and if there are ghosts, I respect them very
much--very much indeed, and would do anything in the world to oblige
them!"

The valiant proposer of the experimental trip to the first floor uttered
these last sentences in a loud voice, no doubt with the hope that if any
of the ghostly company of the first-floor were within hearing, they
would be so good as to report the same to their friends, so that he
might make his way there with quite a good understanding.

They trimmed the candle now; and having each of them fortified himself
with a glass of brandy that Todd had laid in for his own consumption,
they commenced their exploit by leaving the parlour and slowly ascending
the staircase that led to the upper portion of the house.

Of course, Todd knew well the capabilities of that house, and long
before the two men had actually left the parlour he had made up his mind
what to do. The door of communication between the shop and the parlour
was not fastened, so that he could on open at the moment; and when the
men left that latter room he at once entered it. Todd's first movement,
then, was to supply himself with a good dose of his own brandy, which he
took direct from the bottle to save time.

"Ah!" he whispered, drawing a long breath after the draught, "I feel
myself again, now!"

In order to carry out his plan, he knew that he had no time to spare;
for he did not doubt but that the two men would make their visit as
short as possible to the first-floor; so--with cautious but rapid
footsteps--he slipped into the passage and at once commenced the ascent
of the staircase after them. The light they carried guided him very
well. How little they imagined that any of its beams shone upon the
diabolical face of Sweeney Todd!

"Can't you come on?" said one of the men to the other. "Damme, how you
do lag behind, to be sure. Any one would think you were afraid."

"Afraid? Me afraid! that is a good joke."

"Well, come quicker, then."

"You will both of you," thought Todd, "come down a little quicker, or I
am very much mistaken indeed."

The distance was short, and the landing of the first floor was soon
gained by the men. He who had seen, or dreamed that he had seen, the
strange sight in the room upon a former occasion, was decidedly the most
courageous of the two. Perhaps, after all, he was the least imaginative.

"I think you said it was the front room?" said the other.

"Oh, yes, I heard not a sound in the back one. Here's the door. You hold
the light while I listen a little."

"Yes--I--I'll hold it. Keep up your courage, and don't shake now. Oh,
what a coward you are!"

"Well, that's a good one. You are shaking so yourself that you will have
the light out, if you don't mind. Do try and be a little steady with it;
and your teeth chatter so in your head, that they are for all the world
like a set of castanets."

"Oh, how you do talk. Come, listen at the door; I must say I don't hear
anything; but I have the greatest respect for ghosts, I have. I never
say one word against the dead--God bless 'em all!"

While this man held the light--or rather waved it to and fro in his
agitation--the other, with his ear placed flat against the panel of the
door, listened attentively. All was perfectly still in the first-floor,
and he said--

"Perhaps they haven't begun yet, you know."

"Perhaps not;--shall we go away, now?"

"Oh, no--no. There's no end of curious things in the room; and now that
we are here, let's go in, at all events, and have a little look about
us. Don't be afraid. Come--come."

"Oh--I--I ain't exactly afraid, only, you see, I don't see much the use
of going in, and--and, you know, we have already heard an odd noise in
the shop, to-night."

"But that was nothing, for I looked, you know."

"Yes--yes,--but--but I'm afraid the fire will go out below, do you
know."

"Let it go, then. If you are too much of a coward to come with me into
this room, say so at once, and you can go down stairs while I have a
look at it by myself. You can't have the candle, though, for it is no
use my going in by myself."

"What! do you expect me to go in the dark? Oh dear, no, I could not do
that; open the door, and I will follow you in; I ain't a bit afraid,
only, you see, I feel very much interested, that's all."

"Oh, well, that's quite another thing."

With this, the most courageous of the two men opened the door of the
front room on the first-floor, and peeped into it.

"All's right," he said. "There ain't so much as a mouse stirring. Come
on!"

Highly encouraged by this announcement, the other followed him; and they
allowed the door to creak nearly shut after them.

While this hesitation upon the stairs was going on, Todd had been about
half way up from the passage, crouching down for fear they should by
chance look that way, and see him; but when he found that they had
fairly gone into the front room, he made as much speed to the top of the
stairs as was consistent with extreme caution, and laying his hand upon
the handle of the lock of the door of the back room on that floor, he
noiselessly turned it, and the door at once yielding, he glided in.

The two rooms communicated with each other by a pair of folding-doors,
and the light that the men carried sent some beams through the
ill-fitting junction of the two, so that Todd could see very well about
him.




                             CHAPTER CXLVI.
       THERE IS A FIRE IN FLEET STREET AFTER ALL.--TODD ESCAPES.


When once he had gained that back room, Todd considered that his design
against the peace of mind of the two men was all but accomplished; and
it was with great difficulty that he kept himself from giving a hideous
chuckle, that would at once have opened their ears to the fact that some
one was close at hand, who, whether of this world or the next, was a
proficient in horrid noises.

He controlled this ebullition of ill-timed mirth, however, and listened
attentively.

"There don't seem much else beside lots of clothes," said one of the
men, "and hats, and sticks, and umbrellas."

"Ah!" said the other, "and they all belong to the murdered men that Todd
cut up to make pies of!"

"Horrible!--horrible!"

"You may say that, old friend. It's only a great pity that Sir Richard
has so expressly forbid anything to be touched in the old crib, or else
there's some nice enough things here, I should say, that would make a
fellow warm and comfortable in the winter nights."

"Not a doubt of that. Here's a cloak, now!"

"A beauty--quite a beauty, I say. He can't know what is really here. Do
you think he can?"

"What, Sir Richard?"

"Yes."

"Oh, don't he. I wouldn't venture to touch so much as an old hat here,
for I should feel, as sure as fate, he'd find it out."

"Oh, nonsense, he couldn't; and as for the ghosts, they don't seem at
all likely to interfere in the matter, for there's not one of them to be
seen or heard of to-night."

"No, I defy the ghosts--a-hem! I begin to think, do you know, that
ghosts are all a sham. Why here we are, two men as brave as lions, or we
should not have come here, and yet the deuce a ghost is to be seen. I
tell you what I'd do if one was to come. I'd say, 'Old fellow, was this
your cloak?' and then if he said 'yes,' I'd say, 'well, old fellow, it's
of no use to you now, you know; will you give it to me?'"

"Ha!--ha! Capital! Why you have quite got over all your fears."

"Fears? Rubbish! I was only amusing myself to hear what you would say."

"Was you, though? Only acting, after all?"

"Precisely."

"Well, then, I must say you did it remarkably well, and if you take to
the stage you will make your fortune. Oh, here's a nice brown suit now,
that would be just my size. I should feel inclined to say to the ghosts
what you would say about the cloak."

"Well, let's say it, and if nobody says anything to the contrary, we
will take it for granted. I will take the cloak, and you the brown suit;
Sir Richard will be none the wiser, and we shall be a little the richer,
you know. 'Mr. Ghost, may I have this cloak, if you please, as you can't
possibly want it?'"

"Upon my life you are a funny fellow," said the other; and then holding
up the brown suit, he said, "Mr. Ghost who once owned this, may I have
this brown suit, as it is of no use to you now?"

It was at this moment that Todd dashed open the two folding doors, and
with one of the most frightful, fiendish yells that ever came from the
throat of man, he made one bound into the front room.

The effect of this appearance, and the sound that accompanied it, was
all that Todd could possibly wish or expect. The two men were almost
driven to madness. They dropped the light, and with shrieks of dismay
they rushed to the door--they tore it open, and then they both fell
headlong down the staircase to the passage below, where they lay in a
state of insensibility that was highly amusing to Todd.

[Illustration: Todd Alarms The Two Bow Street Officers.]

"Ha! ha!" he laughed, as he stood at the head of the stairs; "Ha! ha!"

He listened, but not so much as a groan came from either of the men, and
then he clapped his huge hands together with a report like the discharge
of a pistol, and laughed again. Todd had not been so well pleased since
his escape from Newgate.

He slowly descended the stairs, and more than once he stopped to laugh
again. The passage was intensely dark, so that when he reached it he
trod upon one of the men, but that rather amused him, and he jumped
violently upon the body.

"Good," he said. "Perhaps they are both dead. Well, let them both die.
It will be a lesson to others how far they interfere with me. Society
and I are now fairly at war, and I will win as many battles as I can.
They can't say but this is a well-fought one, two to one. Ha! They ought
to make me a Field-Marshal. Ha!"

Making the most hideous faces, just for the fun of the thing, Todd made
his way to the parlour, and taking from a corner, where he knew to lay
his hands upon them in a moment, a couple of old newspapers, he twisted
them up into a kind of torch, and lighting it then at the fire, he went
with it flaming in his hand to the passage.

The two men lay profoundly still. Terror and the fall they had had,
combined to throw them quite into a swooning state, from which probably
it would be hours before they would recover.

"This is capital," said Todd. "Lie there, both of you, until I have
transacted the business in this house that brought me here. Then I will,
perhaps, think of some amusing way of finishing you both off--ha!"

Still carrying the flaming papers in his hand, Todd now made his way to
the first-floor, and found the candle that the men had dropped. That he
lighted, as it would be much more convenient to him than the papers; and
then he trod them out, for he did not wish any great light as yet to
appear from the windows of that house, and perchance awaken the
attention of some passing traveller or curious neighbour.

Shading the light with his hand, and looking like some grim ogre, Todd
took his way to the second-floor. As he went, he every now and then
muttered his satisfaction to himself, or gave utterance to one of his
unearthly laughs; for in the whole of that night's adventure there was
much to please him.

In the first place, he hoped, and fully expected, to get enough booty
from the house to place him a little at his ease as regarded money
matters, provided that with it he should be fortunate enough to get away
from England. Then, again, it was no small satisfaction to Todd to do
anything which looked like a triumph over Sir Richard Blunt, and this
not only looked like it, but really was.

"A good step," he muttered, "a capital step, and a bold one, too; but
bold steps are always good ones. Who knows but that from some place of
security I may laugh at them all yet; and then, if I do not succeed in
killing any of them before I go, I can at my leisure think of and mature
some scheme of revenge against them; and there is much to be done with
ingenuity, if you are quite unscrupulous. Ha! ha! I have some dainty
schemes, if I can but carry them out in the time to come--ha!"

When Todd reached the second-floor, he at once went into the front-room,
in one corner of which was a large old fashioned bureau. Now it was not
to be supposed that this bureau had escaped the scrutiny of Sir Richard
Blunt; but then it had so happened that before he came to search it he
had all the evidence he wished against Todd, so that the search was not
so complete or so scrutinising as it might have been.

We shall see that it was not.

"Ah" said Todd, as he drew out the drawers one after the other, "all the
locks forced! Well, be it so. That was just what I expected. But I do
not think they have moved it from the wall by the look of it."

The bureau, it was quite evident, had not been removed from the wall. It
was of immense weight, but Todd managed to move it by short sudden
jerks; and then when he had got it quite away at right angles from the
wall, he said--

"Here was it that I hid, until some favourable opportunity should occur
for the private disposal of them, various articles of value, that I dare
not try to convert into money in my open way, for fear of detection.
Here are watches, and rings, and jewels, that were described in
hand-bills, offering rewards for missing persons, and in advertisements
in the papers; so that it became most unsafe for me to show them even to
the not very scrupulous Hebrews, who have from time to time bought goods
of me."

As he spoke, he removed a portion of the back of the bureau, which slid
out of its place softly and easily, for it was made with great skill and
care. This sliding piece, when it was fairly removed, disclosed a
receptacle capable of holding a great quantity of small articles, and
filled up with narrow shelves, as if to hold them securely.

There were costly watches--wigs with rare jewels set in them; for the
fashion of wearing wigs was so common at the time, that many wealthy
residents of the Temple would pop into Todd's shop for a little
arrangement of their wigs or a puff of fresh powder, if they were going
somewhere in a hurry, and so lost their lives. Then there were some
pairs of rich diamond knee and shoe buckles, and a few lockets, and a
whole heap of chains of gold.

"Ah," said Todd; "here is enough to set me up for a time, if I can
dispose of them; and now I must run risks that I would not think of
while I had thousands at my command. I must take these things that I was
content enough to leave behind me, lest they should at some inopportune
moment lead to my detection. Now they shall do me service."

Todd commenced filling his pockets with this dangerous kind of property,
each article of which was associated with the frightful crime of murder!

A couple of thousand pounds certainly would not have paid for what Todd
upon this occasion managed to stow away about him; and he thought that
if he could get one-fourth of that amount for the articles, that it
would not be a very bad night's work, considering the not very
flourishing state of his finances at that time, compared with what they
had been.

During the process, though, of stocking himself with the contents of the
secret place in the bureau, he more than once crept to the door of the
room, and going out upon the landing, he leant over the staircase and
listened. All was most profoundly still, and he was satisfied that Sir
Richard Blunt's two men remained in the passage, in the same state of
insensibility--if not of death--in which he had left them.

Leaving there some articles of smaller importance than those with which
he loaded himself, Todd pushed the bureau back into its place again; and
then, taking the light in his hand, cautiously descended the stairs.

When he reached the passage, there lay the two men as he had left them.
Indeed, he had been absent much too short a space of time for any very
material change to take place in their condition.

"Well," he said. "Now to dispose of you two. What shall it be? Shall I
cut your throats as you lie there, or--no, no, I have hit it. No doubt
you have both been full of curious speculations respecting how I
disposed of those persons whom I polished off in my shop; so you shall
both know exactly how it was done. Ha! a good joke."

Todd's good joke consisted now of going into the parlour, and fastening
the levers which held up the shaving-chair. Then he lifted up one of the
insensible bodies of the men, and carried it into the shop.

"Sit there, or lie there, how you like," he said, as he flung the man
into the large shaving-chair.

It was quite a treat now to Todd, and put him in mind of old times, to
arrange his apparatus for giving this wretched man a tumble into the
vaults below. He went into the parlour and drew the bolt, when away went
the man and the chair, and the other chair that was on the reverse side
of the plank took the place of that which had gone.

"Ha! ha!" shouted Todd. "This is grand--this is most glorious! Ha! ha!
Who would have thought, now, that I should ever live to be at my old
work again in this house? It is capital! If that fall has not broken his
neck, it's a wonder. It used to kill five out of seven; that was about
the average--ha!"

Todd didn't fasten the bolt again, but went at once for the other man.
He was sitting up!

Todd staggered back for a moment, when he saw him in that position
looking at him. The man rubbed his eyes with his hands and said in a
weak voice--

"Good God! what is it all about?"

Todd placed the light on the floor within the parlour, so that it shed
sufficient rays into the shop to let him see every object in it; and
then, with a cry like that of some wild beast rushing upon his prey, he
dashed at the man.

The struggle that ensued was a frightful one. Despair, and a feeling
that he was fighting for his life, nerved the man, who had recovered
just in time to engage in such a contest, and they both fought their way
into the shop together. Todd made the greatest exertions to overcome the
man, but it was not until he got him by the throat, and held him with a
clutch of iron, that he could do so. Then he flung him upon the chair,
but the man, with a last effort, dragged Todd after him, and down they
both went together to the vault below!

[Illustration: Todd And The Bow Street Officers--The Death Grapple.]




                            CHAPTER CXLVII.
     SIR RICHARD BLUNT AND CROTCHET COMMENCE THEIR SEARCH FOR TODD.


When Sir Richard Blunt left Chelsea, he felt that he had given a
sufficient warning to all who could feel in any way personally
interested in the escape of Sweeney Todd from the punishment that his
numerous crimes merited.

He rode direct to the office of the Under Secretary of State for the
Home Department, and his name at once procured him an interview. This
was not the supercilious personage who once before, upon an occasion of
Sir Richard Blunt calling upon him regarding Sweeney Todd, had exhibited
so much indifference upon the subject, and Sir Richard was received as
he ought to be.

"I have waited upon you, sir," said the magistrate, "to say that I have
now made every arrangement that is possible for the purpose of
counteracting any mischief that the man, Todd, might strive to do; and I
think it very likely that I may not have the pleasure of seeing or
communicating with you for some time."

"Then you still think, Sir Richard, of going personally after the
notorious ruffian?"

"I do, sir. I feel that in some sort I am bound to rid society of that
man. I had so large a share in his former apprehension, and in his
conviction, that I feel his escape quite a personal matter; and I have
no hesitation in saying that I shall not feel at ease until I have again
placed him in the hands of the law."

"It is most desirable that he should be so placed, Sir Richard, and I
have only two things to say to you upon the subject. One is, that I hope
you will be careful of your own safety in the affair; and the other is,
that anything we can do or any facilities we can throw in your way, you
may most unhesitatingly command in the prosecution of your most
praiseworthy enterprise."

"I thank you, sir. I shall take one man with me. His name is Crotchet;
and I should wish that in your name I might tell him that, in the event
of our search for Todd being successful, he may count upon an adequate
reward."

"Certainly! He shall have the whole reward, Sir Richard; and as for
yourself, the ministry will not be unmindful of your service in a way
that I am sure will be more gratifying to you than an offer of money."

"Sir, I thank you. The government has already, upon more than two or
three occasions, been sufficiently liberal to me as regards money to
place me in a good position, and I have now no further desires of that
sort. I will bid you good morning, sir, and at once start upon the
expedition in search of Sweeney Todd. If he be alive and above ground in
this country, I will have him."

"If anybody will, you will, Sir Richard."

The magistrate left the place, and repaired at once to his private
office, which was close at hand, in Craven Street. There our old friend,
Crotchet, was waiting for him.

"Well, Crotchet," said Sir Richard, "I have just seen the Secretary of
State, and if we catch Todd, you are to have all the money."

"All on it, sir? Oh, my eye! No, I doesn't want all on it, Sir Richard.
I isn't a pig."

"I never thought you were, Crotchet; but you may make up your mind to
the whole of the reward, as the government will provide for me in
another way; so you know now, at starting, what you have to expect, and
it will keep you in good heart during all the botheration we may have in
looking after this man."

"Why, so it will, sir, you see, so it will, and if I do catch him and
get all this tin as is offered as a reward for him, I shall retire from
the grabbing business, you see, sir."

"What will you do then, Crotchet?"

"Set up a public-house, sir, and call it 'The Crotchet's Arms,' to be
sure. That's the sort of ticket for me."

"Well, Crotchet, you will be quite at liberty to do what you like; and
now let us at once start on our errand. We will, from the door of
Newgate, see if we cannot trace the progress of this man, with his new
friend, that rascal, Lupin."

A tap sounded on the panel of the door of the room in which Crotchet and
Sir Richard were conversing.

"Come in," said the magistrate, and his clerk entered with a written
paper in his hand.

"Here, sir," he said, "is a report from a city officer, which will give
a clue to the route that Todd and Lupin have taken, sir."

"Ah, that is welcome. Let me see it. 'Two men broke into the house of
Alderman Stanhope; one a tall man with a large face--the other,
shorter.' Humph! Not a doubt of it. I will go and see about it. No doubt
it was Todd and his new friend Lupin. This is something of a clue, at
all events however slight, and may, after all, put us upon the right
track. Come on, Crotchet, we will do the best we can in this matter.
Have you your pistols in good order?"

"Yes, yer honour, and a pair of darbies in my pocket, that if once they
get on the wrists of old Todd, he will find it no such easy matter to
get them off again."

"That is right. I only want to get face to face with the ruffian, and
then I will engage that he shall not be much further trouble to society
or to individuals."

Sir Richard Blunt and Crotchet proceeded then at once to the house in
the City, into which Lupin and Todd, it will be recollected, had made a
violent entry, and from which they had been so gallantly repulsed by the
young lady. Then, from the description of the assailants, not a shadow
of a doubt remained upon the magistrate's mind that they were the
parties he sought; but there all clue seemed to be lost.

He and Crotchet stood in the street looking about them rather
despairingly; and then they thought of going to the round-house close to
Finsbury; and when they got there, they found an officer, who reported
that two men answering the description of the fugitives had been seen
making their way westward; and he had met a woman who had passed them,
and who had heard the words "money," and "Caen Wood."

This was, in good truth, most important intelligence, if it could be
relied upon; and that was the only kind of doubt that Sir Richard had.
He spoke to Crotchet about it.

"What do you think, Crotchet? Is it worth while to follow this seeming
clue to Highgate?"

"Yes, yer honour, it is. We can go there and back again while we are
considering about it here. It's clear enough as we shan't get any other
news in this part of the town; and so I advises that we go off at once
to Highgate, and calls at every public-house on the road."

"Every public-house?"

"Yes, yer honour. Todd won't do without his drops of something strong to
keep him a-going. These kind of feelings go down--down, till they
haven't the heart to say don't, when the hangman puts the noose round
their necks, if they haven't their drops. It's brandy, yer worship, as
keeps 'em a going."

"I do believe, Crotchet, that there is a great deal of truth in what you
say; and that it is only by use of stimulants that they keep up a kind
of artificial strength, as well as drowning reflection; and so they go
blundering on in the career of crime."

"You may depend upon it, sir. They'd cut their own throats in a week, If
it wasn't for the tipple, yer honour."

Acting then upon the practical advice of Crotchet, which in a great
measure accorded with his own convictions, Sir Richard Blunt repaired to
a livery-stable, and hired two good horses. He found no difficulty in
getting them, upon declaring who he was; and so, well mounted, he and
Crotchet went upon the very road that had been so recently traversed by
the two culprits, Todd and Lupin.

At the first public-house they came to they got no news; but at the
second they were told, that two men, answering the description they gave
of those they sought, had called and had some brandy.

The magistrate no longer doubted but that he was upon the right track
now. With such a feeling, he pushed on, making what inquiries he could
on the road; but until Highgate was reached they got no further news,
and then, by dint of diligent ferreting out, they found a woman who had
seen two men go down Swains Lane, and from the description she gave of
them, there could be no doubt but that they were Todd and Lupin. Now as
Swains Lane led direct to Caen Wood, it was a great confirmation of the
former intelligence; and Sir Richard made up his mind to search the
wood, as well as it could be done by him and Crotchet.

They engaged a lad from Highgate to come with them, and to take care of
the horses, while they should go into the wood; but they did not say one
word to him regarding their object in going there, nor could he possibly
suspect it. Sir Richard and Crotchet both thought it would be much more
prudent to keep that to themselves, than to put it in the power of a boy
to gossip about it to every one who might chance to pass that way, while
he was minding the horses.

When the wood was reached, Sir Richard said to the lad--

"Now, my boy, we shall not be very long gone, but you will bear in mind
that if we are absent longer than you expected, you will be paid in
proportion; so don't be impatient, but walk the horses up and down this
bit of the lane; and think that you have got a very good job."

"Thank you, sir," said the boy. "Across that there meadow is the nearest
way to the wood. I seed two fellows go that way, early this morning, and
one on 'em was the ugliest fellow I ever saw, and he calls out to the
other--'Come along Lupin, we shall be all right in the wood now. Come
along, Lupin--Ha! ha!'"

"You heard that?"

"Yes, sir, I did. You see, I was sloe-gathering in the hedge, and they
don't let you do it, cos they say you breaks down all the young twigs,
and spoils the hedge, and so you does; and so, sir, when I heard
footsteps a-coming, I hid myself right down among the long grass, so
that they did not see me."

Mr. Crotchet gave a long whistle.

"Very good," said Sir Richard; "we shall be back with you soon. You take
good care of the horses."

"I will, sir."

"What do you think of that, Crotchet?" said Sir Richard, as they made
their way into the very meadow across which Todd and Lupin had run to
get to Caen Wood.

"It's the finger o' Providence, yer worship."

"Well, I cannot deny, Crotchet, but that it may be so. At all events,
whether it be Providence or chance, one thing is quite certain, and that
is, that we are on the track of those whom we seek."

"Not a doubt o' that, sir. Into the wood here they have been, but
whether they have staid here or not, you see, sir, is quite another
affair. But it's worth looking well to; at all events yer worship, and I
shan't leave an old tree in this here place as we is coming to, that I
shan't walk right round and have a jolly good look at, somehow or
another."

"Nor I, Crotchet. They may know of some hiding-place in this wood, for
all we know to the contrary, and if they do, it strikes me we shall
ferret them out."

"In course we shall, sir; and here we is."

They had reached the wood by this time, and before plunging into its
recesses the magistrate looked carefully about him, and Crotchet did the
same.

"Do you think, your worship, there's a chance of such a fellow as Todd
staying long here?"

"Why do you think that?" said Sir Richard.

"Why, sir," said Crotchet, putting his head on one side, "this here is a
sort of place that makes a man think; and always when I am in a quiet
place like this, with the beautiful trees all about me, and the little
birds a singing, and the frogs a croaking, it makes me think of things
that I don't always think of, and of those as has passed away like
spirits, and as we may meet in t'other world nor this, sir."

"Indeed, Crotchet, I do not wonder that the silence and solitude of
nature should have that effect upon you."

"Exactly, sir. In course, it ain't for me to say whether in this ere
world there ought to be prigs, and sneaks, and cracksmen, and all that
sort of thing or not; but I will say, sir, as I'm not a little surprised
how anybody can do anything very wrong, sir, in the country."

"Indeed, Crotchet?"

"Yes, sir; it has an effect on me. When I gets among the old trees and
sees the branches a waving about, and hear the wind a moaning among 'em,
it makes me think as there ain't a great deal in this world as is worth
the bothering about, you see, sir; and least of all is it worthwhile
doing anything that ain't the right thing."

"You are quite a philosopher, Crotchet, although you are not the first
nor the only one upon whom the beauties of nature have produced an
elevating effect. The reason I fear is that you are not familiar with
such places as these. You are town-bred, Crotchet, and you pass your
life among the streets of London; so such places as this affect you with
all the charm of novelty, while those who are born in the country know
nothing and care nothing for its sights and sounds."

"That's about it, sir, I shouldn't wonder," said Crotchet; "but I feels
what I feels and thinks what I thinks."

They now had fairly penetrated into Caen Wood; and we may here
appropriately remark, that Caen Wood was much more of a real wood then,
than it is now, when it is rather an imitation of one than one in
reality. The smoke and the vegetation-killing vapours of London have
almost succeeded in begriming the green trees even at that distance off;
and in a few short years Caen Wood, we fear, will be but a thing of
tradition in the land.

So time works his changes!

Sir Richard Blunt, with long practised sagacity, began his hunt through
the wood. It could scarcely be said that he expected to find Todd there,
but he would be satisfied if he found some conclusive evidence that he
had been there, for that would show him that he was upon the track of
the villain, and that he was not travelling wide from the course that
Todd had taken. The idea that he might have at once, on foot, made his
way to some part of the coast, haunted Sir Richard, notwithstanding all
the seemingly conclusive evidence he had to the contrary; and knowing
well, as he did, how very little reliance ought to be placed upon
personal descriptions, he did buoy himself up with many hopes consequent
upon the presumed identity of Todd with the person who had been seen by
those who had described him.

Taking a small piece of chalk from his pocket, the magistrate marked a
few of the trees in the different directions where they searched, so
that they might not, amid the labyrinths of the wood, give themselves
increased trouble; and in the course of half an hour they had gone over
a considerable portion of the wood.

They paused at an open spot, and Crotchet lifted from the ground a thick
stick that appeared to have been recently cut from a tree.

"This is late work," he said.

"Yes; and here are the marks of numerous footsteps. What is the meaning
of this strange appearance on the ground, as if something had been
dragged along it?"

Crotchet looked at the appearance that Sir Richard pointed out, and then
with a nod, he said--

"Let's follow this, Sir Richard. It strikes me that it leads to
something."




                            CHAPTER CXLVIII.
            SHOWS HOW TODD HAD A VERY NARROW ESCAPE INDEED.


There was something in the tone of Crotchet that made the magistrate
confident he suspected something very peculiar, and he followed him
without a word.

The track or trail upon the ground was very peculiar, it was broad and
defined, and had turned in the direction that it went every little weed
or blade of grass that was within its boundaries. A number of decayed
leaves from the forest trees had likewise been swept along it; and the
more any one might look at it the more they must feel convinced that
something heavy had been dragged along it.

What that something heavy was, Mr. Crotchet had his suspicions, and they
were right.

"This way, your worship," he said, "this way; it goes right into this
hedge as nicely as possible, though the branches of these bushes are
placed all smooth again."

As he spoke, Crotchet began to beat the obstructing branches of a wild
nut tree and a blackberry-bush, that seemed, by their entwining arms, to
have struck up a very close sort of acquaintance with each other; and
then he suddenly cried out--

"Here it is, sir."

"What, Crotchet?"

"The dead 'un."

"Dead! You don't mean to say that one such is here, and that the dead
body of Todd is in the thicket?"

"Come on, sir, I don't think it is him. It don't seem long enough; but
here's somebody, as safe as possible, sir, for all that. Push your way
through sir: it's only prickles."

The magistrate did push his way through, despite the vigorous opposition
of the blackberry-bush; and then--lying upon its face--he saw the dead
body of a man.

The readers of this narrative could have told Sir Richard Blunt what
that body had been named while the breath of life was in it; but neither
he nor Crotchet could at first make up their minds upon the subject.

"Do you know him?" said Sir Richard.

"I guess only."

"Yes, and you guess as I do. This is Lupin, Todd's prison companion, and
the companion in his escape."

Crotchet nodded.

"I went to Newgate," he said, "and had a good look at him, so that I
should know him, sir, dead or alive; so I'll just turn him over, and
have a good look at his face."

With this, Crotchet carefully--by the aid of his foot--turned over the
body, and the first glance he got at the dead face satisfied him.

"Yes, your worship," he said, "Lupin it is, and Todd has killed him. You
may take your oath of that."

"Not a doubt of it: such is the result of the association of such men.
Todd has found him, or fancied he should find him, an encumbrance in the
way of his own escape, and has sought this wood to take his life."

"That's about it, sir."

"And now, Crotchet, we may make certain of one thing, and that is, that
Todd is not in this wood, nor in this neighbourhood either. I should
say, that after this deed, the first thing he would do would be to fly
from this spot."

"Not a doubt of that, your worship; but the deuce of it is to find out
which way he has gone."

"We must be guided in that by the same mode of inquiry, Crotchet, that
brought us here. We were successful in tracing him to this wood, and we
may be equally successful in tracing him from it. We must go into the
village of Hampstead, and give information about this dead body; and we
will make there what inquiries we can."

They were neither of them very anxious to remain in Caen Wood, after
discovering how it was tenanted; and in a very short time they were
mounted again, and went along the lane until they emerged upon Hampstead
Heath, and so took the road to the village, where Sir Richard gave
information to the authorities concerning the finding of the body of
Lupin.

There, too, he heard that a man answering the description of Todd had
passed through the village, and refused to partake some questionable
brandy, at a public-house, on its outskirts. This man was evidently
proceeding to London. Crotchet heard this information with great
attention; and when he and Sir Richard Blunt were alone, he said--

"I tell you what it is, sir--the country will never suit Todd."

"How do you mean, Crotchet?"

"I mean, sir, that, in my opinion, he has gone back to London again. The
country, sir, ain't the sort of place for such men as he is. You may
depend upon it, he only came to the little wood to get rid of Lupin, and
he has gone back to try and hide in London till the row is over."

"You really think so?"

"I do, sir; and if we want to find him, we must go, too."

"Well, Crotchet, of one thing I am pretty well convinced, and that is,
that he is not in this part of the country, for after the murder in the
wood, which he will be in continual fear of being discovered, it is not
likely he would stay about here; and so, as we have traced him a little
on the road to London, we may as well, for all we know to the contrary,
assume that he has gone there at once."

"Come on, then, sir," said Crotchet; "I feel's what you call's a sort of
a--Oh, dear me, what is it? A presentment--"

"A presentiment, Crotchet."

"Ah, sir, that's it. I feel that sort of thing that old Todd will try
and hide himself in some old crib in London, and not at all trust to the
country, where everybody is looked at for all the world as though he
were a strange cat. Lord bless you, sir, if I had done anything and
wanted to hide, I should go into the very thick of the people of London,
and I ain't quite sure but I'd take a lodging in Bow Street."

Sir Richard Blunt was himself very much of Crotchet's opinion regarding
Todd's proceedings, for his experience of the movements of malefactors
had taught him that they generally, after their first attempt to try to
get away, hover about the spot of their crimes; and it is a strange
thing, that with regard to persons who have committed great crimes,
there is a great similarity of action, as though the species of mind
that could induce the commission of murder from example, were the same
in other respects in all murderers.

To London, then, with what expedition they could make, Sir Richard Blunt
and Crotchet went, and although they made what inquiry they could, they
found no news of Todd. And now we must leave them for awhile, thrown
completely out in all their researches for the escaped criminal, while
we once more proceed to the house in Fleet Street, where we left Todd in
rather an uncomfortable situation.

It will be recollected that, locked in the grasp of the officer, Todd
and that individual had gone down with the chair through the opening in
the floor of his shop.

This was the first time that Todd had undertaken that mode of getting
into the cellars of his house; and when he found the chair going, he
gave himself up for lost, and uttered a cry of horror. It seemed to him
at that moment as if that were the species of retribution which was to
come over him--death by the same dreadful means that had enabled him so
often to inflict it upon others.

No doubt Todd's anticipations of being dashed to destruction upon the
stones below would have been correct had he gone down alone, or had
there been no one already immediately beneath the trap-door in the shop
flooring; but as it was, he fell, fortunately for him, uppermost, and
they both, he and the officer, fell upon the other man who had gone down
only a short time previous. That saved Todd; but he was terribly shaken,
and so was the officer, and it was a few moments before either of them
recovered sufficiently to move a limb.

The lives of those two depended upon who should recover his strength and
energies first. Todd was that man. Hate is so much stronger a passion
than every other, and it was under the influence of that feeling that
Todd was the first of the two to recover; and the moment he did so, the
yell of rage that he uttered really might have been heard in Fleet
Street. It was very indiscreet of Todd, but at that moment he thought of
nothing but revenge. His own safety became a secondary consideration
with him.

He grasped the officer by the throat!

At the moment that, by the feel only, for that place was in the most
profound darkness, Todd felt sure that he had the officer by the throat,
he knew that his triumph was certain. It would have been as vain a thing
to attempt to escape the chances of destiny, as to dream of avoiding the
grasp of that iron hand that now closed upon the throat of the
unfortunate officer.

It was just then, though, that the officer began to recover a little
from the shock of his fall. It was only to recover to die. Better for
him would it have been had he slept on in insensibility to the pangs
that were awaiting him; but that was not to be.

"Ah, wretch!" shrieked Todd, "so you thought you had me? Down--down to
death!--Ha!--ha!"

The officer struggled much, and dashed about his feet and arms, but all
was in vain.

"Ha!--ha!" laughed Todd, and that hideous laugh awakened as hideous an
echo in the dismal place. "Ha!--ha! I have you now. Oh! but I should
like to protract your death and see you die by inches! Only that my time
is precious, and for my own sake, I will put you quickly beyond the pale
of life."

The man tried to cry out; but the compression upon his throat of those
bony fingers prevented him. He had his hand at liberty, and he caught
Todd by the head and face, and began to do him as much mischief as he
could. There was for a few seconds a fierce struggle, and then Todd,
keeping still his right hand clasped about the throat of his victim,
with the left laid hold of as much of his hair on the front of his head
us he could, and raising his head then about six inches from the stone
floor on which it had rested, he dashed it down again with all his
might.

The officer's arms fell nerveless to his sides, and he uttered a deep
groan.

Again Todd raised the head, and dashed it down, and that time he heard a
crashing sound, and he felt satisfied that he had killed the man.

There was now no further use in holding the throat of the dead man, and
Todd let him go.

"Ha!--ha!" he said. "That is done. That is done--Ha! Now am I once more
lord and master in my own house--once again I reign here supreme, and
can do what it may please me to do. Ha! this is glorious! Why, it is
like old times coming back to me again. I feel as if I could open my
shop in the morning, and again polish off the neighbourhood. It seems as
if all that had happened since last I stropped a razor above, had been
but a dream. The arrest--the trial--the escape--Newgate--the wood at
Hampstead! All a dream--a dream!"

He was silent, and the excitement of the moment of triumph had passed
away.

"No--no," he said. "No! It is too real--much too real! Oh, it is real,
indeed. I am the fugitive! The haunted man without a home--without a
friend; and I have this night nor any other night any place in which I
may lay my head in safety. I am as one persecuted by all the world,
without hope--without pity! What will now become of me?"

A low groan came upon Todd's ear.

He started, and looked around him. He tried hard to pierce with his
half-shut eyes the intense darkness, but he could not; and muttering to
himself--"Not yet dead--not yet dead?" he crept to an obscure corner of
the cellar, and opened a door that led by a ladder to the floor of the
back parlour, where there was a trap door, under which the large table
usually stood, and which he could open from below.

In the parlour Todd got a light, and feeling then still disturbed about
the groan that he had heard below, he armed himself with an iron bar
that belonged to the outer door, and with this in his right hand, and
the light in his left, he crept back again to the cellar.

A glance at the two men who lay there was sufficient to satisfy him that
they were no more; and after then taking from them a couple of pairs of
pistols, and a small sum of money, he crept back again to the parlour.
As he did so, he heard St. Dunstan's clock strike the hour of four.

"Four!" he said. "Four. It will not be light for nearly two hours yet,
and I may rest myself awhile and think. Yes, it is necessary now that I
should think; for I have time--a little time--to do so, and much, oh, so
much to think of. There's some of my own brandy, too, in the parlour,
that's a comfort."

The fire was still burning in the parlour grate. Todd raked the glowing
embers together with the iron bar, and then he took a good draught at
the brandy. It revived him most wonderfully, and he gave one of his old
chuckles, as he muttered--

"Oh, that I could get a few whom I could name in such a position as I
had yon man in in the cellar a short time since. That would be well,
indeed. Ha! I am, after all, rather lucky, though."

A sharp knock come, at this moment, at the outer door of the shop, and
Todd sprang in alarm to his feet.




                             CHAPTER CXLIX.
         TODD IS IN GREAT PERIL IN THE EARLY MORNING IN LONDON.


The silence that ensued after that knock at his door, for he had become
to consider it as his again, was like the silence of the grave. The only
sound that Todd heard then, was the painful beating of his own heart.

The guilty man was full of the most awful apprehensions.

"What is it?" he said. "Who is it?--who can it be? Surely, no one for
me. There is no one who saw me. No--no! It cannot be. It is some
accidental sound only. I--begin--to doubt if it were a knock at
all.--Oh, no, it was no knock."

Bang! came the knock again.

Todd actually started and uttered a cry of terror, and then he crouched
down and crept towards the door. He might, to be sure, have made his
escape from the premises, with some little trouble, by the way he had
got into them; but he was most anxious to find out who it was that
demanded admittance to the old shop in Fleet Street, with all its bad
associations and character of terror; so he crept towards the door, and
just as he reached it, the knock came again.

If the whole of his future hopes--we allude to the future that might be
for him in this world only, for Todd had no hopes nor thoughts of
another--had depended upon his preserving silence and stillness, he
could not have done so, and he gave another start.

"Hush--hush!" he then said. "Hush! I must be very cautious now--very
cautious, indeed. Hush--hush!"

He then, in a tone of voice that he strove to make as different as
possible from his ordinary tone, and which he was very successful indeed
in doing, he said--

"Who is there?"

"It's me," said a voice, in defiance of all probability or grammar.
"It's only me."

"Oh! what a mercy," said Todd.

"Open the door. Is it you, Joe? Why didn't you come home, eh? You might
have got away easy enough. I have brought you something good to eat, old
fellow, and some news."

"Ah, what news, my boy?"

"Why, they say that old Todd is in London."

Todd fell to the floor in a sitting posture, and uttered a deep groan.
It was some few moments before he could summon strength and courage to
speak to the man again. But he began to feel the necessity of doing
something, for the man began to hammer away at the door, and the very
worst thing that could happen to Todd, just then, would have been that
man going away from the door of the shop with an impression that all was
not right within it, and spreading an alarm to that effect.

"I will open the door just wide enough," muttered Todd, "and then I will
drag him in and cut his throat, and throw him down into the cellar along
with the two others. That will only make three this morning--yes, this
morning, I may say, for it is morning now."

Acting upon this resolve, which certainly was diabolically to the
purpose, Todd spoke to the man again, saying in the same assumed tone in
which he had before addressed him--

"All's right--all's right. I'll open the door."

"That's the thing; but you seem to have a bad cold."

"So I have--so I have. A very bad cold; and it has affected my voice so
that I can hardly speak at all."

"So I hear."

Todd slowly undid the fastenings of the door, and an infernal feeling of
joy came over him at the idea of murdering this unhappy man likewise. It
quite reconciled him to the danger in which he was, for he could not but
know that the daylight was rapidly approaching, and that each moment
increased his peril.

"Yes," he muttered, "he will make three this morning, three idiots who
fancy they are a match for me; but I will soon convince them of the
contrary, I will soon put him out of his pains and anxieties in this
world. Ha! he shall be an independent man, for he shall have no wants,
and that is true independence."

Todd drew the last bolt back that held the door.

"Come, Joe, are you coming?" said the man.

"Soon enough, my dear friend, soon enough," said Todd. "You will find me
quite soon enough. Come in."

Todd felt quite certain that if the man caught but the slightest glance
at him, it would be sufficient to convince him that it was not Joe, and,
therefore, he only now opened the door wide enough to let him slip into
the shop, and kept himself back partially behind it, so as to be, with
the exception of one arm, quite out of sight.

The man hesitated.

"Come in," said Todd. "Come in."

"Why, what's the matter with you," said the man, "that makes you so
mighty mysterious, eh? What is it, old fellow?"

"Oh, nothing. Come in."

The man stepped one foot across the threshold, and put his head in at
the shop-door.

"Come, now," he said. "None of your jokes, Joe. Where are you?"

Todd felt that that was a critical moment, and that if he failed to take
advantage of it, the least thing would give the man the alarm, and he
might draw back from the door altogether, and so stop him from executing
that summary proceeding against him which he, Todd, thought essential to
his interests.

"No, old fellow. There's no trick. Come in."

"Oh, but I--"

The man was drawing back his head, and Todd saw that the moment for
action had come. Darting forward, he stretched out his right hand and
caught the man by the throat, saying as he did so, in the voice of a
demon--

"In, wretch--in, I say!"

The man's cravat came away in the hand of Todd, who rolled upon his back
on the floor of the shop. The man finding himself free from the terrific
grip that had been laid upon him, fled along Fleet Street, crying--

"Help--help! thieves!--murder! Todd!--help! fire! murder--murder!"

Todd lay upon his back with the cravat in his hand, and so utterly
confounded was he by this accident, that for a few moments he felt
disposed to lie there and give up all further contest with that fate
that never seemed weary of now persecuting him after the long course of
successful iniquity he had been permitted to carry on.

He heard the loud cries of the man, and he knew that even at such an
early hour how those cries would soon rouse sufficient assistance to be
his destruction. He yet did not like to die without a struggle. Newgate,
with its lonely cells, came up before his mind's eye, and then he
pictured to himself the gibbet; and with a positive yell, partly of rage
and partly of fear, he rose to his feet.

"What shall I do?" he said. "Dare I rush out now into Fleet Street, and
by taking the other direction to that in which this man has gone, try to
find safety?"

A moment's thought convinced him of the great danger of that plan, and
he gave it up. There remained then nothing but the mode of retreat
through the church; and no longer hesitating, he took the light in his
hand and dashed open the little door that communicated with the narrow
stairs that would take him underneath the shop.

Before descending them he paused to listen, and he heard the cries and
shouts of men afar off. He found that his foes were mustering in strong
force to attack him; and clenching his double fist, he swore the most
horrible oaths. This was a process that seemed to have some effect upon
the spirits of Todd. The swearing acted as a kind of safety valve to his
passion.

He descended the staircase, and when he reached the foot of it he paused
again. The noise in the street was not so acute. It had sobered down to
a confused murmur, and he felt that his danger was upon the increase.
Shading the light with one hand, for there was a current of air blowing
in the cellars and secret passages, he looked like some fiend or vampire
seeking for some victim among the dead.

"They come," he said. "They come. They think they have me at last. They
come to drag me to death. Oh that I had but the power of heaping
destruction upon them all, of submitting them all to some wretched and
lingering death, I would do it! Curses on them--how I should revel in
their misery and pain."

He went on a few paces past the dead bodies of the two men, and then he
paused again, for he could distinctly hear the trampling of feet upon
the pavement near to the house; and then, before he could utter a word,
there come such a thundering appeal to the knocker of the outer door,
that he dropped his candle, and it was immediately extinguished in the
start that he gave.

It was quite evident that his foes were now in earnest, and they were
determined he should not escape them by any fault of theirs, for the
knocking was continued with a vehemence enough to beat in the door; but
so long as it did continue, it was a kind of signal that his enemies
were upon the outside.

"I may escape them yet," he said, tremblingly. "Oh, yes, who shall take
upon them to say that I may not escape them yet? I can find my way in
the dark well--quite well. I am sufficiently familiar with this place to
do so."

That was true enough; but yet, although Todd was, as he said,
sufficiently familiar with the place to find his way through it in the
dark, he could not make such good progress as when he had a lamp or a
candle to guide him.

He heard a loud crash above.

"They have broken open the door," he said, "but yet I am safe, for I
have a wonderful start of them. I am safe yet, and I am well armed, too.
I hold the lives of several in my hands. They will not be so fond, from
their love of me, to throw away their lives. Ha! I shall beat them
yet--I shall beat them yet."

With his hands outstretched before him, so that he should not run
against any obstacle, he took his way through the gloomy passages that
led to the vaults beneath St. Dunstan's church. The distance was not
great, but his danger was; and yet such was his insatiable desire to
know what was going on in his house, that he paused more than once again
to listen.

From what he heard, he felt convinced that many persons had made their
way into the shop and parlour, and he anticipated a thorough search of
the house.

"Let them," he said, "let them. There is nothing there now that it can
interest me to keep secret--absolutely nothing. Let them search well in
every room. It will give me the more time."

He struggled on in the dark a little further, and then he suddenly
paused. A thought had struck him.

"Oh, what a glorious thing," he said, "if I could only now fire the old
house, and so scorch some of those idiots, who are no doubt running from
room to room full of mad delight at the opportunity to do so, and at the
prospect that they may light upon me, and so share the money among them
that is offered for my blood. It is a tempting thought."

Todd felt in his pocket for the matches that had been supplied to him by
his departed friend, Mr. Lupin, and he found that he had some of them
left, although all the little bits of wax ends of candles were gone.

"A match will do as well as a torch to set fire to a house. I will
chance it, for afterwards I shall most bitterly repent not having done
so. Oh, yes, I will go back and chance it. I know how to do it; and if
that Sir Richard Blunt, whom I yet hope to see in death, has not removed
the materials I placed for the firing of the house, I can do it easily.
Oh, that will be most capital! I think it will make me laugh again!
Ha!--ha! yes, it will make me laugh again!"

He stood for the space of time of about two minutes in deep thought,
with his hands compressed upon his brow; and then he muttered--

"Yes, there is no difficulty. If I can but reach the flooring of that
cupboard beneath the parlour, it will do."

He rapidly made up his mind to attempt this most perilous act of setting
fire to his old house, after all; notwithstanding it was now to his
knowledge filled with his enemies, and that his returning was a matter
of the greatest danger to himself.

He crept back by the way he had gone, and soon reached the cellar again
under his shop. That cellar run partially under the parlour likewise;
and it was upon that circumstance, well known to him, that Todd based
his hopes of being able, with safety to himself, to fire the old house.

He shook a little as he reached the cellar underneath the shop. It was a
natural thing that he should do so; for he knew that he was doing the
very reverse of what impulse would have prompted him to do, namely, fly
from his enemies. The mode of getting into that cellar might, for all he
knew to the contrary, be found out at the most inopportune moment for
him that could be conceived, and he might find himself surrounded almost
at any moment by his foes.

No wonder Todd shook a little.

He quite forgot that the bodies of the two men were there--his two
latest victims; and as he went crawling along with excessive care, the
first thing he did, was to fall over them both, and measure his great
length upon the floor of the cellar. It was quite astonishing how Todd
controlled his temper, when he had any object in view which an
ebullition of rage would have had the effect of jeopardising in any way.
At another time, his oaths upon the occasion of such a fall would have
been rather of the terrific order; but now he uttered not a word, but
gathered himself up again with all the calmness and serenity of an
ancient martyr, who feels that he is suffering for some great and good
cause, dear to the interests of humanity.

Sweeney Todd, however, was very anxious to discover if in his fall he
had made noise enough to alarm those who were above; but he was soon
satisfied that such was not the case, and that the lower part of the
house was quite deserted, while they had made their way to the upper,
intent upon searching in all the rooms for him (Todd). Ah! they little
knew the piece of obdurate cunning that they had pitted against them
there!

"I shall do it!--I shall do it!" muttered Todd, "I shall easily do it.
There is no one to prevent me. Ha!--ha! I do believe that I shall
smother some of them, before they can possibly find the means of getting
down stairs. That would be quite a mercy of providence--oh, quite!"




                              CHAPTER CL.
       TODD SETS FIRE TO HIS HOUSE, AND THEN HIDES IN THE CHURCH.


Immediately beneath the parlour, where a portion of the cellar went,
there was a quantity of old lumber. Perhaps if that lumber had been
looked very carefully over, among it there might have been found some
fragments of old, and some of new coffins from St. Dunstan's; for with
the rich, who had vaults of their own, it was the arrogant fashion to
adorn the last sad and narrow home of humanity with silver plates and
nails; and Todd had despoiled the grave of some of those costly
trappings.

Upon the heap of rubbish he scrambled, and that just enabled him
comfortably to reach the floor of that parlour. That portion of the
floor went under a cupboard in one corner, and in the floor of it three
or four coarse round holes had been drilled with a centre-bit. Todd had
had his own motives for drilling those holes in the cupboard floor.

He now put his finger through one of the holes, and when he did so, he
gave a chuckle of delight, for he was convinced that the contents of
that cupboard had not been in any way interfered with; and that, as a
consequence, he should find no difficulty in firing the house
completely.

"So," he said, "this is the cleverness of your much-vaunted Sir Richard
Blunt. He has left a cupboard as crammed with combustible materials as
it well can be, to the mercy of the first accident that may set fire to
them; and now the accident has come. Ha!"

Again Todd listened attentively, and was still further satisfied that
all was profoundly still in the parlour, although he heard the racket
and the banging of doors in the upper part of the house.

"This is good," said Todd. "This is capital. All is well now. The fire
will have made most excellent progress before they will discover it, and
I will warrant that if once it takes a firm hold of the wood-work of
this old house, it is not a trifle that will stop its roaring progress."

With this, Todd ignited one of his matches and thrust it alight through
one of the holes in the floor of the cupboard.

A slight cracking noise ensued immediately.

"That will do," said Todd, and he withdrew the match and cast it upon
the ground. The crackling noise continued. He turned and fled from the
place with precipitation.

In the lower portion of that cupboard there was a quantity of hay, upon
which oil and turpentine had been poured liberally. High up upon a shelf
was a wooden bowl, with eight pounds of gunpowder in it, and Todd did
not know a moment when the flames might reach it, when a terrific
explosion would be sure to ensue.

"It is done now," he said. "It is done, and they do not know it. More
revenge--more revenge! I shall have more revenge now, and there will be
more death."

He knew that there was only one thing that could by any possibility
prevent the gunpowder in the wooden bowl from becoming speedily ignited,
and that that would be in consequence of the hay being packed too close
to do more than smoulder for a little time before bursting into a flame;
but that it must and would do so eventually, there could be no possible
doubt, and it was in that hearty conviction that Sweeney Todd now most
fully gloried.

And now, as he had done before, he kept his arms outstretched before him
to prevent him from injuring himself against any of the walls or the
abrupt turnings in the passages between his own house and old St.
Dunstan's. He stooped, likewise, in order that he might not strike his
head against the roof at in places where it was very low, and rough, and
rugged.

Once only Todd got a little bewildered, and did not well know his way,
and then he ignited one of the matches, and by its small light he saw in
a moment which way he was to go.

"All is well," he said, and he rushed on; but yet he began to be a
little surprised that he heard no noise from the house--no sound of the
explosion; and inclining his ear to the ground, he stopped in one of the
old vaults to listen.

A low moaning sound came upon his ears like the muttering of distant
thunder, and then a report as though some heavy piece of timber had
fallen from a great height to the earth. He fancied that the vault in
which he was shook a little, and in terror he rushed forward. The
gunpowder had exploded in the cupboard, and Todd's imagination was left
to revel in the thought of the mischief which it had done to the house
and to all within it.

In five minutes more he reached the foot of the little flight of
stone-steps that led to the church. All was profoundly dark still, as he
thought; but he had not got up above six of those steps when he became
conscious that the light of early dawn had already found its way through
the windows of the church, and was making everything within it dimly
visible. Todd recoiled at this. He and daylight were decidedly not upon
good terms with each other by any means.

"It is morning--it is morning!" he exclaimed. "What will become of me
now? It is light."

He staggered right back into the vaults again, and there gave himself to
painful thought for awhile; as he did so, he heard loud shouts in the
streets--shouts that awakened echoes in the old church; and if anything
could have given to Todd, at such a time as that, very great
satisfaction, it was to hear that those shouts were all commingled with
the one prevailing cry of--"Fire--fire--fire!" That was a joy, indeed,
to him.

"It burns--it burns!" he said; "but I am here a prisoner; I dare not go
out into the daylight; but the old house, with all that it contains, is
wrapped in flames, and that is much--much! It is now everything. Oh,
that I could hear the cries of those who find themselves wrapped up in
the unappeasable element, and have no means of escape! They would,
indeed, be music to my ears."

This state of mental exultation passed away very quickly, as it was sure
to do, and gave place to the most lively fears for his own personal
safety; for, after all, that was the great thing with Todd--at least it
was while any portion of his deep revenges remained yet to be
accomplished.

"What shall I do?" That was the question that he kept repeating to
himself. "What shall I do?" He advanced now right up the steps into the
body of the church. There, at least, he knew that he was safe for the
present; and as he stood and listened, he thought that in the bustle and
in the confusion that men's minds were in regarding the fire, he might
emerge from the church and no one notice him, and fairly get away
without observation. If he only got a few streets off it would be
sufficient, and he should be able to tell himself that he had indeed and
in truth escaped.

With these thoughts and feelings, he approached the church door.

The nearer he got to the old doors of St. Dunstan, the more appallingly
and distinctly there came upon his ears the cries and the shouts of the
people who were hurrying to the fire, and he muttered to himself--

"Ah, it must be blazing briskly now--very briskly. It must be quite a
sight to the whole of London to see the old den burning so bravely."

An engine came rattling on, and with a roar and a crash went past the
church door.

"Capital!" said Todd. "Upon my word this is capital!"

Another engine, with the horses at a mad gallop, went by, and Todd quite
rubbed his hands at the idea of the scene of confusion that he had by
his own unaided efforts succeed in making in old Fleet Street.

"They did not think," he said, "when they closed the gates of the old
prison upon me, and told me I should die, that there was one half the
mischief in me yet that they now find there is. Ay, and there is much
more yet, that they dream not of, but which they shall know some day."

He laid his hand upon the lock of the church door. A long ray of the
faint early gray light of dawn streamed through the massive keyhole, and
at the moment Todd laid his hand upon the lock that ray of light
vanished. It was obstructed by some one on the outside. He recoiled
several steps, and then from the outside he heard a voice say--

"Lor bless us, yes, it's that old villain Todd's house, gentlemen, in
course. It's come to a bad end, like its master will come to, if he
hasn't. When I saw the flames and heard 'em a-roaring, I said to my
missus 'Conwulsions!' says I, 'if that ain't Todd's house in a blaze.'"

"You are right, Mr. Beadle," said a voice in reply.

"Yes, gentlemen, perhaps I says it as oughtn't to say it, but I is
commonly right in my way, you know, gentlemen; and so, as I says,
'Conwulsions! It's Todd's house a fire.'"

"And you think," said another voice, "we shall get a good view of it
from the old church tower?"

"Yes, gentlemen," replied the beadle, whom the reader will not fail to
recognise as our old acquaintance. "Yes, gentlemen. I'll warrant as you
will get a capital view from the top of the old tower, where I will take
you. Lor a _mussy_, how it is a _roorin_, that fire! I know'd it was
Todd's house, and I said to my missus, 'Conwulsions!' says I, 'that's
old villanous Todd's house a-fire!'"

Todd ground his teeth together with rage as he listened to this; but he
felt that if he would provide for his own safety, there was indeed now
no time to lose, and he rapidly retreated into the body of the church.

His first thought was to hide himself in one of the pews, but the
divisions between them were not so high as to prevent a person of very
moderate height indeed from looking over one of them, and there was
quite light enough now for any one in such a case to have seen him, if
they had chosen to glance into the pew in which he might take shelter.
The case was urgent, however, and he had not much time for thought, so
being close to the pulpit he ran up its steps, opened the little door,
and ensconced himself within it in a moment.

There, at all events, he felt that he was hidden securely from any
merely casual observation.

The church door was opened almost before he could get the pulpit door
shut; but he did manage to close it, and he was satisfied that he had
done so without exciting the attention of those who were entering the
church. Todd could, of course, from where he was, hear, with the
greatest clearness and precision, every word that they said to each
other, as they walked up the aisle.

[Illustration: Todd Sets Fire To His House, Then Hides Himself In St.
Dunstan's Pulpit.]

One of the persons who were coming with the beadle to view the fire from
the tower of the church went on speaking to his companions.

"And so," he said, "I think, if no one be hurt, and the fire can be kept
just within the limits of Todd's house, it will be no bad thing to have
a place that is such a continual reminder of atrocious guilt, swept from
the face of the earth."

"Yes," said the other, "the only pity is, that Sweeney Todd is not in it
to go with it. Then the good thing would be complete."

"It would, gentlemen," said the beadle. "Oh, when you comes to think of
what he did and what he might have done--Oh, it makes my hair stand o'
end, and my parochial blood curdle, to think of what he might have done,
gentlemen."

"He could not do worse than he did."

"Not _wus_? not _wus_? Oh,--oh!"

"How is it possible? He committed a number of murders, and if you can
find me anything worse he could have done, I shall indeed be very much
surprised."

"Gentlemen, he might have polished _me_ off. That's what he might have
done, for he has actually had me hold of by the nose. Oh, conwulsions!
if I had only then thought that there was a chance of his polishing off,
as he used to call it, a parochial authority, I should have--I should
have--"

"What, Mr. Beadle?"

"_Flewed_ through the window, sir, that's what I should have done, and
told the world at large what had happened."

"Well, certainly, that would have been something."

"Everything," said the other gentleman, in a tone of voice that showed
how much he was inclined to enjoy a joke at the expense of the beadle.
"It would have been everything. But how plain you can hear the roaring
of the flames now, even in this church, with the door shut."

"You can, indeed," said the other. "Ah, there dashes past another
engine. Come, Mr. Beadle, the sooner we get on this tower the better."

"In a minute, gentlemen; but now as you is here arter the blessed old
church has been shut up all night, I jest ask you to say if it has the
_orrid_ smell as it used to have, which offended the holy nose of the
bishop when he came to confirm the people."

"I smell nothing."

"Nor I."

"Very good; then that's so far satisfactory. Cos you see, sirs, only
yesterday Sir Christopher Wren and two gentlemen come and left in the
church a pailful of chemists, for the express purpose of taking away the
smell."

"A what?"

"A pailful of chemists."

"Of chemicals, you mean, I suppose, although that would be a singularly
inappropriate term. But come on, Mr. Beadle, we are very anxious to get
on the tower."

"This way, gentlemen, if you pleases. This will lead you nicely and
fairly up those little stairs and right on. Oh, what a world we does
live in, to be sure!"

With this general philosophical remark, the beadle, opening a little
door at the extremity of the south aisle, pushed his friends up a narrow
staircase that led to the top of the tower of old St. Dunstan's, and
from which certainly a very good view of the surrounding streets and of
the Temple could be obtained; and in the clear light of early morning,
before the million fires in London were lighted, that view was seen to
be a tolerably distinct one.

Todd muttered the bitterest maledictions upon them, as he heard them go
up the little stairs.

There he was, certainly, to all appearance, safe enough; and he might,
for all he knew, be safe enough until the next Sunday; but how was he to
live in a pulpit even for the whole of a day? It might be that he would
have to wait there until the dim shadows of the night should come again,
and wrap up the whole church in gloom; but how many weary hours must
pass before that time would come, and what infinite danger there was,
that he might drop into sleep after all his fatigues, and so forget his
caution, and discover himself!

Already the great fatigues he had passed through, and the many hours he
had been debarred from rest, began to tell upon him; and it was with
difficulty that he kept himself from dropping into slumber. He began to
get fearfully alarmed at his situation.

"What shall I do?" he said, "I must escape--escape! Yes. How the fire
roars! I will not sleep. Oh, no--no! It is done now; the old house is
gone--gone!"

Todd fell fast asleep in the pulpit.




                              CHAPTER CLI.
        SHIFTS THE SCENE TO ONE OF QUIET GOODNESS AND SERENITY.


The necessities of our story force us for a short space of time to leave
Sweeney Todd in the pulpit of St. Dunstan's Church, and his house in
process of demolition by fire, while we take the reader back again to
Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, where the Ingestries resided in such loving and
pleasant union.

The communication that Sir Richard Blunt had made to them, had had the
effect of disturbing the serenity of Mark Ingestrie to a much greater
extent than he would have liked to admit, or than he was at all likely
to let Johanna know.

She, too, the fair and gentle Johanna, felt an acute pang as she thought
on the stern, revengeful character of Todd; and began to fancy, that if
he wished to work her any woe, he would take a means of doing so which
would touch her much more severely than as if he aimed at her own life,
by attacking that of her husband, to whom, after so many perils, she was
at length so very happily united.

"Oh, Mark," she said, "you will, you must promise me that you will
depart at once from here."

"We will be gone directly, Johanna. But who have we here? Why, there is
an arrival already. I will go and see who it is. It is some one in a
coach."

"Oh, no--no, Mark, do not go."

"Not go?"

"No. You do not know but it may be some horrible scheme of that fiend in
the shape of man, Todd, to lure you to the door, and kill you. I am full
of fears, Mark, and cannot bear to let you go from my sight a moment."

"Oh, Johanna, this is unlike you, indeed. There now, look from the
window, dear, and you will soon see how little you have to fear. Why,
it's your father and your mother. Do you not see them, or does your
tears, and your fears together, blind you?"

"A little of both, Mark," said Johanna, with a faint smile; "but I see
that my dear father is there, and my mother, too. I will fly to welcome
them. They have heard of the escape of Todd, and cannot endure to have
us out of their sight."

As Johanna spoke, she hurried to the door to receive Mr. and Mrs.
Oakley. The old man caught her in his arms, as he said--

"Oh, my own dear child! Thank God I see you safe again!"

"Safe, father?"

"Yes, my darling. You know that dreadful man?--that--that--Oh, I don't
know what to call--"

"The horrid Todd," put in Mrs. Oakley, as she kissed Johanna. "He has
escaped, my dear, from Newgate; but, of course, Sir Richard Blunt has
been here to tell you, as he said he would; so you know all about it."

"Oh, yes--yes. Come in; I am so glad you have come."

"And so am I," said Mark Ingestrie, making his appearance in the hall;
"for here is Johanna starting at every little noise, and I do believe if
a mouse were now to run across the floor she would fancy that it was
that old rascal, Sweeney Todd."

"Ah! but, my dear boy," said Mr. Oakley; "you really don't seem to have
any idea of what a dreadful man he is--you don't, indeed."

"I don't care either, father; but I only wish one thing, and that is,
that he would be so good as to trust himself, for about half a minute,
within arms-length of me, that's all."

"Heaven forbid!" cried Mrs. Oakley. "My dear son, you don't know he used
to--to--what did he call it, Johanna?"

"Polish people off, ma."

"Ah, to be sure."

"Well, it's no use talking," said Mark; "but if ever I get hold of him,
I'll polish him off to some purpose. But you have just come in time for
me to say a very serious thing to you, mother, indeed."

"Oh, what is it?" cried Mrs. Oakley.

"Don't agitate us," said old Mr. Oakley, putting on his spectacles
upside-down. "Don't agitate us, my boy, but tell us at once what the
dreadful thing is."

"Why, pa," said Johanna, "Mark did not say it was a dreadful thing he
was going to say."

"Well, then, my dear, what is it?"

"Ah, that, indeed, I don't know; but I would wager--yes, I would wager
anything, that it is something not dreadful at all. Come, Mark, what is
it?--Speak out."

"Then, it's just this," said Mark. "We are going out of London, and I
want you both to come with us, for I know very well if you don't, that
you will be as miserable as possible, thinking of Johanna, and that
Johanna will be in much the same state thinking of you, and that you
will dream every night of Todd."

The old couple looked at each other with surprise and gratification. Mr.
Oakley took off his spectacles, and said--

"My dear boy, do you know, I was just going to say that--that--"

"That, in fact," put in Mrs. Oakley, "we would be glad to go with you,
if you would let us, for Sir Richard said he would advise you both to go
out of London, and leave him to find out and hang Todd at his leisure,
you know."

"Yes, that was it," said the old man. "That was the very thing that
brought us over here, my dears; so if you will only be so good--"

"Come, come," said Mark, "it is, you must be so good. I asked you first,
you know, so you do us the favour. Is not that it, Johanna? Of course it
is."

"You are very, very good and kind, Mark."

"Oh, stuff! not at all; I say what I like, that's all, and when I say
that it would please me mightily to have your father and mother with us,
Johanna, where we are going, I mean it from my heart, as you know well."

"I know you do, Mark. And poor Tobias, father, is to be with us
likewise. You have heard all about poor Tobias?"

"Oh, yes--yes."

"Well, then, Sir Richard Blunt told us that it would be the death of the
poor lad if he should be in London and hear that Todd has escaped from
Newgate. So we gladly agreed to take him with us, for he--more than any
one--has suffered deeply from Todd's wickedness."

"Hilloa!" cried Mark, as he glanced from the window. "If here is not
another coach at the door!"

"Oh, who is it?" said Mrs. Oakley. "It's Todd, of course, come to kill
us all!"

"I hope it is," said Mark. "I'll soon set you all at rest about him. But
only look! If it ain't the colonel, and Arabella, and Tobias. Well, if
Todd wants to be down upon us all at once, now is his time certainly to
do so."

In a few moments, the colonel and Arabella were shown into the room, and
they were quite surprised to see the Oakleys there; but while Johanna
and Arabella were embracing each other, Mark Ingestrie went up to the
colonel, and pointing slightly to Tobias, he whispered--

"Does he know?"

"Oh, no--no."

"Very good; but he had better, I am convinced, for it will be sure to
slip out in conversation, some time or another, and then the poor lad
will think much more of it than as if it were told to him in a quiet
manner by his friends, for he will think that there is more to conceal
than there really is. I am convinced that such will be the case."

"Then we will take an opportunity of telling him, but not just now. I
want to speak to Johanna."

"There she is, then."

"And what does he want to say to me?" said Johanna, as she shook hands
with the colonel.

"Why, a--the fact is that--that, in fact, Sir Richard told me he would
advise you to go out of town; and as I am pretty well aware that you set
sufficient store by his advice to follow it, I think it is very likely
you will go out of town."

"And so, dear," put in Arabella, "and so, dear, in a word, we want to go
with you, if you think that such an arrangement will not be disagreeable
to you."

"Now, that is the unkindest thing you have said, Arabella, for a long
time. How could you suppose that it would be other than most agreeable
to me to have with us such valued friends?"

"There, I told you that," said the colonel. "Of course it will be all
right, and we shall make quite a merry party, I'll be bound; so that's
as good as settled, and a very satisfactory thing it is, and the sooner
we all set off the better. Here's Tobias quite delighted with the idea
of his little excursion."

"Ah, yes," said Tobias, "and it is so kind and good of you, colonel, and
of all of you; but you know I leave my heart in London still, let me go
where I may."

"Never mind, Tobias," said Johanna. "I feel quite sure that you will
find it in good keeping when you do come back again; so now we will make
preparations at once for departure, and I hope we shall be quite
delighted with where we are going. It is one of the pleasantest places,
they tell me, on the coast, and will in time be a place of great
importance."

"Well," said the colonel, with a laugh, "it's quite a pleasant thing to
hear that it is on the coast, for that is something towards a knowledge
of where it is."

"Ah, my dear--By-the-by," said Mrs. Oakley, "I should like to know where
you really intend to take us all."

"To the little fishing village of Brighthelmstone, for it is nothing
more; but then it lies pleasantly between the hills, and you can see the
Channel opening fairly before you, and there is an air upon the Downs
that is full of life and joy. You will be sure to like it, mother, and
so will you, father, and you, colonel, and you, my dear Arabella."

"You don't mention me," said Mark.

"Oh, that is because you know you are of no sort of consequence at all.
You are nobody."

"Thank you!"

"Well now, my dears," said Mrs. Oakley, "don't begin to quarrel now, I
beg of you, for that is the worst thing you can do; and so long as we
get out of the way of having all our throats cut by that horrid Todd, I
don't care where I go to or how many inconveniences I put up with, so
long as it is a great way off; and I do hope that Sir Richard will soon
catch him again, and regularly hang him, as he deserves, the wretch,
that I do."

A complete silence followed the utterance of the indiscreet speech of
Mrs. Oakley's, which, if it did not at once open the eyes of poor Tobias
to the real reason of the sudden journey, nothing would. All eyes were
bent upon the lad; and rising from the seat which Johanna had made him
take, he looked about him with dismay.

"Oh, tell me, some one," he then said, "what does it all really mean?
Believe me, my kind and dear friends, that I shall suffer less from the
truth than as if I were left to make myself mad by thought. Oh, tell me
all!"

"You shall know all," said the colonel.

"Oh, mother--mother," said Johanna. "Why did you--"

Mrs. Oakley sat looking the picture of dismay, and Colonel Jeffrey
added--

"This is an accident that I don't think is to be much lamented. Tobias
must have known at some time, and it is better that he should know now
that he is surrounded by his friends. Give me your hand, Tobias. You see
that I smile, so it cannot be of great moment after all."

"Oh, tell me--tell me!"

"I will. Todd has made his escape from Newgate, that is all; but he is
friendless and penniless, and it will be quite impossible that he can
remain many days at large, as Sir Richard Blunt is already upon his
track. Let me beg of you not to be in the least alarmed at this
intelligence. It ought not to alarm you. Todd will have too much to do
to look after his own affairs to enable him to give a thought to anybody
else."

"You will save me?" said Tobias.

"I will. We will all stand between you and any harm; but, I repeat, I do
not apprehend any danger to you."

They all spoke to Tobias cheeringly, and in the course of half an hour
they got him into quite a different state of mind; and then, as he was
to form one of the party, it was quite a relief to them all that they
did not feel compelled to keep a guard upon their tongues in his
presence. In the evening of that day they were all at Brighton.

[Illustration: Johanna And Company Leave Chelsea To Avoid The Vengeance
Of Todd.]




                             CHAPTER CLII.
           TODD HAS SOME FURTHER ADVENTURES IN FLEET STREET.


We left Todd in the pulpit of St. Dunstan's Church, while his old house
was rapidly burning down. A perilous position for Todd!

Perhaps, if he had courage sufficient to have made the attempt, he might
have escaped at several junctures, but the dread of the consequences of
capture was so strong in his heart and brain, that while he felt that he
was undiscovered in the pulpit, he preferred remaining there to making
any precipitate means of escape.

It will be remembered how the beadle had taken up several gentlemen to
the roof of the church, in order that they might get a good view of the
fire; and it was during that time that Todd thought of escaping, but the
rapid approach of daylight daunted him.

"Oh, that I had remained in the wood at Hampstead, or anywhere but here
in London, where the hands of all men are raised against me! Oh, I was
mad--mad to come here. But I am not quite lost. If I thought that, my
senses would go from me this moment. Oh, no--no, I will be calm now
again; I will not believe that I am quite lost yet."

Of a truth, Todd felt that if he really gave up in despair, that he
might commit some extravagance which would at once draw down upon him
his enemies; and there he lay in the pulpit, his gaunt form huddled up
so as completely to hide himself in it, and dreading to stay as much
almost as he dreaded to leave.

He heard still the loud shouts of people at the fire, and at times he
thought he heard even the flames that were rapidly consuming the old den
of iniquity in which he had committed so many crimes. The regular clank,
clank, too, of the engine pumps came upon his ears, and he muttered--

"No, no, you may try your hardest, but you will not subdue that fire. It
will blaze on in spite of you. You will not--you cannot, I say, subdue
it. The house is too well prepared. I had a care for that before I left
home. It will burn to the very ground--ay, and below the ground, too;
and the spot of earth only will remain that held the foundation of my
old house. Would that all whom I hate were at this moment writhing in
the flames! Then I might feel some sort of satisfaction with myself, and
even this place of peril would be for the time quite tolerable to me."

No doubt it would have been a vast satisfaction to Todd to have all that
he hated in the flames of his burning house; but as yet he could only
tell himself that the puny vengeance he had achieved had been upon the
most inferior tools of those who had wreaked his ruin, while the
principals remained untouched and most completely unscathed.

What had he yet done to Sir Richard Blunt? What to Tobias? What to
Johanna? What even to the dog that had played no inconsiderable a part
in his final conviction of the murder of its master? Little, indeed; and
the thought that his revenges were all to do, scared his imagination,
and filled him full of rage as well as terror.

He heard the sound of the footsteps of the people who had gone to the
roof of the church with the beadle to see the fire, coming down again,
and he shrunk still closer into the bottom of the pulpit.

"Oh," he said, "if they could but for one moment guess that I was here,
what joy it would give them to drag me forth to the light of day! To
once again cast me into the condemned one's cell, and then to hoot me to
the gallows! But, no--no; I will not die a felon's death. Rather by my
own hands will I fall, if my fortune should reach such a wretched
extremity. Hush!--oh, hush! Why do I speak? They come--they come."

"Well, gentlemen, as you say, the old house is gone at last," said the
beadle, "and I must say, though fires always gives me a turn, and, as a
parish authority perhaps I ought not to say it, I think it is a very
good job."

"A good job, Mr. Beadle?" said one. "How do you make that out?"

"Why, sir, who would have lived in it? Who would have paid rent, and
rates, and taxes, and given his Christmas-box to the beadle like a
Christian, in Todd's old house, I should like to know?"

"Well, you are right there."

"I know I is, sir. The fact is, that house would have been like a great
blot, sirs, in the middle of Fleet Street; no one would have taken it
for love or money; and it a very good thing as it's gone at last."

"You reason the matter very well, Mr. Beadle," said another, "and I for
a certainty subscribe to your opinion, that it is a good thing it is
gone at last, and I only hope that its late owner will soon be in the
hands of justice. Somebody is trying the door of the church."

The beadle went to it, and upon opening it two persons entered the
church. One of them spoke at once, saying--

"Is the beadle of St. Dunstan's in the church?"

Todd knew the voice. It was Sir Richard Blunt, and he shook so that the
pulpit creaked again most ominously, so that if the attention of any one
had chanced to be directed towards it, they might have felt a kind of
suspicion that it was occupied. Luckily for Todd, no one looked up, nor
in any way noticed the pulpit.

"Lor, sir, yes," said the beadle. "Here I is, and if I don't make a
great mistake, sir, you is Sir Richard Blunt."

"I am."

"Lor bless you, sir, that's the way with me. If I sees a _indiwidal_
once, and knows 'em, I knows 'em again."

"It's a capital faculty, Mr. Beadle. But my friend, Mr. Crotchet, here,
will just go down with you through the vaults to make sure that the fire
in Todd's house has in no way connected with this. We don't want to burn
down the church."

"Burn down the church, sir? Oh, conwulsions! Me go down into the vaults
with this gentleman? Bless you, sir, I should only _obstructify_ him in
the discharge of his duty. I couldn't think of doing it, I assure you,
sir. He can go by himself, you see, and then he will have the advantage
of nobody to contradict him."

"I'd rather go without him, Sir Richard," said Crotchet, who was the
gentleman. "He's only a idiot!"

The beadle marched up to Crotchet, until he got within about two inches
of that gentleman's nose, and then slowly shaking his head to and fro,
he said--

"Did you call me a _hidiot_?"

"Yes, I did."

"You did? Now, young man, mind what you say, because if you call me a
hidiot, I shall be bound to do--"

"What?"

"Nothing at all. I see you are rather a low fellow, so I shall treat you
with the same contempt as I did the very common person that pulled my
nose last week--Silent contempt! That's how I serve people. I despise
you, accordingly."

"Werry good," said Crotchet. "That's by far the safestest way, old
feller. So now I'll go down into the vaults."

"No news of Todd yet, Sir Richard?" said one of the gentlemen, walking
up to the magistrate.

"Oh, Sir Christopher Wren, I beg your pardon," said the magistrate. "I
did not see you at the moment. I am sorry to say that although we have
some news of Todd, we have not yet been able to catch him. But we must
have him, England is not so very large a place after all, and I don't
think he has any means of getting away from it."

"The sooner the rascal expiates his crimes upon the scaffold the better.
I never before heard of a criminal in whose whole career there was
nothing found that could excite the faintest feeling of compassion."

"He is a desperate bad fellow, indeed," said Sir Richard Blunt, "but I
hope that he will not long trouble society. I have determined to give up
all other pursuits until I take him, and I have a _carte blanche_ from
the Secretary of State to go to any expense, and to do what I please, in
the way of capturing him."

Todd's heart sunk within him at these words. Had they come from any one
else, he would not have heeded them much but from him they were of
fearful import.

"Oh, that I could kill that man," he muttered, "then I should know some
peace; but while he lives and while I live, we are like two planets in
one orbit, and cannot long exist together."

"I wish you every success," said Sir Christopher Wren.

"I am obliged to you, Sir Christopher. The fact is, that Todd left his
house pretty full of combustibles, and my men were unwise enough,
contrary to my positive orders, to let them be there; and I am afraid
that he may have contrived some mode of blowing up the church by a train
or some other equally diabolical means, as he had such free and
unrestrained access to it for so long."

"What!" cried the beadle. "What did you say, Sir Richard?"

"I merely said that I was apprehensive Todd might have concocted some
means of blowing up the church, that is all."

"And me in it! And me in it! Conwulsions!"

The beadle did not pause for another moment, but rushing to the door, he
flew out of the church as if a barrel of gunpowder had been rolling
after him, nor did he stop until he got right through Temple-bar and
some distance down the Strand.

"I am afraid I have frightened away our friend, the beadle," said Sir
Richard Blunt.

"And I don't wonder at it," replied Sir Christopher Wren. "I should not
like exactly to be blown up along with the fragments of old St.
Dunstan's Church myself, so I will go."

"Ah, I am sorry I mentioned it."

"Are you though? I am very much obliged to you for so doing. Excuse me,
Sir Richard, for bidding you good-morning rather abruptly, if you
please."

Sir Richard Blunt laughed as he bade Sir Christopher and his friend
good-morning--by-the-by, the friend had already made his way outside the
church-door, and was waiting for Sir Christopher in no small degree of
trepidation.

"For God's sake," he said, "come along at once, or we may all be blown
up together."

"Well," said Sir Richard Blunt, as he paced up the aisle of the old
church, "I would risk a little scorching, if at the end of it I could
only lay my hand upon the shoulder of Sweeney Todd. What on earth can
have become of the rascal? But I must be patient--yes, patience will do
it, for that we shall come face to face again, I feel to be as
established a fact for the future, as that of my own existence now."

"Oh," thought Todd, "if I now only dared to shoot him! If I only dared
do it! And I would if it were not for the other one in the vaults--that
wretch they call Crotchet. And yet I have a pistol here. If I thought
that after shooting him through the head or through the heart, I could
by one bold rush get out of this church, what a glorious piece of work
it would be! This Sir Richard Blunt is the only man that I dread. Were
he no more, I should feel completely at peace. I could shoot him now."

Todd took a pistol from his pocket and presented it through the little
crevice of the very slightly open door of the pulpit. The door would
open a little in spite of him.

"Yes, oh, yes, I could shoot him now; but the report of the pistol would
perhaps bring that other villain they call Crotchet from the vaults, and
then who shall say what would happen? And yet I have another pistol, and
could shoot him too. Oh, how glorious, if I could take the lives of both
these men! It would indeed be a good work."

The magistrate paced to and fro waiting for Crotchet, and little
suspecting that Todd was so near to him, and with a pistol aimed at him!
If he had only guessed as much, he would have freely risked the shot,
and would soon have been in the pulpit along with Todd. But it was not
to be. Sir Richard Blunt had not any supernatural power by which he
could tell of the proximity of Todd from no evidence of that fact at
all.

"Yes," said Todd suddenly, "I will shoot him. I will risk all and shoot
him now. If I die for it, I shall have, at least, had a great and
glorious revenge! I will shoot him now, when he turns and walks up the
aisle again."

Todd felt calm and pleased now that he had actually made up his mind to
shoot Sir Richard. He projected the barrel of the pistol about an inch
or so through the crevice caused by the spring of the door, and he
calmly waited for the opportunity of sending its deadly contents into
the heart of the magistrate.

The aisle down which Sir Richard had slowly paced was rather a long one,
and he had walked down it some half-dozen times, in deep thought, and
waiting for Crotchet. There was no reason on earth why he should not
come up it again, and so expose himself to the deadly aim of Todd.

He did commence the walk up it. If he had taken twenty steps he would
have been a dead man; but chance, or providence--it is not for us to say
which--had it otherwise. After going about ten paces, he turned abruptly
to the left, and made his way down a long narrow passage between the
pews to the opening that led down to the vaults, where Crotchet was
pursuing his inquiries.

Todd was foiled.

He drew back with a deep sigh.

"He is saved!" he said. "He is saved! It is not to be!"

Quite unconscious of the serious danger he had so narrowly escaped, Sir
Richard went to the mouth of the opening to the vaults, and called out--

"Crotchet! Crotchet!"

"Here you is, sir," replied Crotchet; "I was just coming. It's all
right. The old wagabone hasn't done nothing, sir, to spread the fire out
of his own blessed premises, as I can see. The church isn't in danger,
sir, I take it."

"Very good, Crotchet; then we need not remain here any longer. I cannot,
for the life of me, think what has become of our man that we left in
Todd's house. In all the riot and racket of the fire, no one seems to be
at all aware of what has become of him. Is he a steady sort of a man,
Crotchet?"

"Why yes, Sir Richard, he is. But if the truth must be told, he has got
the fault of many. He is fond of the--"

Here Crotchet went through expressively the pantomime of placing a glass
to his lips and draining it off, after which he rubbed his stomach, as
much as to say--"Isn't it nice!"

"I understand, Crotchet: he drinks."

"Rather, Sir Richard."

"Ah, that is the case of all--or of nearly all--men in his class of
life. I should not wonder now, at all, if he has not been taking a glass
of something, in consequence of feeling lonely, and so set fire to the
old house."




                             CHAPTER CLIII.
      TODD ASTONISHES THE BEADLE, AND ESCAPES PROM ST. DUNSTAN'S.


"Oh!" groaned Todd to himself. "Oh, if I had but shot the villain before
the other one came up from the vaults, and all would have been well; but
I cannot shoot them both at once. It is not often that I lose anything
by procrastination, but I have now--Oh, yes, I have now! It is
maddening!--It is quite maddening! and I could find in my own heart
almost to turn this pistol against my own life, only that I hope yet to
live a little while for vengeance."

A smart tap came against the church door.

"Open the door, Crotchet," said Sir Richard. "We are alone in the church
now, for the beadle was too careful of himself to remain after he found
that there was some little danger."

"Oh, sir," said Crotchet, with an expression of disgust in his face,
"beadles is humbugs, sir; and this beadle of St. Dunstan's is the very
worst of the worst of beadles. Didn't you notice, sir, what an old
humbug he was before, when we was a-coming here on the hunt about Todd
and that beautiful creature Mrs. Lovett? Then, sir, we found out what
sort of a beadle that was. I rather think I despises beadles, sir; I
does, your worship."

Tap came the knock at the church door again.

"You forget, Crotchet," said Sir Richard, pointing to the door.

"Lor, yer worship, so I did. I begs his blessed pardon whosomever it is.
Come in. There's nobody but the right sort here, whoever it is. Hilloa!
it's our friend, Green."

"Ah, Green, are you looking for me?" said Sir Richard.

"I was, sir."

"Then you have news. What is it?"

"Todd is in the neighbourhood, sir, or was an hour or two ago, I am well
assured."

"Todd?"

"Yes, sir. He was in his own house. A man came to the door of it to see
the person minding it, and the door was opened a little way, and Todd
tried to pull him in, and would have pulled him in, but his neckcloth
gave way, and then the fire broke out directly after. The man has been
in too great a fright till just a little while ago to venture into the
street again."

"You have seen him?"

"I have, sir."

"Bring him here, Green."

Green immediately left the church, and Mr. Crotchet set up a long and
melancholy whistle.

"In my heart I thought this might be," said Sir Richard, "and yet having
no evidence to justify the suggestion of my fancy, I did not like to
nurse the idea. Todd in this neighbourhood--Todd in his own house! Oh,
what a chance!"

"Your worship," said Crotchet, shaking his head and speaking slowly,
with an appearance of great wisdom. "Your worship, it's mostly always
the case. There's a special providence that always brings back folks as
has done a murder back again to the place where they has done it; and
the next time I'm on the lay for a cove as has done a slaughtering job,
I shall sit myself down, yer worship, in the room where he did it and
wait for him. It's a special thing of Providence, it is, sir, I feel as
sure as though I did it myself, as isn't Providence at all, but just
Crotchet, and no sort of mistake."

"You are right, Crotchet, as far as examples go. We will only just
listen to what this man that Green has gone for has got to say, and then
we will be off and do our best."

"Yes, yer worship, we will; and here he is."

Green, the officer, now brought into the church the very man with whom
Todd had had the little adventure at the door of his shop; and
notwithstanding the time that had elapsed since that little incident,
the man was still in a state of terror, which was quite manifest in
every feature of his face.

"Why, what's the matter with you?" said Crotchet, as he dealt the man a
blow on the back that nearly took all his breath away. "You look as
scared as if you had just seen a ghost, old fellow, that you do."

"It was worse than a ghost."

Sir Richard Blunt stepped up to the man, and said--

"Do you know me? I am Sir Richard Blunt the magistrate."

"Oh, yes, sir, I know you."

"Answer me then, clearly and distinctly, for much may depend upon it.
Who was it opened the door of Todd's house for you, and strove, as I
hear, to drag you into it?"

"Sweeney Todd, sir."

"Are you quite sure? Do you know him well by sight?"

"Oh, yes, sir, I could swear it."

"And you thought it very natural that he should be there, and if anybody
there had so laid hold of you in the dark, you would, of course, at once
have naturally concluded that it must be Todd?"

"Oh, dear no, sir, I hadn't an idea that it could be him, sir; and if I
hadn't seen his face, that I know quite well, I couldn't possibly have
believed it to be him."

"That is enough. I will not trouble you any further. I am much obliged
to you for your information."

"You are very welcome, Sir Richard; and I do hope you may catch the
rascal soon. I shall never forget his having hold of me, for the longest
day I have to live."

Still shaking at the bare remembrance of the danger that he had run, the
man left the church; and peeping over his shoulder every now and then as
he went, for fear Todd should be close at hand, he took his route to
quite a different quarter of the town, where he fancied he should feel
more secure; for he could not make up his mind to anything but that Todd
must have some special desire to lay hold of him, and add him to the
already formidable muster-roll of his victims.

When he left the church, Sir Richard Blunt turned to Crotchet, and
said--

"Crotchet, you may depend, now, that Todd is in London, and fancies that
among its crowds will be his greatest chance of safety. I will take
measures at once to discover him. Come along with me to Craven-street,
and you too, Green, and I will explain to you both what I think will be
the best plan to adopt."

"All's right, sir; we'll have him," said Crotchet.

"I think we shall," said Green, "for, large as London is, I rather think
we know how to search it as well as most folks. I attend you, sir, and I
will run any risk in the world to take the scoundrel prisoner."

"And so will I," said Crotchet.

"I know you both well," said Sir Richard, "and I cannot desire to be
aided by better men than you both are. Come on. I will not speak further
of any plans or projects except in my own office, where I know that
there are no spies or eaves-droppers."

"This blessed church is pretty safe," said Crotchet. "It ain't very
likely that anybody is on the listening lay in it. It would be rather
cold work, I take it. But, howsomdever, there's nothing like being on
the right side of the hedge, and in one's own crib, that one knows all
the ins and all the outs of, after all."

They both followed Sir Richard Blunt from the church, and Todd felt that
he was once again alone within that sacred edifice, the very atmosphere
of which was profaned by the presence of such a wretch, so loaded with
crimes as he was.

"Gone," said Todd, looking up put of the pulpit, "and may all--"

We cannot repeat the maledictions of Todd. They were additionally awful
spoken in such a building, and from such a place in that building. It
was dreadful that the roof of a place reared to the worship of God,
should be desecrated by the raving curses of such a man as Todd.

He was silent after he had satisfied his first ebullition of rage, and
then he was afraid that he had gone too far, and endangered his safety
by making an appearance at all above the level of the pulpit, or by
speaking. How did he know but that Sir Richard Blunt might, after all,
have some sort of suspicion that he was not far off, and be listening
close at hand?

As this supposition, wild and vague as it was, and quite unsupported by
any evidence, found a home in the brain of Todd, the perspiration of
intense fear broke out upon his brow, and again he shook to the extent
of making the old pulpit creak dreadfully.

"Oh, hush! hush!" he moaned. "Be still--be still. I am safe yet. There
is no one here. I am safe, surely. There is no one in the church. Why do
I suffer more, much more, from what does not happen, than from what
does?"

Still the notion clung to him for a little while, and he remained at the
bottom of the pulpit quite needlessly for the next half hour, listening
with all his might, in order to detect the slightest noise that might be
indicative of the presence of a foe. But all was as still as the grave,
and by slow degrees Sweeney Todd got more assured.

"I breathe again," he said. "They do not suspect that I am here. It is
much too unlikely a place for them to dream of for a moment. Even Sir
Richard Blunt, with his utmost prescience, does not think of looking for
me in the pulpit of St. Dunstan's Church. I am safe--I am safe for the
present."

He agreed with this feeling that he was quite alone in the church, and
he was right. He looked over the edge of the pulpit. How still and
solemn the place looked!

The morning had advanced quite sufficiently now to shed a dim light into
the church, and the noise in the street contingent upon the fire had
nearly passed away. The fact was, that the firemen had, after making a
few efforts and finding them of no use, let Todd's house burn to the
ground, and turned all their efforts towards saving the edifices on
either side. In that object they were successful, so that the
conflagration was over, and nothing remained but the frail wall of
Todd's house.

And so the clank of the engine-pumps no longer sounded in his ears, but
he could yet be certain that there was a great crowd in Fleet Street,
for he heard the hum of voices, and occasionally the trouble that ensued
when a vehicle tried to force its way through the dense mass of people
that blocked up the thoroughfare, which at the best of times was none of
the clearest.

"Is there a chance now of escape," said Todd, "if I could only make up
my mind to it? I do not forget that I am disguised--I ought not to
forget that. Who will know me? and yet that man knew me--that man that I
missed killing at the old place. Yes, he knew me. He said he could swear
to me. Confound him! I wish I could have sworn to his dead body. I
wonder if they have left the church-door open, or, rather, only upon the
latch? I--I will descend from here, and make a bold attempt."

He opened the pulpit-door, and had got about three steps down the little
ornamental flight of winding stairs that led from the pulpit to the body
of the building, when the church-door was suddenly opened, and he fled
back with a precipitation that made some noise, when he might have done
so in perfect quietness, for it was not very likely that any one would
have looked up to the pulpit immediately upon their entrance to the
building.

A glance towards the door convinced Mr. Todd that it was the beadle.

"Oh, dear, I thought I heard something," said the beadle, as he closed
the door after him. "But I suppose it was only fancy, after all. Now
they say that all the fire is out, and that it is quite impossible for
the church to be blowed up, I suppose I may come in without any danger.
Lor bless us, that Sir Richard Blunt, I do believe, would think no more
of blowing up a beadle, than he would of eating a penny bun, that's my
opinion of him."

"Curses on your head!" muttered Todd.

"Bless me, what a world we live in," said the beadle.

"Wretch--beast," muttered Todd; "what does he want here at this time of
day?"

"Yes, to-morrow's Sunday," said the beadle, as if pursuing a train of
thought that had found a home in his brain. "How the weeks do run round,
to be sure, and one Sunday comes after another at such a rate, that it
seems as if there was weeks and weeks and weeks of 'em, without any of
the other days at all. I wish I hadn't to come here."

Todd uttered faintly some dreadful imprecations, and the beadle
continued talking to himself to keep his courage up, as was evident from
his nervous and fidgetty manner.

"Ah, dear, me. Conwulsions! I tried to persuade my wife to come and dust
the communion table and the pulpit-cushions for to-morrow, but she
politely declined; she needn't have thrown the bellows at my head
though, for all that."

"Dust the pulpit-cushions!" thought Todd. "The wretch is coming up here!
I shall have to cut his throat, and leave him at the bottom of the
pulpit for the parson to tread upon the first thing he does to-morrow,
upon coming up here to preach."

As Todd spoke, he took a clasped knife out of his pocket, and opened it
with his teeth. "Oh, yes, my old friend, I shall, I see, be under the
painful necessity of cutting your throat, that I shall, and I shall not
hesitate about it at all."

"Yes," added the beadle, "I mean to say that to throw the bellows at the
man is like adding insult to injury, for it is blowing him up in a kind
of way that's anything but agreeable. Lor! how cold and rum the church
does feel. Rum? why did I say rum and put myself in mind of it? Oh,
don't I like it, rather! If I only now had a glass of real fine old
Jamaica rum at this moment, I'd be as happy as a bishop."

"Oh, I'll rum you!" growled Todd.

"Eh? Eh?"

The beadle turned round three times, as though he were going to begin a
game at blind-man's-bluff, and then he said--

"I thought I heard something. Oh dear, how shivery I do get to be sure,
when I'm alone in the church. I'll just get through the dusting job as
quick as I can, and no mistake. Amen! Amen! I'm a miserable
sinner--Amen!"




                             CHAPTER CLIV.
             DETAILS THE PERILOUS SITUATION OF THE BEADLE.


Todd had heard all this with anger and impatience rankling at his heart.
He began to have the most serious thoughts of sacrificing the
beadle--indeed, if any good could have been got to himself by so doing,
he would not have scrupled to do so with the greatest speed. As it was,
however, he could not concoct any plan of proceedings quickly which
would benefit him, and so he was compelled to remain an auditor of the
beadle's private thoughts, and a spectator of what he was about, when he
chose to peep over the edge of the pulpit.

"Well, it's astonishing," continued the beadle, "what a fever that
fellow Todd has kept me in for I don't know how long, one way or
another: me and Fleet Street have been regularly bothered by him. First
of all, I was in all sorts of doubts and uncertainties about the matter
before they took him and tried him, and was a-going to hang him, and
then I did think that he was as--good--as done--for--"

As he uttered these last words, the beadle was banging one of the
cushions of the communion-table, so that he was compelled for want of
breath to utter them at intervals.

"Oh, confound you!" muttered Todd, "if I only had hold of you, I would
throttle you, and then think of what to do afterwards."

Todd's great difficulty arose from the fact that he thought if he tried
to descend from the pulpit, the beadle might see him and get the start
of him in leaving the church, in which event the alarm that he would
raise in Fleet Street would be such, that any attempt to escape would be
attended by the greatest hazard.

"There is nothing for it but to wait," said Todd to himself gloomily. "I
can do nothing else; but woe to him when I do catch him!"

"This dusting job on a Saturday," said the beadle, "does seem to me to
be one of the most disagreeable of all that has to be done with the
church. I don't mind one's duty on a Sunday, but this is horrid. On a
Sunday there's lots of people, and the old place has a sort of cheerful
look about it, but now I don't like it, and I've a good mind to get one
of the charity-boys of the blessed parish to keep me company."

"I will kill him, too, if you do," muttered Todd.

The beadle paused upon this thought concerning the charity-boy; but as
he had finished the communion-table, he did not think that for the mere
dusting the pulpit and its cushions, it was worth while to make any
fuss.

"It will soon be over," he said, "very soon. I'll just pop up and settle
the pulpit, and then get home again as quick as I possibly can. I do
wonder, now, if that old Todd will be caught soon? The old wretch!"

The beadle began the ascent of the pulpit.

"It's my opinion," he said, "that Todd--as he had other folks made up
into pies--ought to be made into one himself, and then given to mad dogs
for a supper--Ha! ha! That's a very good thought of mine, and when I go
to the 'Pig's-eye, Tooth, and Tinder-box,' to-night, I will out with it,
and they will knock their pots and glasses against the table
beautifully, and cry out--'Well done, bravo!--bravo!' I rather think I'm
a great man at the 'Pig's-eye, Tooth and Tinder-box.'"

By this time the beadle had got quite to the top of the pulpit stairs,
and had his hand on the door. Todd was crouched down at the bottom of
the pulpit, waiting for him like some famished tiger ready to pounce
upon his prey. He fully intended to murder the unfortunate beadle.

"Well, here goes," said that most unhappily-situated functionary, as he
stepped into the pulpit.

Todd immediately grasped his legs.

"If you say one word, you are a dead man!"

The shock was too much for the nerves of the poor beadle of St.
Dunstan's, and on the instant he fainted, and fell huddled up at the
bottom of the little place.

Todd immediately stood upon the prostrate form of the parochial
authority.

"Ha! ha!" he laughed, "I have him now, and I shall be able to leave St.
Dunstan's yet."

He trampled as hard upon the beadle as he could, and then he took the
clasp knife from his pocket, and said--

"It will be better to kill him. Rise, idiot, rise, and tell me if you
can, why I should not cut your throat?"

The beadle neither moved nor spoke.

"Is he dead?" said Todd. "Has the fright killed him? It is strange; but
I have heard of such things. Why it surely must be so. The sudden shock
has been the death of him, and it would be a waste of time for me to
touch him. He is dead--he must be dead!"

Todd, full of this feeling, retreated two or three steps down the little
winding staircase of the pulpit, and then reaching in his hand, he
caught hold of the poor beadle by the hair of his head, and dragged him
sufficiently out of the pulpit to be enabled to look him in the face.
The eyes were closed, the inspiration seemed to be stopped, and there
was, in truth, every appearance of death about the unfortunate
functionary of the old church.

"Yes, dead," said Todd; "but it will be better for me. He will be found
here, and as no violence will show upon him, the doctors will learnedly
pronounce it a case of apoplexy, and there will arise no suspicion of my
having been here at all. It is much better, oh, much, than as if I had
killed him."

With this feeling, Todd pushed what he considered to be the dead body of
the beadle back into the pulpit again, and then himself rapidly
descended the little spiral flight of stairs.

The clock of St. Dunstan's struck the hour of ten, and Todd carefully
counted the strokes.

"Ten," he said. "A busy hour--a hour of broad daylight, and I with such
a price upon my head, and the hands of all men lifted against me, in one
of the most populous streets in the City of London! It is a fearful
risk!"

It was a fearful risk, and Todd might well shudder to find that his
temerity had brought him into such a position; but yet he felt that if
anything were to save him, it would be boldness, and not shrinking
timidity. One great cause of dread had passed away from Todd when Sir
Richard Blunt left the church. If in any way Todd had had to encounter
him, he would have shrunk back appalled at the frightful risk.

When he gained the body of the church, he glanced again up to the
pulpit, but all was there profoundly still; and the fact of the death of
the beadle appeared to him, Todd, to be so very firmly established, now,
as to require no further confirmation.

Although the beadle had closed the church door, he had placed the key,
most probably for security, in the inner side of the lock, and there
Todd found it. He thought it would be a good thing to put it in his
pocket, and he did so accordingly; and when the key was removed, he
placed his eye to the keyhole, and peeped out into Fleet Street.

Todd could see the people passing quickly, but no one cast a glance
towards the old church, and he began to reason with himself, that surely
there could be no difficulty in getting into the street quite unnoticed,
if not quite unobserved. Again he told himself that he was well
disguised.

"I dread no eye," he said, "but that of Sir Richard Blunt, and he is not
here to look upon me. There is not one else, I think, in London that
would know me through this disguise. There was never but one who could
do so, and she is dead. Yes, Mrs. Lovett might have known me, but she is
no more: so I will venture. Yes, I will venture now."

His heart failed him a little as he placed his hand upon the lock of the
church-door. It well might do so, for the risk he run, or was about to
run, was truly fearful. He was on the point of sallying out among a
population, the whole of whom were familiar with his name, and to whom
he was as a being accursed, who would upon the slightest hint of
identity be gladly hunted to the death.

Truly, Todd might well hesitate.

But yet to hesitate was perhaps to be lost. How could he tell now one
moment from another when some one might come to the church-door? and
then he would be in a worse position than before. Yes, he felt that he
must make the attempt to leave, whether that attempt should involve him
in destruction or not, for to stay were far worse.

He opened the door and coolly closed it again, and marched into Fleet
Street.

We say he did this coolly, but it were better to say that he acted a
coolness that he was far from feeling. A very tempest of terror was at
his heart. His brain for a moment or two felt like a volcano, and he
reeled as he felt himself in the broad open light of day in Fleet Street
among the throng of the population, and yet in that throng was in truth
his greatest safety.

"Ain't you well, sir?" said a man.

Todd started and placed his hand upon the knife that he had handy in his
pocket; and then he thought that after all it might only be a civil
inquiry, and he replied--

"Oh, yes, thank you--thank you, sir. But I am old."

"I beg your pardon, sir."

The man passed on.

"Oh, curse you! I should like to settle you," said Todd to himself as he
passed through Temple Bar; but what a relief it was to pass through
Temple Bar at all! To leave that now frightfully dangerous Fleet Street
behind him. Oh, yes, that was a relief indeed; and Todd felt as if some
heavy weight had been taken off his heart upon the moment that he set
foot in the Strand.

"Am I safe?" he muttered. "Am I safe? Oh, no, no. Do not let me be too
confident."

He was superstitiously afraid of pluming himself upon the fact of having
got so far in safety, lest at the moment that he did so, malignant
destiny might be revenged upon him, by bringing in his way some one who
might know him, even though his capital disguise; so he went on
tremblingly.

Todd did not like large open thoroughfares now, and yet, perhaps, if he
had set to work reasoning upon the subject, he would have come to the
conclusion that they were quite as safe, if not a few degrees safer for
him, than by-streets but there was something in the glaring publicity of
such a thoroughfare as the Strand that he shrunk from, and he was glad
to get from it into the gloomy precincts of Holywell Street.

That street then, as now, was certainly not the resort of the most
choice of the population of London, but Todd liked it, and he was
wonderfully attracted by a dirty-looking little public-house which was
then in it. A murder was committed in that house afterwards, and it lost
its licence, and was eventually destroyed by fire.

"Dare I go in here?" said Todd. "I am faint for want of food, and if I
do not have something soon I feel that I shall sink, and then there will
be a fuss, and who knows what horrible discovery might then take place?
This house is dark and gloomy, and in all likelihood is the resort of
gentlemen who are not in the habit of having any superfluous questions
asked of them; so it will suit me well."

He dived in at the narrow doorway, and found himself in one of the
smallest and darkest public-houses that he had ever beheld in all his
life, for although he had lived so long in Fleet Street so close at
hand, he had never ventured into that den.

"A nice parlour to the right, sir," said a rather masculine-looking
specimen of the fair sex in the bar.

"Thank you, madam."

Todd went to the right, and opening a little door, which, in consequence
of having a cord and pulley attached to it, made a great resistance, he
entered a little grimy room, the walls of which were of wainscot, but so
begrimed with tobacco smoke were they, that they were of the colour of
the darkest rose-wood, and the ceiling in no way differed from them in
tint. A fire was burning in a little wretched grate, and the floor was
covered with coarse sand, which crackled under Todd's feet.

The furniture of this little den, which certainly had the name of
'Parlour' from courtesy only, consisted of the coldest-looking rigid
wooden chairs and tables that could be imagined. Two men sat by the fire
trying to warm themselves, for a cold wind was blowing in the streets of
London, and the season was chilly and wintry for the time of the year.

Todd, when he found the parlour had some one in it, would gladly have
effected a retreat; but to do so, after he had made his way into the
middle of the room, would have only aroused suspicion, so he resolved to
go on, and carry the affair through; and for greater safety, he put on a
very infirm aspect, and appeared to be bent double by age and disease.

He coughed dreadfully.

"You don't seem to be very well, sir," said one of the men.

"Oh, dear me, no," said Todd. "When you are as old as I am, young man,
you won't wonder at infirmities coming upon you."

"Young man, do you call me? I am forty."

"Ah, forty! When I was forty, and that was thirty years ago, I thought
myself quite a youth. Oh, dear me, but what with the gout, and the
lumbago, and two or three more little things, I am nearly done for now.
Oh, dear me, life's a burthen."

"What would you like to have, sir?" said a girl who waited upon the
parlour guests, and who came in for Todd's order.

"Anything, my dear, you have in the house to eat, and some brandy to
drink, if you please."

"Sit by the fire, sir," said one of the men; "you will be more
comfortable. We ought to make way for age."

"Oh, dear no, I thank you. I must be somewhere where I can rest my poor
back at times, so I like this corner." It was a dark corner, and Todd
preferred it. "It will do very well for me, if you please. Oh, dear me;
don't disturb yourselves, gentlemen, on my account, I beg of you. I am
an old broken-down man, and have not long to live now in this world of
care and sorrow."




                              CHAPTER CLV.
        TODD GETS THE BETTER OF THE SHARPERS, AND TAKES A BOAT.


The girl brought Todd a plate of roast-beef, a loaf, and some brandy,
with which he regaled himself tolerably well; but he was uncomfortably
conscious that the two men were looking at him all the while.

"Gentlemen," he said, "it's a very odd thing, but my appetite continues
good notwithstanding all my infirmities. I eat well, and I drink well,
and the doctors say that that is what keeps me alive."

"I should not wonder," said one of the men drily.

"Yes," said the other, with a laugh, "you are like us, old gentleman; we
live by victuals and drink."

"Ah, I didn't mean that," said Todd; "you young people are so fond of
your jokes. Dear me, when I was young I used to be fond of my joke,
likewise, but now I am so old, that what with my winter cough, and the
gout, and all that sort of thing, my joking days are long since gone by.
I lost my poor wife, too, a little while ago--bless her heart! Ah, me!"

Todd had the greatest inclination in the world to make up one of his old
diabolical faces at this juncture; but he restrained himself, for he
felt the danger of doing so; and then affecting to wipe away a tear, he
added--

"But I find my consolation in religion. There's where, gentlemen, an old
man may look for comfort, and that strength of heart and soul, which in
this world is denied to him."

"Very true, sir--very true."

"Ah, gentlemen, it is true; and there's nothing in all the world like an
easy conscience. That's the sort of thing to make a man feel serene and
happy in this world, while he is preparing for the joys of the next."

"How delightful it is, sir," said one of the men, "for us to meet with a
gentleman who has the same opinion as ourselves. Will you join us in a
glass, sir, if you please?"

"Oh, yes--yes, with pleasure. What a shocking bad fire, they tell me,
has been in Fleet Street."

"Yes, it's the notorious Todd's house."

"In--deed!"

The man who had proposed the social glass rang the bell, and ordered
three tumblers of brandy-and-water, and then he said--

"Ah, sir! if you or I could only lay hold of Sweeney Todd it would be
rather a good day's work."

"Oh, dear, God forbid!" said Todd. "He would soon lay me low if I were
to try to lay hold of him, with, as I may say in a manner of speaking,
one foot in the grave. I am not, in the natural order of things, long
for this world, gentlemen, and it is not for me to lay hold of desperate
characters."

"That's true, sir; but do you know the reward that is offered for him by
the Secretary of State?"

"No! Is there really a reward for him?"

"Yes, a thousand pounds clear to any one who will lodge him in any jail.
A thousand pounds! Why, it makes a man's mouth water to think of it. One
might retire, Bill, mightn't one, and give up all sorts of--"

Bill gave his enthusiastic comrade rather a severe cautionary kick under
the table, and it seemed to have the effect of stopping the word
'thieving' from coming past his lips quite at unawares--at least that
was the way Todd translated it. He had not the smallest doubt but that
the public-house was a very indifferent one, and that the two men whom
he was in company with in it were two of the most arrant thieves in all
London.

Todd resolved to act accordingly, and he did not let them see that he
had the least suspicion of them; but he kept such a wary eye upon their
movements, that nothing they did or looked escaped him. They little
supposed that so keen an observer watched them as Sweeney Todd was.

The brandy-and-water that had been ordered soon made its appearance; and
Todd, while perpetrating a very well-acted fit of coughing, saw one of
the men just slightly wink at the other, and take a little way from his
waistcoat pocket a small bottle.

"Oh!" thought Todd, "my brandy-and-water will be prepared, I see; and if
I do not look sharp, these fellows will rob me of all that I have run so
much risk, and took so much trouble to get out of the old house."

After a moment's thought, he rose and said--

"I will only go and pay for what I have had at the bar, and you must
permit me likewise to pay for this."

"Oh, no--no!"

"Oh, yes, but I will--I will! I dare say that I have the most money,
after all, for I have been very careful in my time, and saved a trifle,
so you must permit me."

The two thieves were so delighted at getting rid of him for a few
moments, that although they declared it was too bad, they let him go.
The moment he was gone, one said to the other, with a grin--

"Bill, put a good dose into the old chap's glass. He has got a rare gold
watch in his pocket, and there's a ring on his finger, that if it isn't
a diamond, it's as near like one as ever I heard of. Give him a good
dose."

"Well, but you know that even a few drops will settle him?"

"Never mind that. It's all right enough; pour it in."

They put enough of some deadly drug into the glass of brandy-and water
that stood next to where Todd had been sitting to kill a horse; and then
he returned and sat down with a groan, as he said--

"It's quite a funny thing! There's a man at the bar inquiring for
somebody; and he's got a red waistcoat on."

"A red waistcoat!" cried both the the thieves, jumping up. "Did you say
a red waistcoat?"

"Why, yes; and I think he is what they call a Bow Street thingamy--Lord
bless my old brain! what do they call them--"

"A runner?"

"Ah, to be sure, a Bow Street runner, to be sure."

Both the thieves bundled out of the parlour in a moment, and Todd was
not idle while they were gone. The first thing he did was to decant his
own brandy-and-water--which had been drugged--into an empty glass. Then
he filled his glass with the contents of one of the thieves' glasses.
After that, he half filled that glass with the drugged spirit, and
filled it up from the other thief's glass, and that again he filled up
with the drugged spirit.

By this means, each of them had half from the glass they had--as they
thought--so very cleverly drugged for him, to drink from; and as they
had not scrupled to put in an over dose, it may be fairly presumed that
there was in each of their glasses quite enough to make them very
uncomfortable.

They both returned.

"There's nobody there now," said one. "Are you sure you saw him, sir? We
can't see any one."

"Didn't I tell you he was going away when I saw him? It was only the
latch of the door catching his top-coat that made me see his red
waistcoat; and it was a wonder then that I saw it, for I am not very
noticeable in those things. Oh, dear, how bad my cough is."

"Take some of your brandy-and-water, sir," said one of the thieves, as
he winked at the other. "It will do you good, sir."

"Not a doubt of it," said the other.

"Do you think so? Well--well, perhaps it may. Here's my friendship to
both of you, gentlemen; and I hope we shall none of us repent of this
happy meeting. I am much pleased, gentlemen, to see you both, and hope
the brandy-and-water will do us all a world of good. I will give you a
toast, gentlemen."

"Ah, a toast!--a toast!"

"But mind gentlemen, you must take a good draught, if you drink my
toast--Will you?"

"Will we? Ay, to be sure, if you will."

"I promise, gentlemen; so here's the toast--It's to the very cunning fox
who laid a trap for another, and caught his own tail in it!"

"What a droll toast!" said the two thieves. They paused a moment, but as
they saw their new friend drink at least one-half of his
brandy-and-water in honour of the toast, they did the same thing, and
looked at each other quite contented and pleased as possible that the
drugged spirit, at the very first pull, had been so freely partaken
of--for they had found, by experience, the victims they would have made
perceived a disagreeable taste, and would not drink twice.

"Hilloa!" said Todd.

"What's the matter, old gentleman?"

"Do you know, this is very good brandy-and-water?"

"Glad you like it."

"Like it?--I couldn't be off liking it. It's capital! Let's finish these
glasses, and have others at once."

As he spoke he finished his glass, and the two thieves were so delighted
that he had taken it all, that they at once finished theirs likewise;
and then they looked at him, and then at each other, until one said to
the other, as he made a wry face--

"I say, Bill, I--I don't much like my glass. How did yours taste, eh,
old fellow?"

"Very queer."

"How strange," said Todd; "mine was beautiful! I hope, gentlemen, you
have not made a mistake and put anything out of the way in your own
glasses instead of mine?"

"Oh, dear. Oh--oh! I am going, Bill."

"And so am I. Oh, murder! My head is going round and round like a
humming-top as big as St. Paul's."

"And so is mine."

"Then, gentlemen," said Todd, rising, "I shall have the pleasure of
bidding you good day, and I hope you have just sense enough left to
appreciate the toast of the 'cunning fox that laid a trap for another,
in which he caught his own tail,' and I have the further pleasure of
informing you that I am Sweeney Todd."

The two thieves, quite overcome by the powerful and death-dealing
narcotic they had placed in the liquor, fell to the floor in a state of
perfect insensibility, and Todd very calmly walked out of the
public-house.

[Illustration: Todd Turns The Tables On The Two Sharpers, And Escapes.]

"This will not do," he said, when he reached the west-end of Holywell
Street. "I must not run such risks as this. I must now be off. But where
to? That is the question. Out of London, of course. The river, I
think--ay, the river. That will be the best. I will house myself until
night, and then I will hire a boat and go to Gravesend. From there I
shall not find much difficulty in getting on board some foreign vessel,
and with what I have in my pockets I will bid adieu to England for a
little while, until I can sell my watches and jewels, and then I will
come back and have my revenge yet upon those whom I only live now to
destroy."

Full of these thoughts, Todd went down one of the narrow streets leading
to the Thames, and as he saw a bill in a window of lodgings to let, he
thought he should be safer there than in a house of public
entertainment. He resolved upon taking a lodging for a week at any cost,
and then leaving it in the evening after he should have had some rest at
it, which he might do for the remainder of the day, provided the people
would take him in, which he had very little doubt of them doing, as he
did not intend to object to their terms, and he did intend to pay in
advance.

Todd knocked at the door.

It was answered by a woman of the true landlady species, who, upon
hearing that it was the lodging Todd was after, was all smiles and
sweetness immediately.

"I have come up from the country, madam," said Todd, "and my luggage is
at an inn in Gracechurch Street. I intend to send for it in the morning;
and as I am weary, if you can accommodate me with a lodging, as I have
some business to transact for my son, the Deacon, in London, I shall be
much obliged."

"Oh, dear, yes sir; walk in. We have every accommodation. The
drawing-room floor, sir, at three guineas and a few extras."

"That will just do," said Todd. "Will you be so good as to show me the
rooms, madam?"

Todd saw the rooms, and of course admired them very much; and then he
said, in the blandest manner--

"I think the rooms very cheap, madam, and will take them at once, if you
please. The reference I will give you, is to the Principal of Magdalen
College, Oxford, the Reverend Peter Sly, madam. My own name is Bones,
and my son is the Reverend Archdeacon Bones. I will pay you now a week
in advance; and all I have to beg of you is, that you do yourself
justice as to charges. I will lie down and rest for a few hours, if you
please, madam."

"Oh, dear, sir! yes, certainly, Mr. Bones. There shall be no noise to
disturb you, and anything you want, if you will be so good as to ring
for, I will supply you with the greatest pleasure."

"Thank you, madam."

Thus then was it that Todd secured himself what appeared to be a
wonderfully safe asylum until night. He got into the bed with all his
clothes on; for he did not know how sudden the emergency might be that
might induce him to rise; and he soon fell into a deep sleep, for he had
undergone the greatest fatigues of late.




                             CHAPTER CLVI.
          SIR RICHARD BLUNT IS VERY NEAR TAKING HIS PRISONER.


We left the poor beadle in anything but a pleasant situation in the
pulpit of St. Dunstan's Church.

Now it so happened that the beadle was particularly wanted at home; and
as he did not make his appearance, his wife repaired to the church to
search for him; but it was locked by Todd, who had swung the door shut
after him, and as he had taken the key with him, she could not make her
way into the sacred edifice.

As she stood at the door, however, she distinctly heard deep groans
issuing from some one within the church; and in a state of great alarm,
she ran off to one of the churchwardens, who had a duplicate key, and
related what she had heard.

The churchwarden not being one of the most valorous of men, rather, upon
the whole, declined to go into the church with no other escort than the
beadle's wife; and as he, too, upon listening at the key-hole, heard the
groans distinctly, he called upon the passers-by to assist, and got
together quickly enough about twenty people to go into the church with
him.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I don't know what it is, but there's groans; and
in these horrid times, when, for all we know, Sweeney Todd is about the
neighbourhood, one can't be too cautious."

"Certainly," said everybody.

"Then, gentlemen, if we all go in together when I open the door, it will
be the very best plan."

This was duly agreed to; and the churchwarden, with a trembling hand,
turned his key in the lock, and opened the door. He then stepped aside,
and let all the crowd go in first, thinking that, as he was a man in
office, the parish could not afford to lose him, in case anything
serious should happen.

"Well, gentlemen," he cried, "what is it?"

"Nothing," said everybody.

"Then I will soon let nothing see that I, a churchwarden, am not to be
frightened with impunity--that is to say, when I say frightened, I don't
exactly mean that, but astonished, I mean. Come, come--if any one be
here, I call upon them to surrender in the king's name!"

A deep groan was the only response to this valorous speech; and the
moment the churchwarden heard it, he bolted out of the church, and ran
right across the way into a shop opposite.

For a moment or two, this precipitate retreat of the churchwarden had
something contagious in it, and the whole of the men who had been
induced to stop and go into the church with him were inclined to retreat
likewise; but curiosity detained some three of four of them, and that
gave courage to the others.

"What was it?" said one.

"A groan," said another; "and it came from the pulpit."

"The pulpit!" cried everybody.

"Who ever heard of a pulpit groaning?" cried a third.

"You stupid!" cried the second speaker: "might it not be some one in the
pulpit?--and--Oh Lord--there's a head!"

At this they all took to flight; but at the door they encountered a man,
who called out--

"What's the matter? Can't you tell a fellow what the blessed row
is--eh?"

This was no other than our old friend Crotchet, who was returning from a
conference with Sir Richard Blunt at his private office in Craven
Street.

"Oh, it's a ghost! A ghost!"

"A what?"

"A ghost in the pulpit, and there is his head."

"You don't say so?" said Crotchet, as he peered into the church, and
shading his eyes with his hand, saw the beadle's head just peeping over
the side of the pulpit in a most mysterious kind of way. "I'll soon have
him out, ghost or no ghost."

Courage is as contagious as fear, especially when somebody else
volunteers to run all the risk; and so when Crotchet said he would soon
have the somebody out of the pulpit, the whole crowd followed him into
the church, applauding him very greatly for his prowess, and declaring
that if he had not then arrived, they would soon have had the ghost or
no ghost out of the sacred building, that they would. But they kept
within a few paces of the door for all that, so that they might be ready
for a rush into Fleet Street, if Mr. Crotchet should be overcome in the
adventure.

That was only prudent.

But Crotchet was not exactly the man to be overcome in any adventure,
and with an utter oblivion of all fear, he marched right into the middle
of the church, and commenced the ascent of the pulpit stairs.

"Come--come," said Crotchet. "This won't do, Mr. Ghost, if you please;
just let me get hold of you, that's all."

"Oh!" groaned the beadle.

"Oh, yer is remarkably bad, is yer? but that sort of thing won't answer,
by no means. Where is yer?"

Crotchet opened the pulpit door, and reaching in his hand, he caught
hold of the beadle by the leg, and fairly dragged him out on to the
little spiral stairs, down which he let him roll with a great many
bumps, until he landed in the body of the church all over bruises.

"Why, goodness gracious!" cried the beadle's wife, "it's my wretch of a
husband after all!"

The beadle had just strength to assume a sitting posture, and then he
cried--"Murder!--murder!--murder!" until Mr. Crotchet, seizing a cushion
from a pew, held it up before his mouth, to the imminent danger of
choking him, and said--

"Hold your row! If you wants to be murdered, can't you get it done
quietly, without alarming of all the parish? If you has got anything to
say, say it; and if you has got nothink, keep it to yourself, stupid."

"Todd!" gasped the beadle, the moment the pew-cushion was withdrawn from
his mouth. "Todd--Sweeney Todd!"

"What?" cried Crotchet.

"Here!--he has been here, and I'm a dead man--no, I'm a beadle. Oh,
murder! murder!"

"Don't begin that again. Be quiet, will you? If you have got anything to
say about Todd, say it, for I'm the very man of all the world as wants
to hear it. Speak up, and don't wink."

"Oh, I've seen him. He's been here. I came to dust the bellowses, you
see, after my wife had thrown the pulpit at my head, for asking her to
come with me."

"Oh, he's a-raving gentlemen," said the wife. "As I'm a sinner, it was
the bellowses as I throwed at his stupid head, and not the pulpit as
never was."

"Go on," said Crotchet. "Confound the pulpit and the bellows too. It's
about Todd I want to hear. Drive on, will you?"

"Oh, yes. I'm a coming to that; but it curdles my blood, and makes my
wig stand on end. I had dusted the communion table, and banged the
cushions, and up I goes to the pulpit, meaning to do for that as soon as
I could, when who should be there but Sweeney Todd!"

"In the pulpit!" cried everybody.

"In the pulpit," said the beadle.

"Why didn't you nab him at once?" roared Crotchet.

"Because, my good friend, he nabbed me at once. He laid hold of me by
this leg--no, it was this--no it wasn't. It was this--that is--no--"

"Confound both your legs! Where is he now?"

"Why, really I can't exactly say, for after stamping upon my inside for
about half an hour, he left me for dead, and I was about half gone that
way, and I have been a groaning ever since, till now. I am going
fast--very fast, and there will be an election for beadle again in this
here parish. Oh dear--oh dear! Murder--murder--mur--"

"What, you is coming that agin, is you," cried Crotchet, as he again
caught up the pew-cushion. "I shall be obligated, after all, for to push
this down your blessed throat. Hold your noise, will you, Mr.
What's-your-name."

The beadle was so terrified at the idea of the pew-cushion again nearly
smothering him, that despite all his injuries, he sprang to his feet and
bolted out of the church.

"Well, did yer ever know sich a feller?" said Crotchet. "Why, one would
think he was afraid of Todd."

The spectators thought that nothing was more probable; and as Mr.
Crotchet considered that he had got all the information he was at all
likely to get from the beadle, he did not at all trouble himself to go
after him, but after considering for a few moments, decided upon seeking
Sir Richard Blunt, and telling him that he had heard some unexpected
news of Todd.

Crotchet knew where to pitch upon Sir Richard at once; and when he
related to him what had taken place, a look of great chagrin came over
the face of the magistrate.

"Crotchet," he said, "I have missed Todd, then, by what may be
considered a hair's breadth. He must have been in the pulpit while I was
in the church alone. Oh, that I could but for a moment have guessed as
much! You, if you recollect, Crotchet, were in the vaults, and I was
waiting for you."

"To be sure, Sir Richard."

"And so the rascal was almost within arm's length, and yet escaped me."

Sir Richard Blunt paced to and fro in an agony of impatience and regret.
To be so near apprehending Todd, and yet to miss him, was truly
terrific.

"Lor, sir," said Crotchet, "what's the use of fretting and pining about
it? That won't bring it back, sir, I can tell you. After all, sir, you
can't do better than grin and bear it, you know, which is the out and
outest policy on all these here occasions, you know, yer worship. I wish
as I'd a knowed he'd been in the church as much as you do; but you don't
see me a _cussin_ and a knocking my own head about it, no how."

"You are right, Crotchet, but in good truth it is most desperately
provoking. You will proceed as I have directed you, and I will run down
to Norfolk Street river, for fear Todd should try to escape us that way.
You will be so good, Crotchet, as to be as vigilant as possible. You
know how to find me if you want me."

"Rather, sir."

At this moment, and just as Crotchet was upon the point of leaving the
room, an officer brought in a little slip of paper to Sir Richard Blunt,
upon which was the word "Ben."

"Ben--Ben?" said Sir Richard, "who is Ben? Oh, I think I know. Pray show
him in at once. It is my friend the beef-eater, from the Tower."

"Easy does it," said Ben, popping his head in at the door of the room.
"Easy does it."

"So it does, Ben. Come in. I am glad to see you. You can go, Crotchet.
Pray be seated, Ben, and tell me how I can serve you in any way, my good
friend, and you may be assured that I shall have exceeding pleasure in
doing so, if I possibly can in any way."

"Lord bless you," said Ben, "I hardly knows. There's ups and downs in
this here world, and ins and outs."

"Not a doubt of it, Ben."

"And retreats within retreats, Sir Richard, and foxes, and laughing
hyenas, as you can't concilliorate no how, if you wollop 'em till you
can't wollop 'em no more."

"Precisely, Ben. If I were a hyena, I don't exactly think, do you know,
that such a process would conciliate me."

"Oh, dear yes--it's the only way. But what I've come about, Sir Richard,
is what I calls a delicate affair. Oh, dear yes--I tries to take it easy
but I can't--I'm--I'm--"

"What, Ben?"

"I'm in love! Oh!"

"Well, Ben, there is no great wonder in that. I have been in love
myself, and I believe very few indeed escape the soft impeachment. I
hope your love is prosperous, Ben?"

"Thank you kindly, Sir Richard, thank you; but, you see, I thought you
might tell me if there was any vice or natural kicking running in the
family, and that's why I comed here."

"I tell you, Ben? Why I don't even know the name of the family."

"Yes, you does, Sir Richard. The young woman as I fell in love with, is
Miss Julia Hardman, and her father is one of those chaps as nabs the bad
un's for you, you know, Sir Richard."

"One of my officers?"

"To be sure he is."

"Does he reside in Norfolk Street, Strand?"

"Does he? Ay, he does; and that's how I came to know the little morsel
of a cretur as has made for the first time an impression upon my heart.
Oh, Ben, Ben, little could anybody think as you was a marrying sort of
person, and here you is in love with Miss Julia!"

"It does seem to me a little extraordinary, Ben, for I must confess I
have heard you say some rather severe things against the married state."

"I have--I have; and if it hadn't a been for all the marrying set-out
with those two girls, Johanna and Arabella, I never should have got sich
a idea in my head. Howsomedever, there it is, and there it is likely to
remain. It's a agravation, but there it is!"

"And how did you get acquainted with Julia Hardman?"

"Oh, dear! There's a public house at the corner of her street, and after
I had been to Cousin Oakley's, I used to go there at times and get a
drain of something, you see, and then she used to come tripping in with
a mug for the family beer, you see; and once it rained, so I took her up
and carried her home beer and all, and that was how we got acquainted,
you see, Sir Richard."

"A very natural way too, Ben. All I can say is, that I know her father
to be a very worthy man indeed, and I believe the daughter is a good and
virtuous girl."

"You don't say so? Then as there's no vice and kicking, I do believe I
shall have to marry her out of hand."




                             CHAPTER CLVII.
    TODD FINDS THAT HE HAS GOT OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE.


After this little explanatory conversation between Ben and Sir Richard
Blunt, the reader will probably guess that Todd's evil fortune had
actually carried him to that very house in Norfolk Street, Strand,
occupied by the Hardman family, to which he, Sir Richard, talked of
going to, to give instructions to his officer, and in which resided the
identical Julia, that Ben had carried home, beer and all, in the shower,
and to whom his large heart had become so deeply attached.

Todd could hardly have fairly expected to be way-laid by such a
conjunction of events; and certainly when he laid himself down so
comfortably and easily in the bed at the lodging-house for the luxury of
a few hours' sleep, for which, if sleep he could, he had paid the
moderate price of three guineas, he little dreamt that his enemies were
rallying, as it were, around that house, and that in a short time their
voices would be actually within his hearing.

Truly it seemed as though there were henceforth to be no peace in this
world for Todd; although, by circumstances little short of absolutely
miraculous, he did continue to avoid absolute capture, near as he was to
it at times.

The great fatigue he had undergone, combined with the little refreshment
he had taken at the public-house in Hollywell Street, induced a feeling
of sleep in Todd's frame; and after he had lain in the bed at the
lodging-house for about a quarter of an hour, and found the house
perfectly still, and that the bed was very comfortable, he pulled the
clothes nearly right over his face, and fell fast asleep.

Nothing but sheer fatigue could have given Todd so unbroken a repose as
he now enjoyed. It was for an hour or more quite undisturbed by any
images calculated to give him uneasiness; and then he began--for there
was some noise in the house--to dream that he was hunted through the
streets of London by an infuriate mob; and by one of those changes
incidental to dreams, when the reason sleeps and imagination ascends the
mental throne, he thought that the heads of all the mob were armed with
horns, like those of cattle, and that they come raging after him with a
determination to toss him.

This was not a dream upon which any one was likely to be very still for
any length of time, and Todd groaned in his sleep, and tossed his arms
to and fro, and more than once uttered the word--"Mercy!--mercy!"

Suddenly he started wide awake as a knock came at the door and roused
him. Todd blessed that knock at the moment; for by waking him it had
rescued him from the dream of terrors that had been vexing his brain.

He sat up in bed, and for a moment or two could hardly collect his
scattered senses sufficiently to assure himself that it was all a dream,
and that he was in the lodging-house in Norfolk Street; but the brain
rapidly recovers from such temporary confusions; and Todd, with a long
breath of immense relief, gasped out--

"It was, after all, but a dream--only a dream! Oh, God! but it was
horrible!"

He fell back upon the pillow again; but sleep did not again come to him,
and he began to feel a vague kind of curiosity to know who it was that
had knocked at the door; and yet, he told himself, that it could not
matter to him, for that in a house like that, of course, there must be
plenty of people coming and going, and that, although the persons who
kept it might control noises within the house, they could not possibly
have any influence upon the knocker.

"Oh, it's all right," said Todd. "It's all right. I will sleep again--I
must sleep again; for it yet wants hours and hours to the night, when I
may, at least, make the attempt to get off from--from England for ever!"

A faint sort of doze--it could not be called a sleep--was coming over
Todd, when he suddenly heard the sound of voices; and he was startled
wide awake by hearing his own name pronounced. Yes, he clearly heard
some one say--"Todd!"

In a moment he sat up in bed, and intently listened. He held his breath,
and he shook again, as his imagination began to picture to him a
thousand dangers.

There were footsteps upon the staircase, and in a few moments he heard
persons go into the next room--that is to say, the front one to that in
which he lay, the room that he had paid for a few weeks' occupation of,
and which was only divided from that in which he lay by a pair of
folding-doors, that he knew were just upon the latch, and might, at any
moment, be opened to discover him.

He then heard a female voice say--

"I do wish you would be quiet, Mr. Ben."

"Ah," said another voice, "keep him in order, Julia, for he has been
quite raving about your beauty as we came along the street, I can tell
you. Do you think the servant will be able to find your father?"

"Oh yes, Sir Richard. If ma were at home she could have said at once
where he was; but Martha will find him, I dare say."

Todd threw the bed-clothes right over his head. It was no other than Sir
Richard Blunt who was in the front-room of that diabolical
lodging-house, and Todd looked upon himself as all but in custody. His
sense of hearing seemed to be preternaturally acute, and although the
bed-clothes covered up his ears, and he could not be said to be exactly
in his usual state, inasmuch as terror had half deprived him of his
reasoning powers, yet he heard plainly, and with what might be called a
perfect distinctness, every word that was spoken in the front room.

Perhaps, even in the condemned cell of Newgate, Todd did not suffer such
terrors as he was now assailed with in that lodging, where he thought he
was so safe, and which he had, as he fancied, managed so cleverly.

"Will you be quiet, Ben!" said the girl's voice again.

"Make him--make him, Julia," said Sir Richard.

"Lor bless your little bits of eyes," said Ben. "Do now come and sit in
my lap, and I'll tell you such a lively story of how the leopard we have
got at the Tower lost a bit off the end of his tail?"

"I don't want to hear it."

"You don't want to hear it? Come--come, my lambkin of a Julia--when
shall we be married? Oh, do name the day your Ben will be done for for
life. I want it over."

"Well, I'm sure," said Julia, "if you think you will be done for, you
had better not think of it any more, Mr. Benjamin."

"It won't bear thinking of, my dear. It's like a cold bath in January:
you had better shut yer eyes and tumble in."

"Upon my word, Ben," said Sir Richard, laughing, "you are anything but
gallant; and if I were Julia, I would not have you."

"Not have me? Lord, yes, she'll have me. Only look at me."

"Ah," said Julia, "you think, because you are a great monster of a
fellow, that anybody would have you; but I can tell you that a husband
half your size would be just as well, and I only wonder, after you have
made all the neighbours laugh at me, that I have a word to say to such a
mountain of a man, that I do, you wretch!"

"Laugh!" cried Ben, "Why, my duck, what do they laugh at? I should like
to catch them laughing."

"Why, you know, you wretch, that that day it rained as if cats and dogs
were coming down, you took me up as if I had been a baby, you did, and
carried me home, and me with a jug of porter in my right hand, and the
change out of a shilling in my left, so that I could not help myself a
bit, and all the street laughing. Oh, I hate you!"

"She hates me!" said Ben. "Oh!"

"But she don't mean it, Ben," said Sir Richard.

"Do you think she doesn't, sir?"

"I am sure of it. Do you, now, Julia?"

"Yes, Sir Richard, indeed I do, really now, for he is quite a horrid
monster, and I only wonder they don't put him in one of the cages at the
Tower along with the other wild beasts, and make a show of him. That's
all that he is fit for."

"Oh, you aggravating darling," said Ben, making a dart at Julia, and
catching her up in his arms as you would some little child. "How can you
go on so to your Ben?"

"Murder!" cried Julia.

"Oh, if you are going to have a fight for it," said Sir Richard, "I will
go and wait down stairs, Julia."

Bang came a knock at the street-door.

"Oh, Ben, there's ma or pa," said Julia. "Let me down directly. Do
Ben--oh, pray do. Let me down, Ben."

"Do yer love your Ben?"

"Anything you like, only let me down."

"Very good. There yer is, then, agin on yer little mites of feet. Lor
bless you, Sir Richard, that girl loves the very ground as I walks on,
she does, and she has comed over me with her fascinations in such a way
as never was known. Ain't she a nice 'un?--sleek and shiny, with a
capital mane. But you should see her at feeding-time, Sir Richard, how
nice she does it--quite delicate and pretty; and you should see her--"

The door of the room opened, and Hardman, the officer, made his
appearance.

"Your humble servant, Sir Richard. I hope I have not kept you waiting
long? I was only in the neighbourhood."

"No, Hardman, thank you, it's all right. I have not been here above a
quarter of an hour."

"I am glad of that, sir. How do you do, Mr. Ben?"

"Pretty well," said Ben, "only a little hungry and thirsty, that's all;
but don't trouble yourself about that, Mr. Hardman; I always do get
hungry when I look at Julia."

"I hope, Mr. Ben, that don't mean that you will dine off her some day
when you are married?"

"Oh, lor, no. Bless her heart, no. She loves me more and more, Mr.
Hardman."

"I am glad to hear it, Ben--very glad to hear it. But I presume, Sir
Richard, that you have some orders for me?"

"Why, yes, Hardman. There's that rascal Todd, you know, still continues
to elude us. What I want you to do is, to take charge entirely on the
river, and to make what arrangements you like at the various quays and
landing-places, and with all the watermen, so that he shall not have a
chance of escaping in that way."

"Certainly, sir; I will set about it directly."

"Do so, Hardman. Expense in this case is of no object, for the Secretary
of State will guarantee all that; but of course I don't wish you to be
extravagant on that account."

"I quite understand you, Sir Richard, and will do my best."

"That I am sure you will, Hardman; and now I will go. I shall feel no
peace of mind until that man is dead, or in the cell again at Newgate."

Todd popped his head out from under the clothes, and making the most
hideous face, he shook one of his clenched fists in the direction of the
front room. It would have been some satisfaction to him to have given a
loud howl of rage but he dared not venture upon it; so he was forced to
content himself with the pantomime of passion instead of its vocal
expression.

"I do hope, sir, we shall soon have him," said Hardman. "It seems to me
to be next thing to impossible he should escape us for long. Do you
think he has any money, sir?"

"He cannot have much, for all he has, if any, must be but the produce of
depredation since his escape from Newgate. He certainly has not
extensive means, Hardman."

"Then he must fall into our hands, sir. Julia, is that your mother just
arrived, do you think?"

"Yes, pa, it is ma's step. She has been out to get something or another,
but I don't know what, as I was out myself all the morning; but it is
ma, I know."

Mrs. Hardman came into the room, looking very red and flushed, and with
a large basket on her arm. She looked from one to the other of the
assembled guests with surprise and horror.

"What's the matter?" said her husband. "Why wife, you look
panic-stricken. What has happened?"

"Oh, gracious! where's the gentleman?"

"The gentleman?" cried everybody.

"Yes, the lodger. The highly respectable gentleman who took the
first-floor only a couple of hours ago. Oh, gracious, where is he? and a
capital lodger too, who paid in advance, and didn't mind extras at all."

"But what lodger, mother?" said Julia.

"Oh, mum, I forgot--I forgot," said Martha, suddenly coming into the
room, "I forgot to tell Miss Julia, mum, that an old gentleman had taken
the first floor, mum, and gone to bed in the next room."

"In bed in the next room?" said Sir Richard Blunt.

"I am lost!" thought Todd. "I am lost now, I am quite lost! and the only
thing I can do is to kill as many of them as possible, and then blow my
own brains out."

"Do you mean to say, ma," said Julia, "that there's a gentleman asleep
in the next room in the bed?"

"Lor!" said Ben, "you don't mean to say that, Mrs. Hardman?"

"He may be in bed, but if he is asleep," said Sir Richard, "he is a
remarkable man; of course if we had had the least idea of such a thing,
we should not have come up here; but here we were shown by the servant."

"Oh, yes, it's all that frightful Martha's fault. I'll--I'll
kill--no--I'll discharge that odious hussy without a character, and
leave her to drown herself! For Heaven's sake go down stairs all of you,
and I'll go and speak to the old gentleman, and apologise to him."

"Let me go," said Ben, "and roll on him on the bed, and if that don't
settle him I don't know what will."

"Shall I apologise to him?" said Sir Richard.

Todd nearly fainted when he heard this proposition; but when Mrs.
Hardman rejected it, and insisted upon going herself, he felt quite a
gush of gratitude towards her, and breathed a little more freely once
again.




                            CHAPTER CLVIII.
                TODD'S FEARFUL ADVENTURES ON THE RIVER.


"Shall I lay hold of her," thought Todd, "and choke her the moment she
comes into the room, or shall I answer her, and let her go again? Which
will be the safest course? I suppose I must let her go, for she might
possibly make a noise. Ah! how I should like to have my hand upon all
their throats!"

Mrs. Hardman came into the room on tip-toe, leaving the folding-door
just a little ajar.

"My dear sir," she said, "are you awake?"

"Oh, go to the deuce," said Todd.

"What did you remark, my dear sir?"

"Go along--go along--Eugh!--eugh! Oh, dear, how bad my cough is. I
dreamt that no end of people were talking and talking away in the next
room; but that can't be, as I have paid for it. Oh, dear!--oh!"

Mrs. Hardman took her cue from this; and she was at once resolved to
pass off the disturbance in the next room as merely a dream of her new
lodger.

"Dear me, sir," she said in the blandest possible accents; "have you
indeed had a dream? What a singular thing!"

"Eugh! Is it? I don't think so."

"Well, sir, when I say singular, of course I mean that it's very
natural. I always dream when I sleep in a strange bed, do you know, sir,
and sometimes the most horrid dreams."

"Oh, go along."

"Yes, sir, directly. Would you like anything got for you, sir? A nice
mutton chop for instance, or--or--"

"No--no! Good God, why don't you go?"

"I am going, sir. Thank you. There will be a very quiet house here, I
assure you, sir."

With these words, Mrs. Hardman was about to leave the room, flattering
herself that it was all passing off quite comfortably as a mere dream,
when Ben, thinking it incumbent upon him to do something civil, suddenly
popped his head into the room, and in a voice that sounded like the
growl of some bear for his food, he said--

"Take it easy, old gentleman. You'll find that easy does it all the
world over; and if so be as you ever comes near the Tower, just you ask
for Ben, and I'll show you the beasteses, all gratis, and for nothing.
Feeding time at four o'clock."

"Oh, you great ugly wretch!" cried Mrs. Hardman, dealing Ben a sound box
on the ear. "How dared you interfere, I should like to know, you monster
in inhuman shape?"

"Oh, lor!" said Ben, "I only hope another of the family ain't so handy
with her front paws."

"Oh--oh!" said Todd. "No peace!--no peace!"

Mrs. Hardman at once closed the door of communication between the two
rooms; for she quite despaired now of being able to make any apology to
her lodger, and she seemed much inclined to execute further vengeance
upon Ben, but Sir Richard Blunt interfered, saying--

"Come--come, Mrs. Hardman, you should recollect that what Ben said was
with the very best of motives, and any one, you know, may go wrong a
little in trying to do good. Let us all adjourn down stairs, and be no
further disturbance to this old gentleman, who, taking everything into
consideration, has, I think, shown quite an exemplary amount of
patience."

Todd heard those words. They seemed to him quite like a reprieve from
death.

"I will come down stairs, of course," said Mrs. Hardman, in an under
tone; "but for all that, this great monster of a Ben ought to be put in
one of his own cages, at the Tower, and there kept as a warning to all
people."

"A warning o' what, mum?" said Ben.

Mrs. Hardman was not very clear about what he would be a warning of, so
she got out of the difficulty by saying--"What's that to you,
stupid?"--and as Ben was rather slow in explaining that it did rather
concern him, she walked down stairs with a look of triumph that was
highly amusing to Sir Richard Blunt, as well as to Mr. Hardman, the
officer.

How Todd listened to the footsteps as they went down the stairs! How his
heart beat responsive to every one of them! and when he felt for certain
that that immediate and awful danger had passed away, he peeped out from
amid the mass of bed-clothes, with his eyes almost starting from his
head.

"Gone! gone!" he gasped. "He has really gone. My mortal enemy--the only
man who can make me tremble, that terrible Sir Richard Blunt! That he
should be within half-a-dozen paces of me; that he should hear me speak;
that he should only have to stretch out his hand to lay it upon my
shoulder, and yet that I should escape him! Oh, it cannot be real!"

Todd heard some accidental noise in the house, and he immediately dived
his head under the bed-clothes again.

"They are coming again!--they are coming again!" he gasped.

The noise led to nothing, and after a few moments, Todd became convinced
that it had nothing to do with him, so he ventured, half-suffocated, to
look up again.

"I must listen--I must listen," he said, in a low anxious tone. "I must
listen until he has gone. When I hear the street-door of the house shut,
I shall think that they have let him go and then I shall be able to
breathe again; but not before. Oh, no--no, not before--hush--hush! What
is that?"

Every little accidental sound in the house now set the heart of Todd
wildly beating. If one had come into the room, and said--"You are my
prisoner,"--the probability was, that he would have fainted; but if he
did not, it is quite certain that he could not have offered any
resistance. A child might have captured him then, during the accession
of terror that had come over him in that house, whither he had slunk
purposely for safety and for secrecy.

At length he heard a noise of voices in the passage, and then the
street-door was opened. As he lay, he could feel a rush of cold air in
consequence. Then it was closed again, and the house was very still.

"He has gone! He has gone!" said Todd.

The manner in which Todd pronounced these few words it would be
impossible to describe. No shivering wretch reprieved upon the scaffold,
with the rope round his neck, could feel a greater relief than did Todd,
when he found that the door of that house was really closed upon Sir
Richard Blunt.

And then he began to felicitate himself upon the fact that, after all,
he had come to that place; "for now," he thought, "I know that, although
I have been in great danger, it has passed away; and as Sir Richard
Blunt has transacted all his business in this house, he is not likely to
come to it again."

That was a pleasant thought, and as Todd dashed from his brow the heavy
drops that intense fear had caused to assemble there, he almost smiled.

A very profound stillness now reigned in the house, for Mrs. Hardman was
resolved to make up to her lodger--as well as she could--for the noise
and disturbance that had been so unwittingly caused in her front room.
She had made Ben go away, and as her husband had likewise gone, in
pursuance of the orders of Sir Richard Blunt, to take measures lest Todd
should make an escape by the Thames, the place remained as calm and
still as if no one were in it but herself.

Todd closed his eyes, and wearied nature sought relief in sleep. Even
Sweeney Todd, with more than twenty mortal murders on his conscience,
slept calmly for no less than six hours of that, to him, most eventful
day.

Twice during this long sleep of her lodger's had Mrs. Hardman stolen
into the front-room to listen, and been quite satisfied by the regular
breathing, that, at all events, her lodger was not dead; and she kept
herself upon the alert to attend to him whenever he should awake from
that deep sleep.

The long shadows of the houses on the other side of the street had
fallen upon the windows of the Hardmans' abode, and a slight fog began
to make itself perceptible in London, when Todd awoke.

"Help--help! Oh, God, where am I?" he cried.

He sprang half out of the bed, and then the full tide of recollection
came back to him, and he fully comprehended his situation in a moment.

"Hush!--hush!--hush!" he said; and he listened most intently to hear if
his sudden exclamation had attracted any attention.

He heard a footstep on the stairs.

"Hush!--hush!" he said again, "hush--who is it? I must be very careful
now!--Oh, very!"

The footstep paused at his door, and then he heard it in the next room,
and Mrs. Hardman advancing to the folding doors, said, in the blandest
of accents--

"Are you awake, sir, if you please?"

Todd at once assumed the tone in which he had formerly addressed her,
and replied--

"Yes, madam, yes. I am awake!"

"And how do you feel now, sir, if you please?"

"Oh, a great deal better, ma'am, a great deal better. Indeed, I feel
quite refreshed. I will come out directly, my dear madam. Pray have the
goodness to take this guinea. I shall want a cup of tea at times, and I
think I could take a cup now, my dear madam. You can get it out of that,
and keep the change, you know, till I want something else."

"Oh, really, sir," said Mrs. Hardman, as she put her hand through a
small opening of one of the folding doors and took the guinea. "It is
quite delightful to have so pleasant a lodger as yourself--oh, quite.--I
will get the tea directly, my dear sir, and pray make yourself quite at
home, if you please."

"Yes, ma'am, I will--I will."

"Do, sir. I should be really unhappy now, if I did not think you were
comfortable."

"Oh it's all right, ma'am. Eugh! Oh, dear! I do think my cough has been
better since I have been here."

"How delightful to hear you say that!" exclaimed Mrs. Hardman, speaking
in quite a tremulous voice of sympathetic emotion. "I will get the tea,
directly, sir."

She left the room, and as she went down the stairs, she said to
herself--

"What a pearl of a lodger, to be sure! He pays for everything over and
over again. I should not, now, in the least wonder but the dear old
gentleman will quite forget the change out of this guinea; if he does,
it is not for me to vex him by putting him in mind of it. I know well,
that old people never like it to be supposed that their memory fails
them; so if he says nothing about it, I am sure I shall not. Oh, dear,
no!"

"Wretch!" muttered Todd, as he crept out of the back room into the
front. "Wretch, I find that money will purchase anything in this house;
but am I surprised at that? Oh, no--no. Will not money purchase anything
in this great world? Of course it will. Why, then, should this house be
an exception to the rule so general? No--no. It is no exception; and I
may be very safe for a few guineas well spent; and they are well spent,
indeed. Oh, so well!"

Todd then, as he flung himself into the depths of an easy chair, that
was really easy for a wonder, considering that it was in a
lodging-house, began to arrange in his own mind his course of proceeding
for the night.

"Let me think--let me think," he muttered. "I am now very much refreshed
indeed, and feel quite strong and well, and equal to any emergency. That
sleep has done me a world of good, and it is strange, too, that it has
been the calmest and the quietest sleep I have enjoyed for many a month.
I hope it is not prophetic of some coming evil."

He shuddered at the thought. Todd was each day--ay, each hour, becoming
more and more superstitious.

"No--no. I will not think that. I will not be so mad as to disarm myself
of my courage, by thinking that for a moment. I will take my tea here,
and then I will sally forth, telling this woman that I will soon return,
and then, after a dose of brandy, I will hire a boat and take to the
river. What is that?"

The wind with a sudden gust came dashing against the windows, giving
them such a shake, that it seemed as if it were intent upon getting into
the room to buffet Todd.

He immediately rose, and going to the window, he placed his hideous face
close to one of the panes, and looked out.

The sky was getting very black, and huge clouds were careering about it.
The wind was evidently rising, and there was every appearance of its
being most squally and tempestuous. Todd bit his lips with vexation.

"Always something!" he said. "Always something to annoy me, and to cross
me. Always--always!"

"The tea, sir, if you please."

Todd turned round so suddenly, that he almost upset the servant with the
tea equipage.

"Oh, very well. That will do--that will do. You are the servant of the
house?"

"If you please, sir."

"Ah, you will then have to attend upon me while I am here, my dear, I
presume?"

"Yes, sir, if you please."

"Very good--very good. You are a very nice young woman, and there's
half-a-guinea for you. Eugh! I shall give you that sum every week while
I stay here, you know."

"Lor, sir, will you?"

"Yes, yes. You can go now. Is the tea all right?"

"Oh, dear, yes, sir. You are very good indeed. Misses said as you was a
very good lodger, which I knowed to mean as you didn't be _petikler_
about your money, and now I sees you ain't. Thank you, sir, for me. I'll
get up in the night if you want anythink."




                             CHAPTER CLIX.
           TODD MAKES A VIGOROUS ATTEMPT TO REACH GRAVESEND.


The servant was so profuse in her acknowledgments for the half-guinea,
that she seemed as if she would never get out of the room, and Todd had
to say--

"There--there, that will do. Now leave me, my good girl--that will do,"
before she, with a curtsey at every step, withdrew.

"Well," she said, as she went down stairs. "If I tell misses of this,
I'm a Prussian. Oh, dear, I keeps it to myself and says nothing to
nobody, excepting to my Thomas as is in the horse-guards. Ah, he is a
nice fellow, and out o' this I'll make him a present of a most elegant
watch-ribbon, that he can put a bullet at the end of, and let it hang
out of his fob all as if he had a real watch in his pocket."

"Humph!" said Todd. "I have bought her good opinion cheap. It was well
worth ten-and-sixpence not to have the servant watching me, with, for
all I know to the contrary, eyes of suspicion--well worth it."

It was not very often that Todd indulged himself with a cup of tea.
Something stronger was commonly more congenial to his appetite; but upon
this occasion, after his long sleep, the tea had upon him a most
refreshing effect, and he took it with real pleasure. Mrs. Hardman, in
consideration of the guinea she had received beforehand, had done him
justice, as far as the quality of the tea was concerned, and he had it
good.

"Well," he said, after his third cup, "I did not think that there was so
much virtue in a cup of tea, after all; but of a surety, I feel
wonderfully refreshed at it. How the wind blows."

The wind did, indeed, blow, for all the while that Todd was taking his
tea it banged and buffeted against the window at such a rate, that it
was really quite a fearful thing to listen to it.

A couple of candles had been lighted and brought into the room, but the
gale without soon laid hold of their little flames, and tossed them
about so, that they gave but a dim and sepulchral kind of light.

Todd rose again, and went to the window--again he placed his face close
to the pane of glass, and shading his eyes with his hands, he looked
out. A dashing rain was falling.

"They say that when the rain comes the wind moderates," he muttered;
"but I see no signs of that, yet, it is almost a gale already."

At that moment there came such a gust of wind howling down the street,
that Todd mechanically withdrew his head, as though it were some
tangible enemy come to seek him.

"Always something to foil me here," he said; "always something; but out
I must go. Let it look as strange as it may, I cannot stay a night in
this house, for if I were to do so, that would involve the staying a day
likewise; and it would be this time to-morrow before I dared venture
abroad; and who knows what awful things might happen in that space of
time? No, I must go to-night. I must go to-night."

He could not help feeling that his going out while the weather was in
such a state would excite a great amount of wonder in the house; but
that was a minor event in comparison to what might possibly ensue from
remaining, so he put on his hat.

Tap--tap! came against the panel of his door.

Todd muttered an awful oath, and then said,--

"Come in."

Mrs. Hardman entered the room.

"I hope I don't intrude upon you, sir, but I was so very anxious to know
if the tea was just as you like it, sir?"

"Oh, yes--yes. I am going out a little way, my good madam. Only a little
way."

"Out, sir?"

"Yes, and why not?--why not? Oh, dear me! How bad my cough is to be
sure, to-night. Eugh!--eugh!"

"Goodness gracious! my dear sir, you will not think of venturing out
to-night? Oh, sir!"

"Why not, madam?"

"The wind, sir--the rain, sir--and the wind and the rain together, sir.
Oh, dear! It isn't a night to turn out a dog in, not that I like dogs,
but I beg, sir, you won't think of it. Only listen, sir. How it does
blow, to be sure!"

"Madam!" said Todd, putting on a solemn look, "I must go. It is my duty
to go."

"Your duty, sir?"

"Yes. Whenever the wind blows and the rain comes down, I put a quantity
of small change in my pocket, and I go out to see what objects of
distress in the streets I can relieve. It is then that I feel myself
called upon in the sacred name of heavenly charity to see to the wants
of my poorer fellow-creatures. It is then that I can find many a one
whom I can make happy and comfortable for a brief space, at all events;
and that's the way that I am always, you see, madam, with a bad cold."

"Generous man!" said Mrs. Hardman, wiping her eyes with the corner of
her apron.

"Not at all, madam, not at all. It is one's duty, and nothing else. I
feel bound to do it. But I shall want a little something for supper. A
nice boiled chicken, if you please, and you will be so good as to get it
for me, madam. Take this guinea, if you please, and we can talk about
the change, you know, when I want anything else, my good madam."

"My word!" thought Mrs. Hardman. "He is a wonderful lodger, for he
forgets all about his change. I feel that it would only vex the poor old
gentleman to remind him of it, and that I do not feel justified in
doing. A-hem! yes, sir. Oh, certainly, I will get the finest chicken,
sir, that can be had."

"Do so, madam, do so. Now I'm going."

"Oh, Lord! there's a gust of wind!"

"I like it--I like it."

"And there's a dash of rain!"

"So much the better. Delightful, delightful, my dear madam, I shall find
plenty of poor objects to relieve to-night. Under gateways, I shall find
them, crouching upon door-steps, and shivering on spots where a little
shelter can be found from the inclemency of the weather. This is my time
to try and do a little good with that superfluous wealth which
Providence has given me."

Mrs. Hardman made no further opposition to the benevolent intentions of
a lodger who continually forgot his change, and Todd fairly left the
house.

Little did the landlady think, while she was grasping at the guineas,
that there was a reward of a thousand pounds for the apprehension of her
lodger, and that it would every penny-piece of it have been duly paid to
her at the Treasury, if she could but have managed to lock him in a room
until the officers of justice could be sent for, to pounce upon him and
load him with irons, and take him off to prison.

But poor Mrs. Hardman had really no idea of how near she was to fortune;
and when the street-door closed upon Todd, she little suspected that she
shut out such a sum as one thousand pounds sterling along with him.

"That is managed so far," said Todd, as he shrank and cowed before the
storm-laden gale that dashed in his face the rain, as he reached the
corner of the street.

There Todd paused, for a new fear came across him. It was that no
waterman would venture upon the river with him on such a night; and yet
after reasoning with himself a little time, he said--

"Watermen are human, and they love gold as much as any one else. After
all, it only resolves itself into a question of how much I will pay."

Full of this idea, which, in its way, was a tolerably just one, he
sneaked down the Strand until he got right to Charing Cross. He had
thought of going down one of the quiet streets near that place, and
taking a boat there; but now he considered that he would have a much
better chance by going as far as Westminster Bridge; and, accordingly,
despite the rain and the wind, he made his way along Whitehall, and
reached the bridge.

A few watermen were lounging about at the head of the stairs. They had
little enough expectation of getting a fare at such a time, and upon
such a day. One of them, however, seeing Todd pause, went up to him, and
spoke--

"You didn't want a boat, did you, sir?"

"Why, yes," said Todd, "I did; but, I suppose, you are all afraid to
earn a couple of guineas?"

"A couple of guineas?"

"Yes, or three, for the matter of that; one more or less don't matter to
me; but it may to you."

"Indeed, it does, sir. You are right enough there. But where do you want
to go to sir? Up or down?"

"To Greenwich."

Todd thought if he mentioned Gravesend, he might frighten the man at
once.

"Greenwich? Whew!" The waterman perpetrated a long whistle; and then,
shaking his head, he said--"I'm very much afraid, sir, that it isn't a
question of guineas that will settle that; but I will speak to my mate.
Halloa Jack!--Jack! I say, old boy, where are you?"

"Here you are," said an old weather-beaten man coming up the steps.
"I've only been making the little craft fast. What is the row now,
Harry--eh?"

"No row, old mate; but this here gentleman offers a matter of three
guineas for a cruise to Greenwich."

"Ay, and why not, Harry?"

"Why not? Don't you hear how it's blowing?"

"Yes, I do, Harry; but it won't blow long. I've seen more gales than you
have, lad, and I tell you that this one is all but over. The rain, in
another quarter of an hour, will beat it all down. It's fast going now.
It will be a wet night, and a dark night; but it won't blow, nor it
won't be cold."

"If you say as much as that, Jack," said the younger waterman, "I will
swear to it."

The old man smiled, as he added--

"Ah, dear me, yes, and so you may, Harry. I haven't been so long out of
doors that I don't know the fancies of the weather. I can tell you
a'most what it's a going to do beforehand, better than it knows itself.
There, don't you hear how it's coming in puffs, now, the wind, and each
one is a bit fainter nor the one as comed afore it? Lord bless you, it's
nothing! We shall get a wet jacket, that's all; and if so be, sir, as
you really do want a cruise down to Greenwich, come on, and Harry and me
will soon manage it for you."

These words were very satisfactory to Todd. He had no objection in the
world to its being rather a bad night on the river; but he certainly had
a great objection to risking his life. Discomfort was a thing that gave
him no concern. He knew well that that would pass away.

"If you are willing," he said, "let us, then, start at once, and I will
not hold you to your bargain if the weather should happen to turn very
bad. We can, in such a case, easily, I dare say, put in at some of the
numerous stairs on one side or other of the river."

"There will be no need of that, sir," said the old waterman. "If you go,
and if you choose to go all the way, we will put you on shore at
Greenwich."

"How about London Bridge?" said the younger man, in a tone of some
anxiety.

"Better than usual," said Jack. "It is just the time to shoot it nicely,
for the tide will be at a point, and won't know exactly whether to go
one way or the other."

"It's all right, then?"

"It is."

Todd himself had had his suspicions that the passage of old London
Bridge would be one of no ordinary difficulty on such a night as that,
but he knew that if the tide was at that point which the old man
mentioned, that it might be passed with the most perfect safety, and it
was a matter of no small gratification to him to hear from such a
competent authority that such was the fact just then.

"Let us go at once," he said.

"All's right, sir. Our wherry is just at the foot of the stairs, here. I
will pull her in, Harry."

The old man ran down the slippery stairs with the activity of a boy, and
as Todd and Harry followed him, the latter said, in quite a confidential
tone of voice--

[Illustration: Todd Encounters Great Perils On The River Thames.]

"Ah, sir, you may trust to his judgment on anything that has anything to
do with the river."

"I am glad to hear it."

"Yes, sir, and so am I. Now I thought I knew something, and I shouldn't
have ventured to take you, or if I had, it would have been with rather a
faint heart; but now that the old man, sir, says it's all right, I feel
as comfortable as needs be in the matter."

By this time they had reached the foot of the steps, which was being
laved by the tide, and there the old man had the boat safely in hand.

"Now for it, sir," he said. "Jump in."

Todd did so, and the younger waterman followed him. He and his aged
companion immediately took their places, and Todd stretched himself in
the stern of the little craft.

The rain now came down in absolute torrents as the boat was pushed off
by the two watermen into the middle of the stream.




                              CHAPTER CLX.
                    THE POLICE-GALLEY ON THE THAMES.


What an anxious and protracted glance Todd cast around him when he found
that he was fairly upon the river. How his eyes, with fox-like cunning,
glistening like two lead-coloured stars, were here, and there, and
everywhere, in the course of a few moments. Then he contrived to speak,
as he thought, craftily enough.

"There are but few boats on the river."

"No, sir," said the young waterman. "It isn't everybody that cares to
come on the water in such weather as this."

"No--no. But I have business."

"Exactly so, sir. That's it."

"Yes," added Todd, in quite a contemplative tone of voice, "the fact is,
that I have just heard that at Gravesend there resides a family, with
whom I was once intimate, but had lost sight of. They have, as I hear,
dropped into poverty, amounting to destitution, and I could not rest
until I had gone after them to relieve them."

"Did you say Gravesend?" said the old man.

"Why, yes; but I don't ask you to go so far. I will try and find a
conveyance on land at Greenwich; but--if--you like to pull all the way
to Gravesend, I don't mind paying, for I prefer the water."

"Couldn't do it," said the old man.

"Certainly not," said the young one.

Todd felt mortified that his plan of getting to Gravesend, by the aid of
the boat, was thus put an end to; but he could not help feeling how very
impolitic it would be to show any amount of chagrin upon such a subject,
so he spoke as cheerfully as he could, merely saying--

"Well, of course, I don't want you to do it; I merely offer you the job,
as I am so fond of a little boating, that I would not mind a few guineas
more upon such an account."

"No use trying it," said the old man, sententiously. "There's several
turns in the river, and we should be down one at this time before we
could get there. Gravesend is quite another thing."

"So it is," said Todd.

He felt perfectly certain by the tone and the manner of the old man,
that it would be of no use urging the matter any further; and the great
dread he had of exciting suspicion that he was a fugitive, had the
effect of making him as cautious as possible regarding what he said. In
stern and moody silence, then, he reclined in the stern of the boat,
while it cleaved through the black water; and, as the old boatman
prophesied, the wind each moment went down until it left nothing but a
freshness upon the surface of the water, which, although it was bitterly
cold, in no way effected the progress of the boat.

But a slight rain now began to fall, and every moment the night got
darker and darker still, until the lights upon the banks of the river
looked like little stars afar off; and it was only when they got quite
close to it, that they became aware of the proximity of Blackfriars
Bridge. It was Todd that saw it first appearing like some gigantic
object rising up out of the water to destroy them. He could not resist
uttering an exclamation of terror, and then he added--

"What is it? Oh, what is it?"

"What--what?" said the young waterman, shipping his oars and looking
rather terrified.

The old man gave his head a slight jerk as he said--

"I fancy it's Blackfriars."

"Oh, yes, yes," said Todd, with a feeling of great relief. "It's the
bridge, of course--it's the bridge; but in the darkness of the night, it
looked awful and strange; and as we approached it, it had all the effect
as if it were something big enough to crush the world rising up out of
the water.

"Ay--ay," said the old man. "I have seen it on all sorts of nights, and
was looking out for it. It's all right. Easy with your larboard over
there. That will do--there we go."

The boat shot under one of the arches of the old bridge, and for a
moment, the effect was like going into some deep and horrible cavern,
the lower part of which was a sea of ink.

Todd shuddered, but he did not say anything. He thought that after his
affected raptures at sailing, that if he made any sort of remark
indicative of his terrors at the passage of the bridge, they would sound
rather inconsistent.

It was quite a relief when they had shot through the dim and dusky arch,
and emerged again upon the broad open water; and owing to the terrible
darkness that was beneath that arch, the night upon the river, after
they had passed through it, did not seem to be nearly so black as it had
been before, thus showing that, after all, most of our sensations are
those of comparison, even including those dependant upon the physical
changes of nature.

"This is cheering," said Todd. "It is lighter now upon the river. Don't
you think it is?"

"Why," said the old man, "perhaps it is just a cloud or two lighter; but
it's after coming through the arch that it makes the principal
difference, I take it."

"Yes," said the other, "that's it; and the rain, to my thinking, will be
a lasting one, for it comes down straight, and with a good will to
continue. Don't you think so?"

The question was addressed to the old man, who answered it slowly and
sententiously, keeping time with his words to the oars as they made a
slight noise jerking in the rollocks.

"If it don't rain till sun-rise, just ask me to eat the old boat, and
I'll do it!"

"That's settled," said the young waterman.

The weather, in so far as rain or not rain was concerned, was not to
Todd a matter of much concern. So long as there was no stormy aspect of
the elements to prevent him from speeding upon his journey, he, upon the
whole, rather liked the darkness and the rain, as it probably acted as a
better shield for his escape, and he rather chuckled than not on the
idea that the rain would last. Besides, it was evident that as it fell,
it smoothed the surface of the river, so that the oars dipped clear into
the stream, and the boat shot on the better.

"Well--well," he said, "we can but get wet."

"That's all," said the old man, "and I hold it to be quite a folly to
make a fuss about that. If you sit still, the rain will, of course, soak
into your clothes; but if you go on sitting still, it will in time give
you up as a bad job, and begin to run out again. So you have nothing,
you see, to do, but take it easy, and think of something else all the
while."

"That is very true, my friend," said Todd, in a kind and conciliatory
tone; "but you get wet through in the process."

"Just so. Pull away."

The younger man, for the last five minutes, had glanced several times
through one of his hands along the line of the surface of the river, and
the injunction to pull away was probably on account of his having been a
little amiss in that particular. The old man had spoken the words rather
sharply than otherwise.

"Yes--yes," said the other. "I'll pull away; but there's another craft
upon the river, in spite of the rain, and they are pulling away with a
vengeance rather. Look, they're in our wake."

"It's no use me looking. You know that well enough. I ain't quite so
good with my eyes as I was a matter of twenty years ago. I suppose it's
the police-craft. Of late, you know, they have taken to cutting along at
all times."

"Yes, it's them!"

Todd stooped in the boat, until his eyes went right along the line of
the water's edge, and there he saw coming on swiftly a biggish bulky
object, and as the oars broke the water, he could see that there were
five or six of them on each side. It looked altogether like some great
fish striking through the water with a number of strange-looking fins.

The coward heart of Todd smote him, as well it might, when he saw this
sight. For a moment or two he sat bewildered, and he thought that he
should faint in the stern of the boat, and then that nothing in the
world could save him from capture, if that were in reality the
police-boat. It was, perhaps, only the rain falling upon his face that
revived him, as it came upon him with its cold, refreshed splash. To be
sure he was well armed for one individual, but what could he do against
some dozen of men? Suppose that he did shoot two or three of them, that
would be but a poor recompense for his capture by the others. He was
bewildered to know what to do. He spoke in a low, anxious tone,--

"Are you, from your knowledge of the river, quite sure that that is a
police-boat?"

"Ah, to be sure."

"Do you, then, think likewise that that is upon our track? Answer me
that. Answer it fairly."

"Our track!" said the old man, as he almost ceased rowing. "Hilloa!
There's something more in this affair than meets the eye. It won't
exactly pay us to be overhauled by the police, after a chase. Who and
what are you, my friend? If you are afraid of the police-boat, we are
not, and you ain't quite the sort of customer to suit us exactly, I
should say."

"I have both their lives," thought Todd, as in the dark he felt for his
pistols. "I have both their lives, and if they show any disposition to
give me up, they shall not live another five minutes. I will shoot them
both--cast their bodies into the river, and land myself at the first
stairs I come to."

"Listen to me," he said, in a mild tone of voice. "It would only tire
you, and, besides, it would take too long to tell why I have a fear of
the police. But I have such a fear. I assure you, that I am quite
innocent of what they accuse me. But until I can get from Hamburgh the
only witness who can prove my innocence, I do not want to fall into the
hands of my enemies. I implore you not to sacrifice me!"

"Humph!" said the old man, "What have you done?"

"Nothing--nothing! as Heaven is my witness!"

"But what do they say you have done?" said the young waterman.

"Ay!" said the other, "that's the question!"

"Why, they say that I was wrong in helping a poor lad, who certainly had
done some wrong thing, to escape from the country; but then it would
have broken his poor mother's heart if they had hanged him. It was for
forgery only, and it was all owing to bad company he did it. Alas! I did
not think it a crime to aid the poor boy to get away. What good would
his death have done to any one?"

"Was that all?"

"Yes; that was all. But it appears in law, you see, a very serious
offence to aid and abet, as they call it, a felon. Poor boy!--poor
mother!"

"Oh, hang it, we won't give you up to the bloodhounds of the law for
that," said the old man; "but, hark you, sir, it's out of the question
that we two should be able to hold our way against the police-galley,
with six young fresh rowers; so all we can do is to put you ashore
somewhere, and then you can shift for yourself the best way you may. I
don't see what else we can do for you."

"Nor I," said the young waterman; "and in a few moments it will be best
to do that. Is there a stairs close at hand?"

"Not one," said the old man. "It's a done thing. We can't land you,
except in the water, if that can be called landing you at all. I don't
know what to be at."

"Oh, save me!" said Todd.

"But how can we?"

"Yes," said the young waterman, "there's one way of managing that, I
think, will do it, and do it well, too."

"Oh, how can I thank you?"

"Don't mention it. Suppose we put him on to the first craft we come
along-side of in the river, that is moored, and has got no one on board?
It won't be noticed, like our putting into a landing would, you know.
They would be sure to say we had put some one on shore. But if we just
ease the boat for a moment as we pass some craft, our fare can scramble
on board, and we can go right on, and let the police overtake us, and
overhaul us in due course. I'll be bound that by this light there's not
a man on board of yonder craft can take upon himself to say whether
there's one, two, or three people in our wherry."

"Yes," said the old man, "that will do if anything will, and if that
don't do, nothing will."

"It will do," said Todd; "it will do. I thank you from my heart for the
suggestion. It will do well. All you have to do is to let me board the
craft in the river, upon the side furthest removed from the police boat.
Oh! you will have the prayers of the widow and the fatherless, for this
kind act."

"Never mind about that. Pull away."

"And--and when the police-boat is past, will you then come and take me
off again?"

"That's awkward," said the old man.

"We will, if we can," said the young one; "but don't depend upon us. We
don't know, as yet, what the police may say to us. For all we know, they
know more than we would wish them, of your being in our boat; and all we
can say, then, is, that we put you ashore; but they may keep a watch
upon us after that, and if they do, it will be only to give you up to
them that we could push off to you."

"Yes--yes, I understand," said Todd. "I thank you, and will take my
chance of all that may happen."

"You must."

"There's something a-head," said the old man. "What is it?"

"It's the pile-driving barge. They are mending up the bank of the river.
I know that the men leave that all night, as there is nothing to take
from it that any one can lift. Will you go on board that, sir?"

"Yes, yes," said Todd, "That will do."

"Be quick, then, about it," said the old man, "for they gain upon us."

"Boat a-hoi!" cried a voice over the river.




                             CHAPTER CLXI.
                       THE POLICE-GALLEY'S FATE.


Todd, when he heard that voice, quite sank down into the bottom of the
boat, and felt as though his last hour were come.

"Don't answer," said the old man. "Pull away for the pile-driving barge
as hard as you can."

"Oh, yes, pull--pull!" cried Todd. "Save me!"

"If you make that noise," added the old man, "we may as well be off at
once, for the river, when it is as smooth as it is now, carries voices
well."

"Boat a-hoi!" cried the voice again.

"We must answer them now," said the old waterman. "Ay, ay! Is it here?
Boat a-hoi!"

"Ay, ay!" came the voice from the police-galley.

At that moment the two watermen succeeded in reaching the broad stern of
the barge, in which was centred the pile-driving machinery, and the
young man said to Todd--

"Now clamber in, and good luck attend you. If we don't come to you in
the course of an hour, don't expect us, that's all."

Todd was not very young and supple in his joints, but the sense of
present and serious danger has an effect upon every one, and in a moment
he seized the side of the pile-driving barge, and drew himself in.

"All right," said the old man.

"Oh, yes--yes," said Todd, as he crouched down with his chin touching
the side of the barge.

"Good-night, then."

"Good-night! You will come for me if you can?"

"Yes, but don't expect us. Pull, now, as hard as you can, and get out
into the stream. Pull! pull!"

By the strenuous united exertions of the two men, the boat shot along at
good speed, and soon got to a considerable distance from the barge in
which Todd had taken refuge. It was then that the police-galley hoisted
a strong light that shed a bright glare through the rain, and over the
surface of the river.

"Am I saved?" said Todd. "Am I saved, or am I not?"

He sank quite down into the body of the barge. There was a sort of
platform over one-half of it, and upon that platform he felt the mass of
iron, weighing about a couple of hundredweight, or more, which was used
for driving piles into the bed of the river, and which, when liberated
from a height, and allowed to fall upon the end of the pile, comes with
a most tremendous force.

That piece of metal so used is called "the monkey."

"They come--they come!" said Todd. "Oh, if they only chanced to see the
boat place me here, I am lost. Quite lost! What will become of me, then,
with nothing but the cold, cold river all round me? Death, indeed, now
stares me in the face!"

Truly, the situation of Todd now was rather a critical one. There was no
saying how far the men on board the police-galley might not think
themselves justified in boarding any craft that was moored upon the
river; and, indeed, if they were searching for him, and had really any
idea that he was trying an escape by the Thames, it was highly
improbable that they would omit to have a good look in the barge where
he was. There was another great danger, too, that suddenly flashed
across his mind, and drove him nearly mad.

"If the police, when they overtake the wherry," he thought, "should
mention who it is they are in pursuit of, may not the two watermen at
once, upon finding that their sympathy has been excited for me, declare
where I am, and even aid in my apprehension?"

This idea, either because it was the last one that came into his head,
or because it really was the one that seemed most full of real dangers,
clung to him with desperation; and more than once the thought of ending
all his miseries by a plunge into the river, crossed his mind. But it is
not such men as Sweeney Todd who commit suicide.

"They come--they come!" was all he could now say.

The light from the police was, by the aid of a revolving reflector,
capable of being cast pretty strongly in any direction that those who
had the care and control of it chose; and for a moment it rested upon
the barge where Todd was. He felt as if, at that moment, he could have
crept right through the bottom of the barge, and taken refuge in the
Thames.

The broad beam of light was then shifted off the barge on to the little
wherry, which was at rest upon the water waiting for the approach of the
police-galley.

And now, with vigorous sweeps of its six oars, that galley made its way
right past the barge. Oh! what a relief it was that it went past! It did
not follow that all danger was gone because the police-barge had gone
past; but it was a sufficient proof that the glare of light they had
sent in that direction, by the aid of the reflector, had not had the
effect of discovering him to them.

"That is something," muttered Todd.

He then slowly permitted his eyes to peer over the side of the barge in
order, as far as he could, to watch the interview that was about to take
place between the police and the two watermen in the wherry where he had
been so lately a passenger. Upon that interview, now, he thought that
his fate depended.

"Hilloa!" cried one of the police. "Why did you not wait for us when we
first called to you?"

"We did," said the old man, "as soon as we saw your light, and knew what
you were; but there are so many jokes played off upon the river, that if
we were to rest-oars to everybody who call--'Boat a-hoi,' we should have
enough to do."

"Who are you?"

"A couple of regestered watermen. Here we are. You can overhaul us at
once, if you like."

"You have no passenger?"

"No. I only wish we had. Times are very bad."

"Well, it's all right. But we are placed here by the orders of Sir
Richard Blunt the magistrate, who suspects that the notorious murderer,
Sweeney Todd, may try to escape by the Thames."

"Sweeney Todd!" cried the young waterman in a tone of horror. "What, the
fellow that killed all the people in Fleet Street, and made them into
pies?"

"The same."

"It's coming now," thought Todd. "It's coming now. They will tell him
where I am."

The next words that were spoken, were uttered in a tone of voice that
did not reach his ears. It was the old man who had spoken, and he did
not utter his words so clearly as his younger companion; and although he
tried his utmost to hear what he said, he could not possibly make it
out, and he remained in a perfect agony of apprehension.

"Very well," said the officer in the police-barge, who had conducted the
brief conversation. "It is a miserable night. Give way, my men. Steady
there. Put the light out."

In an instant the light was lowered and extinguished, and the darkness
that reigned upon the surface of the Thames was like a darkness that
could be felt. It was difficult to conceive that it was not really
tangible.

"Are they coming back?"

That was the question that Todd asked of himself, as he grasped, to
steady himself, the heavy piece of iron that belonged to the
pile-driving machine. He listened most intently, until it was positively
painful to do so, and he began to fancy all sorts of strange noises in
the air and from the water. In a few moments, though, an actual
splashing sound put to route all imaginary noises, and he felt convinced
that the boat with the police was slowly returning towards the barge in
which he was concealed.

There was, to be sure, still a hope that they would pass it; but it was
only a hope.

Oh, how awfully full of apprehension was each passing moment now. It
might be that the police-galley was only going quietly back to its
proper station, after overtaking the wherry; but then it might be quite
otherwise, and the doubt was terrific. While that doubt lasted, it was
worse than the reality of danger.

And now it was quite evident to the perception of Todd that the
police-boat was close to the barge, and he heard a voice say--

"Is that the pile-driving barge?"

"Yes, sir," replied some one.

"And they leave it, I suppose, as usual?"

"No doubt, sir."

"Well, pull alongside, and a couple of you jump in and see if all is
right. People leave their property exposed to all sorts of depredations,
and then blame us for not looking after it. Mind how you go, my men.
Don't run foul of the barge."

"No, sir. All's right."

From the moment that this conversation had begun, Todd had remained
crouching down in the barge, like a man changed to stone. He heard every
word--those words upon which hung, or seemed to hang, his life, and his
grasp upon the massive piece of iron tightened.

The police-boat gradually advanced, and finally just grated against the
side of the barge.

A sudden thought took possession of Todd. With a yell, like that of a
mad-man, he, with preternatural strength, moved the heavy mass of iron,
and in one moment toppled it over the edge of the barge.

Crash it went into the police-galley. There was then a shriek, and the
men were struggling in the water. The piece of iron had gone right
through the boat, staving to pieces. It filled and sank.

[Illustration: Todd And The Police Galley.]

"Help--help!" cried a voice, and then all was still as the grave for a
few moments.

"It is done," said Todd.

"Help! mercy!" said a voice again, and a dark figure rose up by the side
of the barge, clinging to it.

Todd drew one of his pistols. He levelled it at the head of the figure.
He was upon the point of pulling the trigger, when it struck him that
the flash and the report might be seen and heard from the shore. The
pistol was heavily mounted with brass at the butt-end of it.

"Down!" said Todd. "Down!"

He struck the clambering, half-drowned man upon the head, and with a
shriek he fell backwards into the water and disappeared. In another
moment Todd felt a pair of arms twining round him, and a voice cried--

"Murderer, I have you now! You cannot shake me off!"

Todd made an effort, but, in truth, those wet and clinging arms held to
him like fate.

"Fool," he said. "You will find drowning the easiest death for you to
meet."

[Illustration: The Murder On The Thames--Todd's Narrow Escape.]

"Help--help! murder!" shouted his assailant.

The pistol was still in Todd's grasp. With a devilish ingenuity, he
thrust the barrel of it under his arm and felt that it touched his
assailant. He pulled the trigger, and then he and the man who held him
fell to the bottom of the barge together.

Todd kicked and plunged until he got uppermost, and then he felt for the
throat of the other, and when he got a clutch of it he held it with a
gripe of iron.

"Fool," he said. "Did you think that one driven to such desperation as I
am, would be conquered so easily?"

There was no reply. Todd lifted up the head of the man, and it hung
limply and flaccidly from the neck. He was quite dead. The pistol-bullet
had gone through his heart, and death was instantaneous.

"Another one," said Todd, as he sprang to his feet and stood upon the
dead body. "Another one sacrificed to my vengeance. Let those only
interfere with me who are tired of life."

He placed his hand to his ear now, to listen if there were any
indications of others of the boat's crew stirring; but all was still. No
sound, save the lazy ripple of the tide past the old barge on which he
was, met his ears.

"It is over," he said. "It is quite over now. That one great danger is
past now."

The rain began to fall quicker, and splashed upon the half deck of the
barge. Todd felt that he was thoroughly wet through; but all minor ills
he could now laugh at, that he had escaped the one great peril of
capture. He felt that his life had hung upon a thread, and that only the
recent accident had saved him; for to be captured, was to him equivalent
to death.

"All gone!" he whispered. "They are all gone! Well--well! They would
have dragged me to a prison, and then to a scaffold! Self-defence is a
sound principle, and for that I have fought!"

A sudden gust of wind got up at that moment, and came howling past Todd,
and ruffling upon the surface of the river; but all was still around the
barge. There was now no cry for mercy--no shout for help--no bubbling
shriek of some swimmer, who was yet sinking to death, as the waters
closed over him.

"Yes," said Todd, as his long hair blew out like snakes in the wind, "I
am alone here now. They are all dead, and I could do it again if it had
to be done."




                             CHAPTER CLXII.
                             ANOTHER BOAT.


It seemed now as though the lull in the weather was over; for after that
one gust of wind, there came others; and in the course of a very short
time, indeed, the surface of the water was much agitated, and such a
howling noise was kept up by the wind, that Todd thought every moment
that he heard the voices of his foes.

"What am I to do now?" he said. "Oh, what am I to do? I dare not wait
here until daylight. That would be destruction. What is to become of
me?"

He came round the sides of the barge with the hope that some wherry had
been moored to it, but he found that that hope was a fallacious one
indeed. There was the gloomy-looking vessel moored far out in the
stream, with him as its only passenger.

Any one without Todd's load of guilt upon his soul, and upon better
terms with human nature, could soon have got assistance, for the
distance from the shore was by no means so great but that his voice must
have been heard had he chosen to exert it; but that would not do for
him. He dreaded that his presence upon the barge should be known, and
yet he alike dreaded that the morning's light should come shiningly upon
him, without any boat coming to take him off.

To be sure, the two men who had brought him there had made a
half-promise to come to his aid, but he felt certain he could not depend
upon their doing so. The look with which they had regarded him upon the
doubt, even, that he might be so frightful a criminal as he really was,
was sufficient to convince him that while that doubt remained they would
not return.

"And what," he said, "is to dissipate the doubt? Nothing--nothing! But
anything may confirm it. Accidents always tell for the truth--never to
its prevention, and so I am lost--lost--quite lost."

The bitterness of death seemed almost to be upon the point of assailing
Todd. He could fancy that spirits of the murdered shrieked and wailed
around him, as the wind whistled by his trembling frame.

In this wretched state an hour passed, and then Todd thought he heard a
voice.

"What is that?" he said. "Oh, what is that?"

He inclined his head as low down to the edge of the water as he could
get it, and heard distinctly some one singing to the stroke of a pair of
oars, as they were deliberately dipped into the stream. The voice
sounded like that of some young lad, and a hope of succour sprung up in
the breast of Todd.

In the course of a few moments he became perfectly convinced that the
boat was approaching the barge, and he shrunk down so that by being
prematurely seen he might not alarm the boy who was rowing down the
stream. The song continued, and it was quite evident from the manner in
which the boy sung it, that he was quite delighted with his own powers
in that line.

"I must speak to him," thought Todd. "If I let him pass there may not be
another chance, now. I must speak to this boy, and speak to him freely
too. He comes--he comes."

It was not so dark but that Todd could see pretty well the surface of
the river, and presently in dusky outline he was conscious of the
approach of a wherry in which was a boy, and he could see how the boy
moved his head to and fro to the tune that he was amusing himself with.

"Hilloa!" cried Todd.

Now Todd in this "Hilloa!" had for once in a way tuned his voice to such
a gentle pleasant sound, that it was quite a wonder to hear it, and he
was rather himself surprised at the manner in which he managed it so as
not to be at all alarming.

The boy stopped rowing and looked about him. It was evident at the
moment that he could not tell where the sound came from.

"Hilloa!" said Todd, again.

"Ay--ay!" said the boy; "where are you?"

"Here, my dear," said Todd, "on board of the barge, bless you. How are
you, my fine fellow--eh?"

"Oh, I'm pretty well. Who are you?"

"Why, don't you know me? I'm Mr. Smith. How is your father, my lad--eh?"

"Oh, father's all right enough; but I didn't know as he knowed a Mr.
Smith at all."

"Oh, yes, he does. Everybody knows a Mr. Smith. Come on, you can give me
a lift to shore off the barge here. This way. Just step up to the side
and I'll step into your pretty little wherry. And so your father is
quite well--eh, my fine lad? Do you know I was afraid he had caught a
little cold, and really have been quite uneasy about him."

"Have you?" said the boy, as he pulled up to the side of the barge.
"Where do you want to go to?"

"Oh, anywhere you happen to be going, that's all, my fine lad. How you
do grow, to be sure!"

"But how came you here, out in the river on the dredging-barge? Do you
belong to her?"

"To be sure I do. I am Mr. Deputy Inspector Dredger Smith, and am forced
to come and superintend the barge, you see; but my boat that I sent to
shore for something, has not come back, and I am getting cold, for I am
not so young as you are, you know."

"Why, I don't suppose you is, sir," said the boy; "but I'll put you
ashore, if you like."

"Thank you, I should like."

"Get in, then, sir. All's right. I'll hold on to the barge. Easy--easy
with you, sir. That will do. Which side of the river, sir, would you
like to be put ashore at, if you please?"

The boy was evidently deeply impressed with the importance of the title
of Deputy Inspector Dredger, and was quite deferential to Todd.

How delighted was Todd to get off the barge! It seemed to him like a
reprieve from death.

"Which way is the tide, boy?" he said.

"Running down, sir, but not fast."

"That will do. I will trouble you, then, to row with it as comfortably
and as fast as you can.

"But I'm going, sir, to Westminster, to meet father. I can't go down the
river, please sir. I would if I could. I said I would put you on shore
on either side you like, and that's a waste of time, for the tide is
getting fuller every minute, and it will be a hard pull against it, as
it is. I can't go down the river, so don't ask me, sir; indeed I can't."

"Indeed?"

"No, sir. If I put you ashore, you will find lots of watermen who will
be glad enough of the job."

"What's your name?"

"Bill White, sir."

[Illustration: Todd Compels Bill White To Assist His Escape From The
Thames Police.]

"Very well, Bill White. I dare say you have ears at your age, and guess
that to have one's brains blown out is not one of the most agreeable
things in the world, and perhaps you know a pistol when you see one.
This that I take from my pocket and hold at your head is carefully
loaded, and if you don't pull away at once with the tide down the river,
I will scatter your brains into the river, and throw your lifeless
carcass after them. Do you understand that, Mr. Bill White?"

Todd uttered these words in such a tone of fiendish malignity, and
glared into the eyes of the poor boy so, that he nearly drove him out of
his wits, and it was as much as his trembling hands could do to hold the
oars. For the space of about half a minute he could only glare at Todd
with his eyes and mouth as wide open as they could be.

"Speak, devil's whelp!" cried Todd. "Why do you not answer me?"

"Murder!" cried the boy.

Todd caught him by the throat, and if the oars had not been well up in
the rollocks, they must have gone overboard.

"Another such cry," said Todd, "and it is the last you shall have the
opportunity of making in this world."

"Oh, no--no--"

"But I say yes. Listen to me! If you row me as I direct you, I will not
only do you no harm, but I will pay you well. If you still obstinately
refuse, I will murder you, and murder your father likewise, upon the
first opportunity."

"I will row you down the river, sir. Oh, yes, I will do it. Indeed I
will, sir."

"Very well. Take your oars, and pull away."

The boy was in such a state of trembling, that although it was quite
evident he did his best to obey Todd, it was with the greatest
difficulty that he could pull a stroke, and it took him some minutes to
get the boat's head round to the tide.

"Be careful," said Todd. "If I see you willing, I make any allowance for
you; but if I fancy, for a moment, that there is any idea of not obeying
me, I will kill you!"

"I am obeying you, sir."

"Very well. Now, listen attentively to what I am about further to say to
you, Bill White. You can pull away while you listen. We are going now
very well with the stream."

"Yes, sir."

"We shall, no doubt, pass many wherries, and you may think it a very
good thing to call out for help, and to say that I threatened to murder
you, and all that sort of thing; but so soon as you do, you die. I will
hold this pistol in my hand, and whenever we come near a wherry, my
finger will be upon the trigger, and the muzzle at your head. You
understand all that, I hope, Bill White?"

"Of course I do, sir."

"Go on then."

Todd reclined back in the stern of the boat, and kept his eyes fixed
upon the boy, down whose cheeks the tears rolled in abundance, as he
pulled down the stream. Having the tide fully in its favour, the wherry,
with very little labour, made great way; and Todd, as he saw the dawn
slowly creeping on, began to congratulate himself upon the cleverness
with which he had escaped from the barge.

The river began to widen--the pool was left behind, and the dull
melancholy shore of Essex soon began to show itself, as the tide, by
each moment increasing in strength, carried the light boat swiftly along
its undulating surface, with its frightfully wicked load.

Todd thought it would be as well now to say something of a cheering
character to the boy. Modulating his voice, he said--

"Now, you see, my lad, that by obeying me you have done the very best
thing you possibly could, and when I think proper to land, I will give
you a guinea for yourself."

"I don't want it," said the boy.

"You don't want it?"

"No; and I won't have it."

"What do you mean by that, you idiot of a boy? How dare you tell me to
my face that you won't have what I offer you?"

"I don't see," said Bill White, "how that ought to put you in a passion.
All you want is to make me row you down the river. Well, you have made
me, cos I don't want to be shot down like a mad dog, of course; but I
won't be paid for doing what I don't like--not I."

"Well, it don't matter to me. You may please yourself about that; I am
just as well pleased at being rowed for nothing as if I paid for it. You
can please yourself in that particular; but it would have been better
for you to have taken what I chose to give you than to have refused it."

The boy made no answer to this speech, but rowed on in sullen silence.
He no longer wept now, and it was evident to Todd that indignation was
rapidly taking the place of fear in his heart. Todd even began to debate
with himself whether it would not be better to throw him into the river
and take the oars himself, and trust to his own skill to conduct the
boat with the stream to Gravesend, than was the risk of any sudden act
of the boy's that might bring danger upon him.

It would have been but a poor satisfaction to Todd to have shot the boy
at the moment possibly of his calling for help, when the sight of such
an act would be sufficient to insure his capture, without people
troubling themselves about what he had done or not done before.

These were considerations that began to make Todd very unhappy indeed.

"Well, Bill White," he said; "as your father, no doubt, expects you by
this time, and I daresay you will be glad enough to go back and forget
all about the little disagreement that we have had, I will get you to
land me at once at those stairs yonder, and then we will shake hands and
part."

"No we won't."

"Ah?"

"I say we won't shake hands. I'm willing enough that we should part, but
as for the shaking hands, I won't do it; and I'm quite willing to pull
in to the stairs."

As he spoke he inclined the head of the boat to a little landing-place,
where a few wherries were moored.




                            CHAPTER CLXIII.
                         ANOTHER POLICE-GALLEY.


"Bill White," said Todd.

"Well, what now?" said the boy, in a sulky tone.

Todd pointed to the pistol, and merely uttered the one word--"Remember!"
and then, with a horrible misgiving at his heart, he let the lad pull
into the landing-place. Some half-dozen lazy-looking fellows were
smoking their pipes upon the dirty beach, and Todd, concealing the
pistol within his capacious cuff, sprang on the shore. He turned and
looked at the boy, who slowly pushed off, and gained the deep water
again.

"He is afraid," thought Todd, "he is afraid, and will be too glad to get
away and say nothing."

Bill White's actions were now not a little curious, and they soon
attracted the observation of all the idlers on the beach, and put Todd
in a perfect agony of apprehension. When the boy was about half a dozen
boats' length from the shore, he shipped one of his oars, and then, with
his disengaged hand, he lifted from the bottom of the boat an old
saucepan, which he held up in an odd, dodging kind of way before his
face, with an evident idea that if Todd fired the pistol at him, he
could interrupt the bullet in that way. Then, in a loud clear voice, he
cried--

"Hilloa! Don't have anything to do with that Mr. Smith. He has been
threatening to shoot me, and he has got a pistol in his hand. He's a bad
'un, he is. Take him up! That's the best thing you can do. He's
well-nigh as bad as old Todd the murderer of Fleet Street, that they
can't catch. Take him up. I advises you. Blaze away, old curmudgeon."

Todd's rage was excessive, but he thought that the best plan would be to
try to laugh the thing over, and with a hideous affectation of mirth, he
cried out--

"Good-by, Bill--good-by. Remember me to your father, and tell him all
the joke."

"It wasn't a joke," said Bill White.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Todd. "Well--well, I forgive you, Bill--I forgive you.
Mind you take my message to your aunt, and tell her I shall be at the
chapel on Wednesday."

"Oh, go to the deuce with you," said Bill, as he put down the saucepan
upon finding that his late fare was not disposed to carry his threat of
shooting him into effect. "You are an old rogue, that you are, and I
daresay you have done something that it would be well worth while to
take you up for."

With this, Bill began vigorously to pull away against the stream,
puffing and blowing, and looking as indignant as he possibly could. Todd
turned with a sigh to the men at the little landing, and affecting to
wipe a tear from his left eye, he said--

"You would not believe, gentlemen, that that boy could say such things
to his poor old uncle, and yet you wouldn't believe if I were to tell
you the pounds and pounds that boy has cost me and his poor aunt. He
don't behave well to either of us; but we are as fond of him as
possible. It's in our natures to love him, and we can't help it."

"Lor!" said one of the men.

"You looks tender-hearted," said another.

The others all laughed at this, and Todd thought it was as well to seem
as if he thought that some very capital joke was going on, so he laughed
too.

"I was thinking," he said, when the merriment had a little subsided, "I
was thinking of going right on to Gravesend. What do you say to taking
me now, a couple of you? There's the tide nicely with you all the way,
and I am always a liberal enough paymaster."

"What will you give?" said one with a voice like a cracked trumpet with
a bad cold.

"Why, name your price, and I shall not say no to it."

"What shall we take the gemman for, Bill?" said this man to another, who
was smoking a short pipe.

"A rum 'un," was the reply of Bill.

"Don't be a _hass_. I didn't go for to ask you what sort of _indiwiddle_
he was, but what we'd take him to Gravesend for."

"Oh, that's the caper, is it?"

"Yes it is, idiot."

"Well--fifteen bob and a tanner."

"Will that do, sir?" said the other to Todd, who thought that it would
look bad to acquiesce too readily in the amount, so he said--

"I will give the fifteen shillings."

"Very good. We won't go to loggerheads about the tanner; so come along,
sir, and we'll soon get you to Gravesend, with this tide a-running all
the way there, as comfortably as it can, all of a purpose."

Todd was well enough pleased to find that these two men owned the
longest and strongest-looking wherry that was at the landing-place. He
ensconced himself snugly enough in the stern of the boat and they put
aside their pipes, and soon pushed off into the middle of the stream.

"Once more," thought Todd, "once more I am on the road to escape; and
all may yet be well."

The two men now set to work with the oars in earnest. They felt, that as
they were paid by the job, the best way was to get it over as quickly as
possible; and, aided by the tide, it was perfectly astonishing what
progress they made down the river.

Todd every now and then cast a long and anxious glance behind him; and
presently he saw a boat shooting along, by the aid of six rowers, at
great speed, and evidently turning into the little landing-place from
where he had just come. His eyesight was either sharpened by the morning
light, or fancy deceived him, for he thought he saw the boy, Bill White,
seated in the stern of the boat.

Todd was in an agony. He knew not whether to attract the attention of
the two watermen to the large boat with all its rowers, so that he might
get an opinion from them concerning it or not; and then again, he
thought that at the moment, there would be a good chance of working upon
the cupidity of the men, if any real danger should befall him of
capture.

"I say, Bill," said one.

"Well, say it."

"There's one of the police officer's gone into the Old Stairs. There's
something afloat this here morning."

"Ah! They are always at some manoeuvre or another. Pull away. It ain't
no business of our'n."

Todd could almost have hugged the man for the sentiment he uttered; and
how he longed to echo those two words, "pull away;" but he was afraid to
do so, lest, by any seemingly undue anxiety just then for speed upon his
part, he should provoke the idea that the police-boat was as interesting
to him as it really was.

Poor, wretched, guilty Todd surely suffered a hundred times the pangs of
death during his progress down the river; and now he sat in the stern of
the boat, looking as pale as death itself.

"You don't seem very well," said one of the men.

"Oh, yes--yes, I am quite well, I thank you."

"Well, I'm glad to hear it; for you look just as if you had been buried
a month, and then dug up again."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Todd,--what a hideous attempt at a laugh it
was!--"that is very good."

"Oh, lor! do you laugh that way when you are at home? 'cos if you do, I
should expect the roof to tumble in with fright, I should."

"How funny you are," said Todd. "Pull away."

He did venture to say, "pull away!" and the men did pull with right
good-will, so that the landing-place, and the long police-boat that was
at it, looked just like two specks by the river-side; and, indeed it
would have been a long pull and a strong one to catch Todd's wherry.

The murderer breathed a little more freely.

"How far have we got to go now?" he said.

"Oh, a matter of nine miles yet."

"And how long will it take you?"

"About one hour and a quarter, with the tide running at such a pace as
it is. There's some wind, too, and what there is, is all with us, so we
cut along favourably. What are they doing away yonder, Bill?"

"Where?" said Bill.

"Right in our wake, there. Oh, they are getting up a sail. I'll be
hanged if they ain't, and pulling away besides! Why, what a hurry they
must be in, to be sure, to get down the river. I never knew them do that
before."

Todd looked along the surface of the water, and he saw the police-boat
coming along at such a rate, that the spray was tossed up in the air
before her prow in millions of white particles.

A puff of smoke came from her side, and a slight sharp report rung upon
the morning air. A musket or a pistol had been discharged on board of
her.

"What's the meaning of that, Bill?"

"I can tell you," said Todd, sharply, before Bill had done moving his
head from side to side, which was a habit of his preparatory to replying
to any very intricate question. "I can tell you easily."

[Illustration: The Police-Galley Chasing Todd To Gravesend.]

"What is it then?"

"You pull away, and I'll tell you. You see that boat with the sail and
the six rowers there?"

"Yes, yes!"

"And you heard them fire a gun?"

"To be sure."

"Well, pull away. It's enough to make a cat laugh; but it was Mr.
Anthony Strong that fired that gun."

"How very droll? But what did he do it for?"

"Well, pull away, and I'll tell you. You must know that Mr. Anthony
Strong, who is in command of that police-boat, is my brother-in-law, and
he laid a wager with me, that he would start from the pier at Cheyne
Walk, Chelsea, at daybreak this morning, and get to Gravesend before me,
if I started from Blackfriars, and did the best I possibly could to get
on that money and men could do for me. I allowed that he was to take all
his six rowers with him, and hoist his sail if he liked, and I was to
take no more than two watermen at a time. When he saw me, he was to fire
a gun, you see; and the wager is for twenty pounds and a dinner. I
should like to win it, and so, if you can fairly beat him, with the
start you have, which is above a mile--"

"It's above two," said Bill, "Water's deceiving."

"Well, I'm glad to hear it; and I was going to say, I would stand five
guineas!"

"You will, old fellow?"

"I will; and to convince you of it, here they are, and I will place them
in your hands at once; so now, I do hope that you will pull away like
devils!"

"Won't we! If Mr. Anthony Strong, with all his sail and his six hands,
catches us on this side of Gravesend, I'll give him leave to skin me and
eat me at the dinner that he would win. No, no! if we don't know the
currents, and the shortcuts of the river a little bit better than ever a
captain of police-boat that ever lived, or that ever will live, why you
may set me down for a frog or a Frenchman, which, I take it, are much of
a muchness."

"They is," said the other.

Todd shouted with delight, and it was real now the wild laughter that
shook his frame, for he began to think he was safe. The confident tone
in which the waterman spoke, had quite convinced him that he could do
what he said. With a perfect confidence in the power of his two
watermen, he looked at the police wherry without any alarm, and the foam
that it dashed up as it came bounding on, did not seem to fall coldly
upon his breast, as it had seemed to do before.

"Two miles," he said. "That's a long start."

"In a stern chase," said Bill, "it's half of the blessed world to get
over is them two miles."

"Yes, yes--exactly; and I shall beat Mr. Anthony Strong, I feel now. You
see, my little nephew, Bill White, gave me the first start from
Blackfriars; but I knew I could not depend upon him all the way, so
I--There's another gun. Hal ha! Mr. Strong, it won't do."

"Well," said Bill, with a look of what he, no doubt, thought was great
cleverness, "if I didn't know as this was a bit of fun between Mr.
Anthony Strong and you, sir, I should have said that them guns was for
us to lie-to."

"That's just what he wants," cried Todd.

"Does he?"

"Yes. He thinks that he will frighten whoever is rowing into a dead
stop, when they find a police-galley firing guns; but I think he is
mistaken in this matter, my friends."

"Rather!" said Dick, as he bent his back to the oars, and pulled away
like a giant.

How the boat shot through the water! and yet to Todd's apprehension, the
police-galley gained upon him. Of course, he told himself that it must
gain with its sail and six rowers; but the question was, how much it
would gain in the seven or eight miles they had got to go? With what a
feverish action Todd licked his lips.




                             CHAPTER CLXIV.
                        TODD GOES BACK ON LAND.


"Oh, quicker--quicker!" cried Todd.

"That would be difficult," said Bill. "But I rather think as we is a
doing of it something out of the common way."

Bang! went another gun from the pursuing boat, and this time there
certainly was the greatest possible hint given by the police-galley that
it was in earnest, for a bullet struck the water not above a couple of
boats' length from Todd's wherry.

"Well," said Bill, "that may be firing, but I'll be hanged if it is at
all pleasant."

"Oh, heed it not," said Todd; "heed it not. They would have such a laugh
at both me and you, if by any means they could frighten you into
stopping, and so giving me up--no, no, I mean giving up the wager. What
am I saying?"

"I tell you what it is," said Bill, "to my mind this is a very odd sort
of wager, and if you have no sort of objection to it, sir, we will just
pull to the next stairs, and put you ashore. If you don't like that,
why, I rather think you must be content to lose your wager."

"You will desert me? Oh, no--no. Surely you will not, and cannot. You
have but to name your price, and you shall have it."

"No. That won't do. You must land now."

Todd looked nervously along the bank of the river, and he saw a little
miserable landing-place, towards which the men now began to urge the
boat. He thought then that if he could get anything like a start of his
pursuers on the shore, all might yet be well. "I could get across the
country to Gravesend, and if once there, I might find some vessel to
take me off."

"Pull to shore, then," he said; "I will take my chance. Pull to shore at
once, as swiftly as you possibly can."

When the boat's head was turned towards the shore, it was pretty evident
that the police-galley was much more intent upon getting to Todd than to
Gravesend, for the rowers in it on the instant turned the boat's head in
the same direction, and it became then, truly, a case of life and death
to Todd.

Vigorously as the boatmen worked, the little wherry was quickly so close
to the shore, that Todd saw he could land by a scramble through the
water.

"There is your money," he cried, to the men; "and for what you have
done, I thank you with all my heart. Good-by to you."

He sprang over the side of the boat, although by so doing he was up to
his knees in the river; but that he heeded not, and in the course of
half a minute he had scrambled to the shore, and going at a great rate
up the little steps at the landing-place, he gained the road and began
to run at great speed.

The two boatmen were not a little amazed at this proceeding, and Bill
said,--

"I say, I rather think that this is another queer sort of a piece of
work than a wager; but if we don't wish to get ourselves into trouble,
we must stick to it tooth and nail, that that was what we believed it to
be."

"Ay," said the other. "I believe you, we must, or else we shall get into
limbo for our share of the affair, and no mistake. Here they come, hand
over hand, and they don't look very well pleased, either."

The rowers in the police-galley had made such strenuous exertions to
reach the landing-place quickly, that they were really not far behind
the wherry that had conducted Todd there, and the first thing that was
done was to lay hold of the wherry with a boat-hook, and drag it
alongside of them. Then the officer in command of the police-boat called
out in a voice hoarse with rage--

"What do you mean, you infernal rascals, by running off in this way,
when you know by our flag that we were the police? But you will have
leisure to repent of it in jail. Clap handcuffs upon them both, my men."

"Why, what have we done?" said Bill. "You will win your wager yet, I
should say, if you look sharp about it."

"Wager? What wager? What do you mean?"

"Why, the gentleman told us that he had a wager with you about who was
to get to Gravesend first, and he was to take what means he could, and
you were to cut along in the galley, and there was to be quite a grand
dinner on the strength of it."

"Oh, nonsense--nonsense."

"Well, that's what he told me, and that's why we pulled away so for; but
if so be as it ain't, we are sorry enough, for why should we get into
trouble about a man we never saw before, and ain't likely to see again?"

"This excuse won't serve you."

"But who is he, and what's he done?"

"For all we know to the contrary, he is the infamous Todd, the
murderer."

"What? The fellow that made the people into pies! Oh, if we had only had
half a quarter of an idea of that! But, hold--I saw the way he went. It
was along that chalky bit of road. If you really want to nab him, why do
you waste time here talking to us? Come on shore, and I will go with
you, and we will soon have him now, if that will do any good."

The officer saw at once that this was the only mode of proceeding that
promised him the least chance of capturing the fugitive, whether he were
Todd or not; for, after all, the persons in the police-galley had
nothing like positive evidence that it was Todd of whom they were in
pursuit. A couple of officers were left in the charge of the boats, and
the whole of the remainder of them landed along with Bill, and ran up
the steps to the road along which Todd had been seen to run.

They did not know, however, what a wily, cunning personage they had to
deal with.

When Todd found himself in such comparatively close quarters with the
enemy, he felt perfectly sure that to continue scampering along the high
road was not the most likely way to escape. If he were to succeed in
eluding his foes, he felt that it must be by _finesse_, and not by
speed.

With this idea, he did not go along the road for a greater distance than
sufficed to bring him to a hedge, across which he then instantly made
his way, and then turning, he crouched down and crept back towards the
other direction. On the side of the hedge where he was now, there was
not a very pleasant kind of field-drain, but Todd's circumstances did
not permit of his being very particular, and getting right down into the
drain, he crept along, stooping so low that only a portion of his head
and back were visible above it.

This was certainly the most likely way to baffle his pursuers, who were
not very likely to think that he had so rapidly doubled upon them.
Knowing now that his destination was Gravesend, they would in all
probability run along the road after him, or if they took to the fields
it would still be with the idea that he was ahead of them.

After proceeding for some distance, Todd thought it would be just as
well if he were to reconnoitre the foe a little, and, accordingly, he
raised his head sufficiently to enable him just to peep through the
hedge, and when he did so, he found that he was on sufficiently high
ground to command a view of the road, and the landing-place, and the
river. To his immense consternation, he saw the police advancing rapidly
towards him.

"Lost! lost!" said Todd, as he sunk down into the ditch, with a
conviction that he was all but taken. He felt in his pocket for a
pistol, and getting one out, he placed it to his ear, and there held it,
for he had made up his mind now, to shoot himself, rather than be
dragged back to prison, from where another escape would be quite out of
the question.

"They shall not take me. I will die--I will die," he murmured; and then
he concentrated all his attention to the act of listening to the
proceedings of the police.

They came on in a straggling kind of way from the landing-place, and the
principal officer cried out--

"You, Jenkins, get up the first tree you come to, and take a long look
about you. The country is flat enough, and he will find it no easy
matter to hide from us, I should say."

"Oh, it's all right, sir," said another voice. "We have him as safe as
if he were lying at the bottom of our boat with the darbies on him; and
as far as I can judge of him, sir, I should say it is Todd."

"I hope so," said the officer. "It will not be a bad morning's work for
you all, my lads, if it is."

Not very far off from where Todd lay concealed in the ditch, only,
fortunately for him, on the other side of the road, was a stunted tree,
rising about twenty feet from the barren soil, and upon this the man,
who was named Jenkins, made his way carefully, and took a long look all
round him, and particularly in advance.

"Do you see him?" said the officer commanding the party.

"No, sir, I don't."

"Then he is hiding somewhere, and the only plan is to go right on, and
hunt him up if he is among the hedges. Come on, now, at once. We must
have him. He cannot possibly escape us now."

Todd, upon this, again gave himself up for lost; but, as luck would have
it, although two of the men got over the hedge, and began looking about,
and dashing their cutlasses into the hedge, the officer called to them--

"Oh, he never came so far up the road. You don't suppose he was goose
enough to come back again? If he is hiding, it will be more likely by
the time he lost breath, I should say. Come now; I saw him myself get
past yonder little chestnut trees, and the white cottage."

Upon this the men ran on, and Todd felt, for the present, at all events,
he was saved.

"The idiots!" said Todd, as he looked up and listened. "The idiots!--So
they think that I am as far gone in stupidity as they are, and that I
have nothing to do, but to run on until they, younger and more fleet of
foot, overtake me."

He crawled out of the ditch, and a most pitiable figure he was when he
did so. In his anxiety to hide himself completely, he had, in fact, lain
himself down comfortably enough, as far as regarded the softness of the
place, right at the bottom of the ditch, and had only, in the midst of a
thick growth of rank weeds, kept his face above the water.

"This is horrible," he said; "and they will be back soon, too. What on
earth am I to do?"

He heard a loud shout at this moment, and he raised his head
sufficiently to see along the road to observe the actions of the
officers. He found that they had paused, and were talking to a man on
horseback, who was pointing in the very direction where he (Todd) stood,
or rather crouched. The idea that this man had from some eminence, he
being mounted, too, seen him (Todd) hide in the ditch, at once crossed
his mind, and from that moment he felt that he was not in the safety
that he had fondly hoped he was.

To remain where he was, with such an idea prevailing in his mind, would
have been madness and, accordingly, crawling down close to the hedge, he
ran along, splashing, like some gigantic water-fowl, in the ditch, until
he came to a thickly-planted fence, at right angles with the hedge that
bordered the road. There he was forced to come to a stand-still.

The fence was composed of the common privet, so that there would have
been neither difficulty nor danger in forcing his way through it; but
what he might encounter upon the other side was a subject of
consideration well worth his attention.

Through the interstices of the foliage he could see that there was a
pretty and well-kept mixed garden on the other side. Roses and other
flowers grew in quite loving companionship with all kinds of culinary
vegetables, and the little plot of ground was well shadowed by some
half-dozen fruit trees. A part of the ground was made into a kind of
lawn, and upon that lawn was a child about one year old crawling about,
and amusing itself by making weak efforts to pull up the grass.

While Todd was observing these things, a woman came out of a little
white-washed cottage that was at the farther end of the garden, with
some clothes to hang up to dry. The woman spoke to the child, and from
the tone in which she did so, it was quite evident she was the mother of
it.

Todd waited until she had hung the clothes up that she had brought out
into the garden, and then when she went into the house for more, he
burst his way through the hedge, and with a resolution and firmness that
nothing but the exigencies of his situation could possibly have endowed
him with, he took the child up in his arms and walked slowly across the
lawn towards the cottage.

The woman, with another heap of wet clothes in her arms, met him, and
uttered a loud scream.

"Peace," said Todd. "Peace, I say. There is no danger unless you make
some. Listen to me, and I will tell you how you can do a service to me,
and spare your child."

"Help! help! Murder! Thieves!" cried the woman.

Todd took one of his pistols from his pocket, and held it to the head of
the child.

"Another word," he said, "and I fire!"

[Illustration: Todd Resorts To A Frightful Stratagem With A Mother And
Child.]

The woman fell upon her knees, and holding up her hands in the attitude
of prayer, she said--

"Oh, have mercy! Kill me, if you must take a life, but spare the child!"

"The child's life," said Todd, "is in your own hands. Why do you seek to
destroy me?"

"I do not--I do not, indeed."

"Then, peace, and do not cry out for help. Do not shout that dreadful
word 'Murder!' for that will destroy me. I am hunted by my fellow-men. I
am a poor proscribed wretch, and all I ask of you is that you will not
betray me."

"You will spare my child?"

"I will. Why should I harm the little innocent? I was once myself a
little child, and considered to be rather a beauty."

As Todd said this, he made one of his most hideous faces, so that the
woman cried out with terror, and tried to snatch the child from him, but
he held it with a firm grasp.




                             CHAPTER CLXV.
                       TODD HIDES IN A CUPBOARD.


"It is in vain," said Todd; "my safety is wound up now with the safety
of this little one. If you would save it, you will save me."

"Oh, no, no. Why should it be so? I cannot save you."

"You can, I think. At all events, I will be satisfied if you make the
effort to do so. I tell you I am pursued by the officers of the law. It
does not matter to you what I am, or who I am, or what crime it is that
they lay to my charge; your child's life is as dear to you in any case.
Hide me in the cottage, and deny my being seen here, and the child shall
live. Betray me, and as sure as the sun gives light, it dies."

"Oh, no, no, no!"

"But, I say, yes. Your course is easy. It is all but certain that my
prosecutors will come to this cottage, as it is the only habitation on
the route that I have taken. They will ask you if you have seen such a
man as I am, and they will tell you that you may earn a large reward by
giving such information as may deliver me into the hands of justice; but
what reward--what sum of money would pay you for your child's life?"

"Oh, not all the world's worth!"

"So I thought; and so you will deny seeing me, or knowing ought of me,
for your child's sake? Is it agreed?"

"It is--it is! God knows who you are, or what you have done that the
hands of your fellow creatures should be raised against you; but I will
not betray you. You may depend upon my word. If you are found in this
place, it shall not be by any information of mine."

"Can you hide me?"

"I will try to do so. Come into the cottage. Ah! what noise is that? I
hear the tread of feet, and the shouts of men!"

Todd paused to listen. He shook for a moment or two; and then, with a
bitter tone, he said--

"My pursuers come! They begin to suspect the trick that I have played
them!--they now know--or think they know, that I have turned upon my
route. They come--they come!"

"Oh, give me the child! I swear to you that I will hide you to the
utmost of my means; but give me the child!"

"Not yet."

The woman looked at him in an agony of tears.

"Listen to me," she said. "If they discover you it will not be my fault,
nor the fault of this little innocent--you feel that! Ah! then tell me
upon what principle of justice can you take its life?"

"I will be just," said Todd. "All I ask of you is, to hide me to the
best of your ability, and to keep secret the fact of my presence here.
If, after you have done all that, you still find that I am taken, it
will be no fault of yours. I do not ask impossibilities of any one, nor
do I threaten punishment against you for not performing improbable
feats. Come in--come in at once! They come--they come! Do you not hear
them now?"

It was quite evident now that a number of persons were approaching, and
beating the bushes as they came on. The tread of a horse's feet, too,
upon the road convinced Todd that among his foes, now, was the mounted
man whom he had seen, and whom he thought he saw point to him as he lay
crouching down behind the hedge, half hidden in the ditch.

With the little child still in his arms, he rushed into the cottage, and
the woman followed him, wringing her hands with terror. And yet Todd was
gentle with the child. He knew that from the mother he had everything to
hope, and everything to dread, and he did not wish to drive her to
despair by any display of harshness to the little one.

"This way," she cried, "this way," as she led the way into an
inner-room. "There is a cupboard here in which you can conceal yourself.
If they do not search the house, they will not find you, and I will do
all that I can to prevent them."

"That will do," said Todd; "but, remember, I will have the child near
me, so that upon the least symptom of treachery from you, I can put it
to death; and I shall not, under any circumstances, at all scruple so to
do. Where is this cupboard that you speak of?"

"It is here--it is here!"

"Ah! that will do." Todd now cast his eyes around the room, and
perceived a little cot, that, at night, was devoted to the slumbers of
the child. "Take that," he said, pointing to it, "and place it against
the door of the cupboard with the child in it. It will seem then not
likely that I am hidden here."

"I will do so."

Todd did not feel any apprehension of treachery from the mother of the
child. He was not slow to perceive that every other feeling was in her
breast weak in comparison with the all-absorbing one of love for the
infant; and so he calculated that, rather than run the shadow of a risk
of injury to it, she would do all that he required. The cupboard was a
deep one; but it was not high enough for Todd quite to stand upright in.
That, however, was a trifling inconvenience, and he got into it at once.
The child's cot was placed against the door; and the young mother, with
a thousand fears tugging at her heart, pretended to busy herself about
her household affairs.

The little interval that now ensued, before Todd's pursuers reached the
spot, was certainly to him rather a fearful one; and he felt that his
fate hung upon the proceedings of the next few moments. He called to the
woman in an earnest tone--

"Courage--courage--all will be well."

"Oh, peace--peace!" she said. "They come!"

Todd quite held his breath now in the painful effort that he made to
listen, so that not the slightest sound that might be indicative of the
approach of his enemies might escape him; and he gave such a start, that
he nearly threw open the cupboard-door, and upset the cot, as he heard a
hoarse man's voice suddenly call out from the garden--

"Hilloa!--House here--house--Hilloa!"

"Now--now," he gasped. "Now I live or die! Upon the next few moments
hangs my fate!"

The cold dew of intense fear stood upon his brow, and his sense of
hearing appeared to be getting preternaturally acute. Not a word that
was said escaped him, although it was right away in the garden that
this, to him, fearfully interesting conversation took place.

"What is the matter?" he heard the woman say, and then the rough voice
replied to her--

"We are the police, my good woman, and we are in search of a man who is
hidden somewhere about this neighbourhood. Has any one come into your
place, or have you seen a tall man pass the cottage?"

"No," said the woman.

Todd breathed a little more freely.

"It's very odd," said another voice; "for he must be about this spot,
that is quite clear, as he was dodging about the field at the back of
here, and hiding in the hedge. We must have passed him."

"Well, he can't get away," said a third; "but after all, he may be lying
down somewhere in the garden, for all we know to the contrary."

"I don't think it," said the woman.

At this moment, the child began to cry violently.

"Oh, confound you for a brat!" said Todd, "I wish it was only safe to
throttle you."

"Is that your child?" said one of the officers.

"Oh, yes--yes," said the young mother, and hastening into the cottage,
she placed a chair by the side of the cot, and began to rock it to and
fro, singing while she did so, to lull the child to sleep.

"She will keep her word," thought Todd. "I feel confident that she will
keep her word, now, with me."

"You look all round the garden, while I take a peep about the house,"
said the principal officer.

"Oh, I am lost!" moaned Todd. "I am surely lost now! If the house should
be searched well, so obvious a place of concealment as a cupboard will
not escape them. All is lost now, indeed."

He almost gave up all thought, now, of keeping life or liberty, and he
waited only for the fatal moment when the officers should approach and
place their hands upon that cupboard door to open it. The child still
cried, and the mother sang to it.

    "'Sleep, sleep, little baby--
      Oh, sleep all the day;
    The sunshine is hiding,
      The birds fly away.
          Away, away--far away.
    The sunshine is hiding,
      The birds fly away--'"

"Hilloa! What cupboard is that behind the child's cot?"

    "'And when they return
      You may open your eyes.'

"Oh, it's where we keep our best crockery. Don't disturb the child--I do
think it is sickening with the measles.

    "'And see how the sunset
      Is gilding the skies,
          Away, away--far away.
    And see how the sunset
      Is gilding the skies.'

"Have you found him in the garden? I shall be almost out of my wits,
now, till my husband comes home. Who is it that you are looking for, and
pray what has he done? He would need to be clever, indeed, to come in
here without my knowing it; and as for the garden, why, I was hanging
out the clothes there for the last half hour, I tell you."

"Oh, he's not here," said the officer. "It would be no bad thing, marm,
for any one who could lend a helping hand to find him."

"Ah, indeed?"

"Yes. You have heard of Todd, the murderer? Well, that's the man we are
after, and we have every reason to think that he is somewhere about
here, and it is a large reward that is offered for him, I can tell you."

"Ah! I should like to get it."

"Not a doubt of it. Good-day, marm. If you should see any
suspicious-looking fellow about the fields, just give notice of it in
some sort of a way, if you can, for you may depend upon it, it will be
Todd."

"Oh, yes, I will. How very fractious this little thing is to-day, to be
sure. I hardly ever knew it to be so before."

"Ah, well, they will be so, at times. But I'm off. Mind, now, you get
the reward if you see anything of Todd."

"Oh, yes. Trust me for that."

The man left the room. What a reprieve from death that was for Todd! He
thought that during all the perils that he had passed through, he had
surely never been quite so near to destruction as then; and when he
found that he was saved, temporarily, he could hardly hold himself up in
the cupboard, and a sensation of faintness came over him.

It was not safe for him yet, by any means, to think of emerging from his
place of concealment. Indeed, he felt that the young mother would be the
best judge upon that hand, so he did not stir nor speak, and at last he
heard the cot with the now sleeping child in it, being gently moved from
before the cupboard-door. Then it was opened, and Todd, with his face
pale and haggard, stepped out into the room.

The young woman only pointed to the door of the little apartment
steadily and significantly.

"What do you mean?" said Todd.

"Go," she said. "I have done that which you require of me. Now go."

"To death?"

"No. Your enemies are no longer here. At the sacrifice of truth and of
feeling I saved you. It was all you asked of me, and now I tell you to
go, and no longer pollute this place by your presence. I know who and
what you are, now. You are Sweeney Todd, the murderer."

"Well, and if I am, what then?"

"Nothing--nothing! I ask nothing of you, but that you should leave this
house; I have kept my word. I will let the memory of this hour's work
sink deeply into my heart, and there remain untold to any one. Not even
to my husband will I breathe it. I only ask you to go."

"I am going--I am going."

Todd felt awed by her manner. He cowered before the look that, full of
horror, she bent upon him, and he crept towards the cottage door. But
the dread that some of his enemies might be lurking about the spot
detained him.

"Tell me," he said, "oh! tell me truly--are they gone?"

"Wait," she said, "and I will see again."

She took the child in her arms, and left the cottage. Todd found, now
that the child was no longer in his power as a kind of hostage for the
faith of the mother, that he had trusted her too far; but it was too
late, now, for him to recede from the position in which he had placed
himself, and with all his terror, he had no resource but to
calmly--calmly as he could--wait her return.

She came back again in a few moments.

"You can go with safety. They are all away."

"I will trust you, and take your word for it," said Todd. "I thank you
for the service you have rendered to me, and I am not ungrateful. Accept
of this in remembrance of me, and of this day's adventure."

He took from his pocket a splendid gold watch and laid it upon the
table, in the outer room, but with vehemence, the woman cried--

"No--no! Take it up, I will not have it. Take it up, or even now I will
dare everything and call for help. I will take nothing from your
blood-stained hands. Take up the watch, or I will destroy it."

"As you please," said Todd, as he placed the watch in his pocket again.
"I wish not to force it upon you. I am gone."

He went out into the little garden, but he looked about him very
nervously indeed, before he trusted himself to walk towards the little
white gate that opened upon the high road. Each moment, however, that
passed without any one springing upon and attacking him, was a moment of
confidence gained. He carried a pistol in his hand, and keeping his eyes
keenly around him, he reached the road.

"All is safe," he said. "I do, indeed, think she is right, and that they
have given up the chase for me. She has not deceived me, and I may yet
escape."

He kept close to the road-side, so that he was very much covered by the
hedge, and then, at as fast a pace as he thought he could keep up for
any length of time, he ran on.

He had not gone far when he heard the sound of wheels behind him, and he
got over a hedge and hid behind it until he could see what sort of
vehicle it was that approached. It turned out to be a cart driven by a
couple of countrymen, who were talking upon their own affairs in rather
loud tones; as they came on, Todd listened intently, and was satisfied
that his supposed escape into that neighbourhood was not the subject of
their discourse.




                             CHAPTER CLXVI.
              THE SHIP BOUND FOR HAVRE TAKES A PASSENGER.


"Hilloa!" cried Todd, as he came out into the middle of the road and
confronted the cart with the two men in it. "Hilloa! Which way are you
going?"

"One would think you might see that," said one of the men, "by the way
the horse's nose points."

"What do you want?" said the other, rather sharply.

"Not to intrude upon you at all, if you don't like it," replied Todd;
"but I am going to Gravesend, and if you will help me on a part of the
way, I will pay you well for it. I thought it would be good for my
constitution to walk, but I find I am older than I thought I was."

"What will you give?" said one of the men, in a dubious tone of voice.

"Name your price," said Todd, "and I will give it. I know you will not
be unreasonable with me."

"Will you give half a guinea?" said the other.

"Yes, for I am foot-weary."

"Jump up, then, and we will soon take you to Gravesend. You ain't many
miles off from it now by the near cuts that we know. Come on."

Todd managed to scramble into the cart, and the man who was driving gave
the horse an impulse forward, and away they went at a good pace.

Todd began to feel a little easier in his mind now, for the quick motion
of the cart in the direction that he wished to go in was most
satisfactory to him. He felt quite delighted in a little time, when one
of the men pointing ahead, cried out--

"There's the first houses in Gravesend, if you really want to go there."

"Really," said Todd. "Indeed I do. Can you tell me what vessels are off
the Port?"

"Perhaps we can, and perhaps we can't, old fellow; but we will have some
talk about that soon. Ha! ha!"

There was something so peculiar in the laugh of the man, that Todd began
to wonder into what hands he had fallen. They, every now and then, too,
gave to each other a very significant look, as though there was some
secret between them which they would not converse of before him. All
this began to make Todd very uneasy, indeed, and the little amount of
felicitation which he had been giving to himself so short a time before,
rapidly subsided.

"Am I a prisoner?"

These were the words that occurred to him, but he had no ready means of
answering the question. All he could do was to keep upon his guard, and,
to tell the truth, well armed and desperate as he was, Todd was no very
despicable match for any two men.

Suddenly the man who was driving turned the horse's head down a deep
declivity that led towards the river, to the right of the road.

The country they were in was all of chalk, and this narrow road, or
rather lane, at right angles with the high road, was evidently a cutting
through the chalk foundation for the sake of a ready passage from the
side of the Thames to the high road.

A more picturesque spot could not well have been conceived. The small
amount of loam upon the surface of the chalk, bore a brilliant
vegetation; and upon the tall rugged sides of the deep cutting, wherever
a small portion of earth had lodged, tall weeds had grown up, while on
each side of the lane, close to the base of the chalky heights, there
was a mass of weeds and tall creeping plants, and here and there a young
tree, which lent a beautifully verdant aspect to the place.

Every step that the horse now went, conducted the cart and its occupants
deeper and deeper into the cutting, until, at last, the sky overhead
looked only like a thin streak of light, and the gloom of a premature
twilight was about the place.

"Halt!" cried the man who was not driving, and the horse was stopped in
the gloomiest portion of the lane. Todd turned ghastly pale, and kept
his hand plunged in his breast upon one of his pistols.

"What have you come down here for?" he said. "Why do you come to a stop
in such a place as this?"

"We will soon let you know," said the man who had not been driving,
knitting his brows. "No doubt, you thought you had nailed us nicely, my
fine fellow."

"Nailed you?"

"Yes. You need not put on such an innocent look, I can tell you. We are
pretty good judges in these matters, and it's quite sufficient for me to
tell you that we know you."

"Know me?"

"Yes, to be sure. Did you think we were taken in by any such nonsense as
your being tired, and so on?--No. We know you, I say, and this hour is
your last. You have placed yourself in our power, and we will take good
care of you now. There is a well in this lane which keeps secrets
capitally."

Todd drew his pistol, and held it against the breast of this man.

"Attempt any violence," he said, "and I fire!"

"Oh, indeed! You are well prepared, are you? I must say that, for an
exciseman, you are a bold fellow."

"A what?"

"An exciseman. You know well you have been on the look-out for us for
the last week; so it is of no use denying it. You thought you nabbed us,
when you got into our cart."

[Illustration: Todd's Adventure With The Smugglers.]

Todd lowered his pistol.

"This is a foolish enough mistake," he said, "I am no more an exciseman
than I am Commander-in-chief of the forces. What could have put such a
thing into your heads?"

"Say you so?" cried the other. "But how will you make us believe it?
That's the question."

"Well," said Todd, putting on a very candid look, "I don't know how a
man is to set about proving that he is not an exciseman. I only know
that I am not. The real truth is, that I am in debt, and being pressed
by my creditors, have thought proper to get out of their way; and so I
want to make the best of my way to Gravesend, that is all. I fancy, by
your anger at the idea of my being an exciseman, that you are smugglers;
and if so, I can only say that, with all my heart, you may go on
smuggling with the greatest success until the day of judgment, before I
would interfere with you in the matter."

"Dare we believe him?" said one of the men to the other.

"I hardly know," replied the other; "and yet it would be rather a sad
thing to take a man's life, when it might turn out that he was not what
we took him for."

"How on earth am I to convince you?" said Todd.

"Where do you want to go to?"

"I want to get on board some vessel, I don't care what, so that it is
bound to some continental port. My object, I tell you, is to get away,
and that is all."

"Would the Port of Havre in France suit you?"

"Perfectly well."

The two men now whispered together for a few moments, and then, one of
them, turning to Todd, said:--

"The fact is that we are somewhat connected with a vessel bound for
Havre, and it will sail to-night. If you are really what you pretend,
and truly want to leave England, you can come with us, and we will give
you a passage; but we expect to be paid for it."

"Nothing can be more reasonable," said Todd; "I will pay you a liberal
price, and as I wish to go on board as soon as I can, you may feel
yourself perfectly easy regarding your suspicions of my being an
exciseman, by keeping me in your company, and placing me on board your
own vessel as quickly as you can."

"Hang it, that's fair enough," cried one of them. "Come on, then, and
let us get to the Lively William as soon as we can. It's rather a mercy
we did not knock you on the head, though, at once."

"I am very much obliged," said Todd.

"Oh, don't mention it. I always myself, mind, defer anything of that
sort till the last. It's a very rough and ugly way of settling matters,
at the best; but when you can't reasonably, you know, do anything else,
why, you must, and there's an end of it."

"Exactly," said Todd. "I perceive that you are quite a philosopher in
such transactions. So now that we have a better understanding together,
the sooner we get on board this Lively William you talk of, the better."

"Not a doubt of that. Come up."

The horse's head was turned up the lane again, and in a very few moments
the high road was gained, and they went on at a rapid trot for
Gravesend. The town was soon reached--that town what is all dirt in
winter, and chalk-dust in summer--and the two men, by the manner in
which they kept their eyes upon Todd while they passed several throngs
of people, showed that it was a very difficult thing indeed to get rid
of suspicion when once it took possession of them.

After, however, getting right through the town, and finding that Todd
did not attempt to give the least alarm, but, on the contrary, shrunk
from observation as much as he could, their confidence in him was
complete, and they really believed him to be what he pretended to be.

Whether, if those men had really known who and what he was, they would
have altered their views with regard to him, is a matter difficult to
give an opinion upon; but as it was, they had no scruples whatever,
provided he would pay them a good price for his passage to Havre.

"Now," said one of them, "we know that you have not deceived us, and
that it is all right, we don't mind telling you that we are the captain
and owner of the Lively William, and that we are in the regular
smuggling trade, between the French Ports and this country. We don't
make a bad thing of it, one way and another."

"I am glad to hear it," said Todd.

"Ah, you view this sort of thing in a christian-like spirit, we see; and
if you have no objection to a drop of as pure champagne brandy as ever
you tasted, provided you have tasted some of the best, you can have a
drop."

"I should like it much," said Todd.

"Just look out ahead, then, and fix your eyes on that old tree yonder,
while we get it."

Todd did not care to know what mode of hiding spirits the two men had in
their cart; so he did as they required of him, and fixed his eyes upon
the old tree. After he had kept his eyes upon that object for some few
minutes, they called out to him--

"All's right."

Todd looked round, and found one of the men with a small bladder of
spirits, and a little horn drinking-cup.

"Here," he said, "you can give us your opinion of this."

Todd tossed off the contents of the cup.

"Excellent!" he cried. "Excellent! That, indeed, is brandy. I do not
think that such is to be got in London."

"Scarcely," said the man, as he helped himself, and then handed the
bladder and the cup to his companion; "but we are going to put up our
horse and cart now, and if you will be so good as to look at the old
tree again, we will send the brandy away."

"Certainly," said Todd.

The brandy was soon, in some mysterious manner, disposed of, and then
the cart was stopped at the door of a little country-looking inn, the
landlord of which seemed to have a perfect understanding with the two
men belonging to the Lively William.

"Now," said one of them to Todd, "as you have no objection to go on
board at once, we will put you there."

"Objection?" cried Todd. "My objection is to remain on land. I beg that
you will let me feel that I am on the deck of your vessel, as quickly as
possible."

"That will do. This way."

They led him down a narrow lane with tall hedges upon each side, and
then across a straggling mangy-looking field or two, such as are to be
found on the banks of the Thames, and on the northern coasts of some
portions of England, the Isle of Wight in particular, and then they came
at once to the bank of the river.

A boatman hailed them, and upon their making signs to him that his
services were required, he pulled in to the shore; and Todd, with his
two new friends, were in a few moments going through the water to the
vessel.

The Lively William did not look particularly lively. It was a
slatternly-looking craft, and its black, dingy hull presented anything
but an inviting appearance. The genius of dirt and neglect seemed to
have taken possession of the vessel, and the nearer Todd got to it, the
less he liked it; but still it was a means of his escaping, and had it
been ten times a more uncomfortable-looking abode than it was, he would
have gladly gone on board it.

"Here we are!" cried one of the men.

The boat touched the side of the ship, and in another moment, Todd was
upon her deck.




                            CHAPTER CLXVII.
         TODD MEETS WITH A LITTLE ROUGH WEATHER IN THE CHANNEL.


Todd almost thought that he was saved, when he felt himself fairly upon
the deck of the Lively William. It seemed to him such a miracle to get
so far, that his faith in completely getting the better of his enemies
increased wonderfully.

"Oh, this is a relief," he said. "This is, indeed, a vast relief."

"What do you mean?" said one of the men of the cart to him, as he eyed
him keenly.

Todd was very anxious not to excite any suspicion that he was other than
what he had represented himself to be; so he answered quickly--

"I mean that it is a relief to get out of the small boat into the ship.
Ever so little a distance in a boat disagrees with me."

"Oh, that's it, is it?"

"Yes; and if you have no particular objection, I will go below at once.
I daresay the cabin accommodation is very good on board the Lively
William."

"Oh, quite wonderful!" said the captain. "If you will come with me
Mr.--a--a--what's your name?"

"Wilkins," said Todd.

"Oh, Mr. Wilkins. Well, if you will come with me, I shall have the very
great pleasure of showing you what a capital berth we can give you."

"Thank you," said Todd, and then, rather timidly, for the staircase down
which the captain dived seemed to Todd better adapted for poultry than
for human beings, he carefully followed his new friend.

The cabin of the Lively William was a woful place. Any industrious
house-wife would have sneered at it as a linen-cupboard; and if it had
been mentioned as a store-room in any establishment of pretentions, it
would have excited universal reprobation. It had a roof which nobbed
Todd's head if he attempted to stand upright; and the walls sloped to
the shape of the sides of the Lively William. The window was a square
hole, with a sliding shutter; and the furniture would have made the
dingiest broker's shop in London blush to own it.

"This is the state cabin," said the captain.

"Really?" said Todd.

"Why, don't you see it is by its size and looks? You won't often see in
a craft of this size a handsomer cabin than that of the Lively William."

"I dare say not," said Todd. "It will do very well for me, my friend.
When a man is travelling, he must not be very particular, as it is soon
over."

"That true; but now I want to say something to you, if you please,
that's rather particular. It's quite clear to me and my mate, that you
want to get out of England as quickly as possible. What you have done,
or what you haven't is not much matter to us, except, so far as that, we
daresay you have swindled the public to a tolerable tune. We don't mean
to take you for nothing."

"Nor do I wish you," said Todd. "Nothing can possibly be further from my
thoughts."

"Very good; then, in a word, we don't intend to do the thing unhandsome;
and you shall have all the capital accommodation that the Lively William
can give you to the Port of Havre for twenty pounds."

"Twenty pounds?"

"Yes. If you think it is too much, you may go on shore again, and there
is no harm done, you know."

"Oh, no--no. That is, I cannot help thinking it is a large price; and if
I were to say I thought otherwise, you would not believe me; but as I
really wish to go, and you say you will not take less, I must give it."

"Very good. That's settled, then. We shall be off at ebb-tide, and I
only hope we shall have good luck, for if we do, we ought to make Havre,
at all events, this time to-morrow."

"I hope we shall."

"Keep up your heart, and make yourself comfortable. Here's lots of the
most amusing books on this shelf. Let me see. Here is the 'Navy List'
for about ten years ago, and here's a 'Ready-reckoner,' and here is 'The
Exciseman's Vade Mecum,' and here is a 'Chart of the Soundings of
Baffin's Bay,' so you can't say you are out of books."

"Oh, how kind," said Todd.

"And you can order whatever you like to eat and drink, provided you
don't think of anything but boiled beef, biscuits, and brandy."

"Oh, I shall do well enough. Rest is now what I want, and a quick
voyage."

"Very good," said the captain. "You will not be at all interrupted here,
so you can lie down in this magnificent berth."

"What, on that shelf?"

"Shelf? Do you call the state berth of the 'Lively William,' a shelf!"

"Well--well, I dare say it is very comfortable, though the roof, I see,
is only eight inches or so from one's nose. I am very much obliged. Oh,
very!"

The captain now left Todd to himself and to his own thoughts, and as he
really felt fatigued, he got into the state berth of the Lively William,
which, to tell the truth, would have been very comfortable if it had
only been a little wider and a little longer, and the roof higher, and
not quite so damp and hard as it was.

But, after all, what where all these little disagreeables, provided he,
Todd, fairly escaped? If he once set his foot upon the shores of France,
he felt that, with the great continent before him, he should be free,
and he did not doubt for a moment getting in any capital a ready enough
market among the Jews for the watches and jewellery that he had about
him.

The ship as the tide washed slowly by it, moved to and fro with a
sluggish motion that rocked Todd to sleep, and he dropped off from a
perception of the world and all its cares.

How long he slept he knew not, but when he awoke all was darkness around
him, and the first attempt he made to move brought his head into violent
contact with the partition of his berth.

Then Todd felt that the ship was tossing upon the water, and he could
hear the dash and ripple of the sea pass her sides, while every now and
then a loud splash against the closed shutter of the cabin-window warned
him that that sea was not in one of its quietest moods.

"We are off!" cried Todd, in the exultation of his spirits at that fact.
"We are off, and I am all but free."

He attempted to get out of the berth, and he was materially assisted by
a roll of the sea that sent him to the other side of the cabin,
accompanied by a couple of stools and several articles that happened to
be lying loose upon the floor.

"Murder!" cried Todd.

"Hilloa!" cried a gruff voice from the companion-way. "Hilloa! What
now?"

"Oh, nothing," said Todd. "Nothing. Where are we now? Oh, dear, what a
thing it is to live in a cupboard that won't stand still."

The gleam of a lantern flashed in Todd's eyes, and the captain came
below with it swinging in his hand. He steadied himself against the
table, which was firmly screwed to the floor, and hung the lantern to a
short chain dependent from the cabin-roof.

"There," said the captain. "The chandelier is alight now, and you will
be able to see about you. Hilloa! Where are you now?"

"Why, I rather think I fell off the shelf," said Todd. "I beg your
pardon, the state berth, I mean."

"Then you had better turn in again, for we shall have, I think, a
squally sort of night rather. There are symptoms of a sou wester, and if
so, you will know a little of what weather is in the Channel."

"Where are we now?" said Todd, mournfully.

"About fifteen miles off the North Foreland, so we are tolerably quiet
just yet; but when we turn the head of the land, it's likely enough we
may find out what the wind means to say to us."

While the captain spoke, he tugged on a complete suit of waterproof
apparel, that seemed as thick and inflexible as so much armour covered
with tar, and then up he went upon deck again, leaving Todd to the
society of his own reflections and the chandelier.

The Lively William was going on just then with a flowing sheet, so that
she was carrying a tolerably even keel, and Todd was able to get up and
reach his berth; but at the moment that he laid hold of the side of it
to clamber in, the ship was tacked, and away went Todd to the opposite
side of the state-cabin with the rug in his grasp that did duty as a
counterpane in the berth.

"This will kill me," he groaned. "Oh, this will kill me. But yet--yet I
am escaping, and that is something. There will be a storm, but all ships
are not lost that encounter storms."

Todd made up his mind to remain where he was, jammed up against the
cabin partition, until the ship should right itself sufficiently for him
to make another effort to reach his berth.

After a few minutes he thought he would make the attempt.

"Now," he said. "Now, surely, I can do it. I will try. How the wind
howls, to be sure, and how the waves dash against the ship's sides, as
though they would stave in her timbers; but all is well, no doubt. I
will try again."

Very cautiously now Todd crept to his berth, and this time the winds and
the waves were kind enough only to move the ship so that he knocked his
head right and left a little, and managed then to scramble on to the
little inconvenient shelf, with its damp mattress that served for a bed.

"Ah," said Todd, "and there are people who might, if they liked, stay on
land all their lives, and yet they pretend to prefer the sea. There's no
accounting for tastes."

By dint of jerking it a little from under him, Todd propped the mattress
against the outer edge of the berth; so that provided the vessel did
lurch in that direction, it was not so likely to tumble him out, and
there he lay listening to the winds and the waves.

"A storm in the Channel!" he muttered. "From what that beast of a
captain said, it appears we are to have one. Well, well, I have
weathered many a storm on land, and now I must put up with one at sea."

At this moment, there was a tremendous bustle upon deck, and some orders
were issued that were quite unintelligible to Todd. There was, however,
a great flapping of canvas, and a rattling of chains.

The Lively William was weathering the South Foreland, and just going to
do battle with half a gale of wind in the Channel.

Up to this point, Todd had, with something approaching to resignation,
put up with the disagreeables about him; and upon the principle of the
song which states that--

    "When a man travels, he mustn't look queer,
    If he meets a few rubs that he does not meet here,"

he regarded his position with philosophy; but now there came over him a
dreadful sensation. A cold clammy dew burst out upon his face--all
strength fled from his limbs, and with a deep groan, Todd began to feel
the real horror of sea sickness.

Nothing can be like sea sickness but death, and nothing can be like
death but sea sickness. Todd had never suffered from that calamity
before; and now that it came upon him, in all its aggravated horrors, he
could not believe that it was a mere passing indisposition, but
concluded that he must have been poisoned by the captain of the ship,
and that his last hour was come.

And now Todd would fain have made a noise, and called for help. He would
have liked to fire one of his pistols in the face of that captain,
provided he could but have got him to the side of his berth; but he had
not strength left to utter a word above a whisper; and as for moving his
hand to his pockets to get out his fire-arms, he could not so much as
lift a finger.

All Todd could do was to go on, and to get each moment worse and worse
with that awful sensation of sickness, which resembles the sickness of
the soul at parting from its mortal house, to which it had clung so
long.

The wind howled upon the deck and through the cordage of the vessel--the
spray dashed over her bulwarks, and each moment the storm increased in
fury.




                            CHAPTER CLXVIII.
               TODD GETS A WORLD OF MARITIME EXPERIENCE.


The idea that he was poisoned grew upon Todd each moment, and to such a
man, it was truly terrific to think that he should come to so fearful an
end.

"Help! Help!" he groaned; but after all, it was only a groan and not a
cry--not that that mattered; for if he had had the lungs of ten men all
concentrated in his own person, and had so been able to cry out with a
superhuman voice, it would have been most completely lost amid the roar
of the wind, and the wild dashing of the waves.

The storm was certainly increasing.

"Oh, this sickness!" groaned Todd. "Oh, dear--oh, dear!"

At the moment that he was so bad that, in his want of experience of what
sea sickness really was, he thought every moment would be his last, he
heard some one coming down into the cabin, and one of the crew rolled
rather than walked into it.

"Help!" said Todd; "oh, help!"

"You go to the d--l!" said the man. "The captain is washed overboard,
and we are all going to the bottom, so I am one who likes to take a
little spirits with him to qualify the water that one may be obliged to
swallow. That's it. Steady, craft, steady."

Practised as this man no doubt was in the art of keeping his footing
upon an undulating surface, the pitching of the ship was so tremendous,
that even he was thrown to the cabin floor with considerable violence,
and had no easy task to rise again.

"No!" cried Todd, finding that positive fright lent him strength, "you
do not mean that?"

"Mean what, you old sinner?"

"That we shall be lost?"

The man nodded, and having opened a little cupboard, he brought out a
little bladder of spirits, and placing it to his lips, he drank a large
quantity, while he held by the cupboard door to keep himself from
falling.

"That will do," he said, as he dropped the bladder to the floor, and
then, after several unsuccessful efforts to do so, he scrambled upon
deck again.

"I, too, will drink," said Todd; "oh, yes, I will drink. I feel that if
anything will give me strength to bear the horrors of the night, it will
be my old and well-tried friend, brandy."

He cast his eyes upon the bladder of spirits that the sailor had thrown
to the floor. The spirit was slowly weltering out of the bladder, and
running in a stream across the cabin. As the odour of it saluted the
nose of Todd, he exclaimed,--

"It is brandy! I must and will have some!"

It was all very well for Todd to say that he must and would have some of
the brandy, but the difficulty of getting at it was one by no means easy
to surmount. He recollected what a job he had to get into his berth
again upon the occasion that he had got out of it before, and he dreaded
to place himself in a similar predicament; yet he found the vessel was
more steady, although the wind had not at all abated. Yes, it certainly
was more steady.

"I will try," said Todd. "I must have some."

With a determination, then, to get at the choice liquor, which was
wasting what Todd considered its sweetness upon the cabin floor, he slid
out of his little bed-place, and the ship giving a sudden roll in a
trough of the sea, he fell sprawling to the floor.

"Oh, I shall be killed!" he yelled. "This frightful voyage will be the
death of me! It is too terrible! Oh, Heaven! It is much too terrible!
Help!--mercy!"

Todd lay upon his back on the cabin floor, with his arms and legs
stretched out like a gigantic St. Andrew's cross. Something touched his
hand; it was the bladder of brandy, that, as the ship rolled, had moved
towards him. He clutched it with a feeling of despair, and brought it to
his lips.

With the exception of about half a pint, the brandy had made its way on
to the cabin floor; but it was strong, pure spirit--such brandy, in
fact, as smugglers might well reserve for their own private drinking; so
that the half pint was a very tolerable dose to take at once, and Todd
drained it to the last drop.

"Better!" he said; "oh, yes, I am better, now."

The fumes of the strong spirit mounted to his brain, and got the better,
for the time, of that frightful feeling of sickness which had been so
like death, that Todd had mistaken it for the last pangs that he was
likely to feel in this world.

"Oh, yes, I am better. How the wind howls now, and how the waves dash
the ship hither and thither. The deck, yes, the deck will be the place
for me. Oh, gracious! what was that?"

A loud crash, and a scream from some drowning wretches who had gone
overboard along with a mast, had broken upon his ears. Terror sat at his
very heart, and unable any longer to endure the frightful suspense of
being below, he tried, upon his hands and knees, to crawl upon the deck.

By no other mode could Todd have had the slightest hope or expectation
of reaching the deck of that fated vessel, but as he tried it, he did,
after a time, succeed in dragging himself up from the cabin. The sea was
washing over the deck, and for a few moments he could see no one. He
watched for a lull in the wind, and then he cried--

"Help! help! Oh, help!"

"Who's that?" shouted a voice.

"I!" said Todd.

"Go to blazes, then!"

"Oh, how kind!" groaned Todd. "How very considerate at such a time as
this, too."

The wind that had lulled for a few moments, now came with a frightful
gush, and Todd was glad to find the fragments of a quantity of cordage,
belonging to some of the top parts of the mast that had gone overboard,
to cling to till the gust had passed over the ship. Then there came some
tons of salt water over him, and he was nearly bereft of the power of
breathing.

"Oh, this is dreadful!" he said. "This is truly dreadful!"

"Hands off!" growled a voice. "Everybody for himself here. Hands off, I
say."

"What do you mean?" said Todd. "Do you speak to me?"

The voice had sounded close to him; and now again, with an angry tone,
it cried--

"Some one has got hold of my leg!"

"Oh, I dare say I have," said Todd, "but I didn't know. There, I have
left go. Who are you, sir, eh?"

"Oh! don't bother!"

"Well, but is there any danger?"

"Danger! I rather think there is. I suppose you are the love of a
passenger that the captain brought on board?"

"Yes, I am the passenger," said Todd. Why he should be called a love of
a passenger he did not exactly know; but he repeated his question
concerning the condition of the ship; and at the next lull of wind, for
it came now very strangely in gusts, he got a not very consolatory
reply.

"Why, as to danger," said the man, "that's rather past, I reckon; but,
perhaps, you are a landsman, and have not yet thoroughly made up your
mind."

"To what?"

"To be drowned, some day or night, as I have."

"Oh, no--no! Don't say that. Drowning is a very dreadful death, indeed.
I am sure it is."

"It may, or it may not be so," said the man, "but whether it is or not,
you and I are very likely soon to find out, for the old craft is going
at last."

"Going?"

"Yes. It's all up with her, and it will soon be all down with her,
likewise."

"But the ship goes easier through the sea."

"Oh, ah, she's filling, you see, and settling lower down in the water,
so you can't have quite so much pitching and tossing as you had an hour
ago, hardly."

"You can't mean that? You do not mean to tell me that there is no hope?
Oh, say not so!"

"Well, you can please yourself. I can tell you that the rudder has
gone.--We have not a mast standing. There is already five feet of water
in the hold, and we are drifting as hard as we can upon a lee-shore, so
if you can make anything satisfactory out of that, I leave you to do
it."

"Did you say we were drifting to shore?"

"A lee-shore."

"Oh, dear. I'm glad to hear it. Any shore will do for me, if I can but
get out of this confounded ship. What is that afar off? Is it a light?
Oh, yes, it is a light."

"It is. We are on the Sussex coast, somewhere, but I can't take upon
myself to say where; but it don't matter a bit, for we shall go to
pieces long before we reach the surf, and then in such a sea as this you
might as well try to swallow the Channel at a few draughts as to swim."

"But I can't swim at all."

"It don't matter a bit."

"But, my dear friend--"

"Hold your row--I am not your dear friend nor anybody else's, just now.
I tell you we shall be all drowned, and the best thing you can do, is to
take it as easy as possible. What can be the good of making a fuss about
it?"

This information was to Todd of so deplorable a character--for to none
is death so terrible as to the guilty--that he wept aloud and screamed
with terror as the spray of the sea struck him on the face, and the wind
roared and whistled over him.

"Oh, no--no!" he cried. "I cannot die yet--I must not. Spare me--spare
me! I am afraid to die!"

"Oh, you stupid," said the sailors. "That comes now of not having had a
proper sort of education. I make no doubt but your howling will pretty
soon be put an end to."

The situation of the ship was undoubtedly one of the greatest possible
peril. Having by the violence of the tempest lost all her masts, and
having had her rudder torn away, she was quite at the mercy of the winds
and the waves; and the set of the sea, as well as the direction of the
wind, carried her sometimes stern foremost and at other times head
foremost, and at times broadside, on to the coast of Sussex, upon which
the lights were at intervals dimly visible through the thick haze of the
storm.

It was truly a dreadful night, and such as fully merited the worst
apprehensions of the sailor, who had spoken so coolly to Todd of his
coming fate.

There was but one chance for those on board of the vessel, and that was
that the wind might abate sufficiently to enable some boats to put off
from the Sussex coast, provided they happened to be off a part of it
where such accommodation was to be had, and rescue those upon the wreck.
The lights that at intervals were visible, rather favoured the
supposition that it was a populous part of the coast that the
ill-starred struggling ship was driving fast upon.

Todd, however, did not know of that slender hope, and he gave himself up
to despair.

To a landsman nothing could exceed the real horrors of the scene on
board the ship, and, indeed, to one well accustomed to the sea, there
was quite enough to produce much terror. All but three persons connected
with the working of the ship had been washed overboard during the gale.
Both of the men with whom Todd had had the meeting in the cart were at
the bottom of the sea, and all their struggles and smugglings were over.
Todd did not know that, though.

It was quite evident to practical observers that the gale was abating,
for it no longer was so steady and so continuous a wind that blew with
fury over the fated ship; and although the sea still ran high, it did
not break over the vessel with such thundering impetuosity.

A very faint glow of daylight, too, began to come over the sea.

If Todd had had mind enough left to look about him now, he would have
seen that there was some food for hope, although not much; but the fact
was, that he had so thoroughly made up his mind that all was lost, that
he did not look for consolation.

How poor and how miserable appeared to him, at this moment, all his
struggles for wealth--that wealth, for the attainment of which he had
struggled through such gigantic crimes! How much happier, he could not
help thinking, it would have been for him to have gone on all his life
in plodding industry, than to endeavour as he had done to find a short
road to fortune, and only to end in finding a short one to death.

One of the seamen cried out in a loud voice--

"Save themselves who can! We shall be on shore, now, in less than five
minutes! We are all going now as safe as nuts!"




                             CHAPTER CLXIX.
              TAKES A PEEP AT SOME FRIENDS OF THE READER.


For a brief space, now, in order to connect more closely the events of
this narrative, we will leave Sweeney Todd to the perils and chances of
the disabled ship, and the storm in the Channel, while we conduct the
reader to the society of other persons, in whom it is to be presumed we
are largely interested.

In the most cheerful room of one of the prettiest houses at Brighton,
facing the beach upon the Esplanade, which is unrivalled, was a rather
select party.

That party consisted of old and well-tried friends of the reader, and
when we announce of whom it was composed, it will be seen that their
society is decidedly good.

First of all, there was Ben the beef-eater. Poor Ben had never before
been at a sea-coast town, and everything was consequently to him new and
strange. Yet he felt amazingly happy, because he was surrounded by those
whom he loved with all his heart; and if he had now and then a wandering
thought, it was to the animals in the Tower, to whom he was accustomed,
and who, no doubt, missed Ben quite as much, if not more, than he missed
them.

Then there was Tobias. Yes, Tobias was there, looking so fresh and so
well, notwithstanding that he knew Sweeney Todd was at large, that it
was quite a congratulation for those who felt that they were his friends
to see him. The rest of the party consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Ingestrie,
and Colonel Jeffrey and his young bride, and Mr. and Mrs. Oakley, so
that there was really quite an assemblage in that room.

The colonel holds a letter in his hands, and is speaking, while all eyes
are turned upon him.

"Yes," said the colonel, "this letter is from Sir Richard Blunt, and I
will read it to you, if you will be so good as to listen to it."

"Oh, yes--yes," said everybody.

"Very well. Here it is, then."

Upon this, the colonel read as follows:--

    "Craven Street, London.

    "MY DEAR COLONEL,--No news of Todd. We are sparing neither pains nor
    expense in tracking him; and it is an absolute impossibility that he
    should escape us long. Accident, I am convinced, much more than any
    design or luck upon his part, has had the effect as yet of keeping
    him out of our hands. But I do not think that it would be very
    difficult to count the time, in hours, between this and the period
    when he must be dead or a prisoner.

    "I hope that all our dear friends with you are quite well, and that
    they will banish from their minds all fear of the revenge of Todd.
    Nothing is more improbable than that he should dream of finding his
    way to the obscure little village where you are. I hope all of you
    are benefiting much by the health-giving breezes of the ocean.

    "With kind regard to all, I am, my dear colonel,

    "Yours very truly,

    "RICHARD BLUNT."

"Still at large!" said Mark Ingestrie, upon the conclusion of the
letter. "So the rascal is still at large?"

"Yes," said the colonel; "but you hear what the magistrate says, that he
will soon have him."

"Yes, but that is rather a hope than a certainty."

Tobias changed colour, and Johanna turned to him, saying, in a kind
tone--

"Nay, now, Tobias, you have nothing to fear from Todd. Did you not hear
what the letter said upon that point?"

"Yes oh, yes!" replied Tobias. "I will fear nothing while you are all so
good to me."

"I tell's you what it is," said Ben. "That 'ere fellow is for all the
world just like one of the wild beastesses as declines being tamed. We
had one once as got away one night, and he swam over the river, you
see."

"And did you catch him?" said Tobias.

"After a time, yes. Easy did it."

"Who did it, sir?"

"Easy--It ain't a who. It's a way of doing things. You take it easy, you
know."

"Oh, yes, I understand now."

"Well, I went arter the fellow, and traced him up and down the streets
on the Surrey side, till I got him into a court where there was no
thoroughfare, and then I nabbed him."

"And he did no mischief?"

"None to signify. He settled a couple of old women and five or six
children, that was all."

Tobias shuddered, and the colonel said--

"I cannot but be surprised that Sir Richard has not yet found out the
retreat of Todd, and my own opinion is that he is dead."

"It is more than probable," said Ingestrie; "I have thought so several
times. When he found that there was no hope for him, and that he was in
a state of destitution, or something near it, which must be the fact, it
is likely enough that he has laid violent hands upon himself, and his
body may not be found for a long time."

"Well," said the colonel "let us get out for a stroll upon the beach. It
will be dark in another half hour, and as there is no moon to-night, we
shall not like to remain out."

They all rose upon this suggestion, but the evening dropped so rapidly,
and several black clouds piled themselves up in the sky, that Ingestrie,
after stepping out upon the balcony and looking at the weather, came
back again, and said--

"You had better remain in, all of you. I have seen enough of the sea,
and heard enough of the wind, to prophesy that this will be a rough
night in the Channel."

"Will there be a storm, Mark?" said Johanna.

"There will be a very good imitation of one, you may depend, if not a
real one."

"If there should be," said the colonel, "you will be rather surprised,
for, I can tell you, that a gale off this coast is no joke. You would be
truly amazed at the violence with which a regular south-western sets
upon this shore."

"I can easily imagine it," said Mark Ingestrie. "See, it darkens every
minute, and what an angry look that small cloud right away in the
horizon has."

"It has, indeed," said Johanna, as she clung to the arm of her husband.
"Do you think, Mark, that any poor souls will be wrecked to-night?"

"Probably enough; but the coast of Suffolk and the Irish Channel will be
the worst. It will be child's play here in comparison."

A strange booming noise came across the sea at this moment, and the
colonel cried out--

"Is that a gun, or is it thunder?"

"Thunder!" said Ingestrie; "hark! there it is again! There is a storm
some forty or fifty miles off. It's right away in the German Ocean, most
likely; but only look now even, dark as it is getting, how the sea is
rising, and what an odd seething condition it is getting into."

They all stood on the balcony and looked out towards the sea. The
surface of it was to the eye only undulating quite gently, and yet,
strange to say, it was rapidly covering with white foam, and that from
no perceptible cause, for as yet the wind was a mere trifle.

"How is that?" said Johanna. "The sea is not very rough, and yet it is
all white."

"It is the worst sign of bad weather," said Ingestrie. "The commotion
has begun below the surface in some mysterious way, and that white foam
which you see each moment rapidly increasing is cast up; but soon the
whole surface will begin to heave, and then you will find out what a
storm is."

"We may hear it," said the colonel; "but if this darkness continues, I
doubt very much if we shall be able to bring any other of our senses
into requisition upon the occasion."

"Hush!" said Tobias, "what is that?"

He held up his hand as he spoke, and as they were then all profoundly
still, a strange, low, wailing sound came over the water.

"What can it be?" said Johanna.

"Only the gale," smiled Ingestrie. "It's coming, now. That's the sigh of
the wind over the water. You will soon hear it, I can tell you. Now,
only notice how still everything is. There, look how that bird flies in
a terrified manner close to the ground. It knows that the gale is
coming. The sound you heard with intense listening, you will be able now
to hear without listening at all. It will force itself upon your notice.
Hilloa! There it comes! Look at the sea!"

A few miles out from the shore the sea seemed to rise like a wall of
water, tipped with a ridge of foam, and then down it came with such a
splash and a roar, that it was plainly heard on the shore, and then, in
a moment or two, the impulse so given communicated itself to the whole
of the sea, and it was fearfully agitated. With a roar and a shriek, the
gale swept on, and from that moment conversation was almost out of the
question.

The ladies of the party were glad to get into the house again, and in a
little time the colonel and Ingestrie found it anything but comfortable
to remain in the balcony; and as the night had fairly set in, they
likewise retreated.

The gale lasted the whole of the evening, and when our friends retired
to rest it seemed to be rather increasing than otherwise. It was still
dark when Ingestrie was awakened from his sleep by a knocking at the
door of his room.

"Hilloa!" he said; "who's there?"

"It is I," said Colonel Jeffrey. "Will you get up, Mr. Ingestrie? It is
nearly morning, and they say a ship is going down about a couple of
miles off the coast."

"I'm coming!" cried Ingestrie, as he sprang out of bed and dressed
himself with amazing rapidity. "If it does go down, it will not be the
only one that finds the bottom of the Channel to-night."

When he reached the lower part of the house, he found the colonel and
Ben waiting for him.

"This has been an awful night," said the colonel.

"Well, I don't know," said Ingestrie; "for I have been fast asleep."

"Asleep!" cried Ben; "I couldn't get a wink of sleep but once, and then
I dreamt I was a mermaid. Why, what with the howling of the wind, which
is a great deal worse than our lioness when she wants her knuckle of
beef, and the washing of the water, I couldn't rest at all."

"The voice of the wind," said Ingestrie, "always has the effect of
sending me fast asleep. But you said something of a ship in distress,
did you not?"

"Yes. They say that in the offing there is a large ship, and that she is
evidently water-logged, and must go down, unless she drives ashore."

"The deuce she must! Let us run down to the beach at once, and see what
we can do."

With this, they all three left the house, and made the best of their way
to the beach along the execrable shingle of the Brighton coast. It was
far from being an easy task to proceed, for the wind was terrific, and
now and then, when they did reach the beach, there came a sea washing
in, that drenched them with spray.

A crowd of people had collected upon the coast; some were holding up
lanterns on the end of poles, and many were prepared with ropes to cast
to the aid of any of the crew of the vessel that might swim to the
shore.

"There she is," said Ingestrie; "I see her! It's a small craft, and she
is a wreck already."

"She must go down, then?" said the colonel.

"I don't know. She is drifting in shore, but evidently quite
unmanageable. She is a sheer hulk. If they had the least control over
her, they could run her in in ten minutes on to the beach; but she is
going about like a log."

"Then, she may go down in deep water yet?"

"In truth, she may."

"Here are plenty of boats?"

"Boats? My dear friend, there never was a boat yet that could live in
such a sea as this. It is out of the question. You find no one makes the
attempt, and I am quite sure that among the hardy fishermen of this
place, there are many would do so if it were at all practicable; but it
is most certain that death in the surf would be the result."

"I fear it would, indeed."

"There she goes!" cried a voice.

"Eh?" said Ben, turning round and round, "I don't see anybody in the
female line."

"The ship!" cried Ingestrie. "They mean the ship. But she is not gone
yet. There she is, still. Do you see her, colonel, like a tub upon the
water? There, right away, by yon light-coloured cloud."

"I do--I do!"

The ship had not gone down. She had only settled for a moment or two in
the trough of the sea; and it was now quite evident that the wreck was
rapidly drifting towards the shore, so that there was an expectation
that it might strike in shallow water, and so give the crew a chance of
escape from death.




                             CHAPTER CLXX.
               MARK INGESTRIE RESCUES A SHIPWRECKED MAN.


The scene now upon the beach at Brighton was one of the most exciting
that can well be imagined. No one who has not stood upon a beach under
such circumstances, and seen a brave ship battling with the waters, can
have any real idea of it.

Language is too weak to paint the feelings of such a conjunction of
circumstances. It is so hopeless a thing to stand upon the shore, and
listen to the wind roaring in its fury, and to see the waves dashing in
mad gyrations hither and thither, while a few frail and creaking timbers
only keep some poor mortals from sinking into the sea, which, like a
seething cauldron, seems ready to devour them, that it is enough to
unman the stoutest heart.

No wonder that persons with kindly sympathies and gentle feelings
towards human nature, such as Colonel Jeffrey and Mark Ingestrie
undoubtedly had, should suffer acutely to see others so suffer.

If there had been any likelihood of a boat reaching the ill-fated ship,
Ingestrie would have been the first to propose such a measure, and the
first, with hand and heart, to carry it out; but there was no such
likelihood. Our friend had seen too much of service afloat, and was by
far too good a sailor to suppose for an instant that any boat could live
for a cable's length from the shore in such a sea as that!

"Is it quite impossible to aid them?" said the colonel.

"Quite," said Ingestrie, "unless they strike close in shore. Then,
something may, perhaps, be done."

"Ay, sir," said a weather-beaten boatman who stood close to Ingestrie,
"you are right there. If they only drift a little further in, and are
still afloat, when the keel touches ground they may get ashore some of
them."

"No boat," said the colonel, "could reach her?"

"Boat, sir! My little bit of a craft will do now and then things that
one ought not to expect, from anything in the shape of a boat; but that
surf would toss it up like a piece of cork, and it would only be making
bad worse to draw a few brave fellows from land here, because others are
going down at sea."

"You are right," said Ingestrie. "Do you happen to know the craft out
yonder?"

"No, sir. She is so swept clear, that it would be hard to know her if
she were one's own; but I don't think she belongs to this port at all."

"The gale is going down a bit."

"It is, sir. Don't you see it's coming in puffs like--It won't last much
longer."

"Gone!" cried a hundred voices at once.

"No--no!" cried Ingestrie. "Don't say that."

A wild shriek came across the surface of the water, and the ship that
had been doing battle with the winds and the waves, disappeared.

"Oh, this is, indeed, terrible," said Colonel Jeffrey. "It is too
horrible!"

"It is, indeed!" cried Ingestrie. "There is but one chance now of doing
any good, and that is in case any poor fellow should get washed on shore
through the surf with a few sparks of life in him. Hilloa, my men! Get
out your tackle, and let us look out for the survivors. Some one may try
to fight for it yet."

The sailors and boatmen upon the beach were charmed with the idea that
they might be able to do some good in this way; and as they soon found
that Ingestrie knew perfectly well what he was about, they listened to
his orders, in the course they should take, and obeyed them with
alacrity and skill.

He had some of the long line connected with the fishing-nets, and to
which corks were attached, cast out into the sea by the aid of little
kedge anchors, so that the waves did not bring them back again, and as
the other ends of the lines were held firmly on the shore, any one might
be struggling for life amid the surf, would have had a good chance of
preservation by laying hold of one of those lines.

"We may do some good," said Ingestrie, as he tied one end of one of the
ropes round his waist.

"What are you about?" said the colonel.

"Oh, nothing. Do not fancy I am going to throw myself into the waves.
But if I should chance to see any poor soul struggling for life, it
would take something to prevent me from going after him."

"But think of yourself."

"Oh, I cannot come to any sort of harm, you know. They will easily be
able to haul me on shore, you perceive, by the other end of the rope,
and I have been rather used to fighting my way through the waves."

"Heaven speed you, if the occasion for your doing so again should arise,
my gallant friend. Far be it from me to dissuade you against such an
attempt; and I am sure that even she who loves you best of all, would be
the first to encourage you."

"Of course she would."

"All lost, sir," said a sailor.

"No, don't say that!" cried Ingestrie. "Where is that night glass that
some one had here a little while ago?"

"Here, sir."

Ingestrie placed the telescope to his eye, and looked fixedly in the
direction of the wreck. He then handed it to the sailor, and said--

"Who has a good hold of the end of this rope that is about me?"

"All's right, sir. There will be no lack of hands with that. But you
don't mean to go through the surf, sir?"

"I see a human being struggling with the foam, and from his actions he
is no swimmer. I cannot stand here and see him die, while there is a
chance of saving him. Hark you! Don't wait for me to sing out, but use
your own eyes, and begin to pull in the moment you see me close with
him. The dawn is coming rapidly, and you will see better each moment.
Now, I'm off."

"For the love of Heaven be careful!" cried the colonel.

Ingestrie smiled, and then dashed into the roaring, bubbling surf of the
sea, with the rope round his waist.

[Illustration: Mark Ingestrie Risks His Own Life To Save Todd.]

A loud cheer burst from the throats of all present, as the heroic action
was witnessed. If anything had been wanting, which it was not, to urge
the gallant Mark Ingestrie on his brave and noble adventure, that cheer
would have done it; but amid the roar and din of the water about his
ears, it is doubtful if he could have heard it at all, or any noise of
ten times the intensity.

The figure in the sea, that had attracted the attention of Ingestrie,
was now plainly perceived by the colonel, and by all who were upon the
beach. To the practised eyes of the sailors then present, it was evident
that the body must be lashed to some very buoyant substance, which
enabled it to keep afloat, not-withstanding the roll of the sea, and the
breaking of the waves over it. The person was evidently not swimming,
although, by the wash of the tide, and the set of the wind, he was being
driven into shore.

Mark Ingestrie felt that his only chance of getting through the surf was
to dive under it, and that manoeuvre he executed with a skill that few
could have commanded and to the admiration and delight of all the
spectators of his heroic conduct, he appeared outside the roaring edge
of the sea, quite able to swim gallantly towards the shipwrecked man.

As he had said, the dawn was coming fast now, so that there was no great
difficulty in seeing him, and in watching, with some degree of accuracy,
his movements.

"He will do it!" said the colonel.

"Do it?" said the sailor who had the first hold of the rope that was
round the body of Mark Ingestrie. "Do it? Of course he will. The man who
has the heart and hand to try these sort of things, always does them."

"I believe you are right, my friend," said the colonel.

"I know I am, sir. I have seen too much of this sort of thing, and if I
had not been a little out of sorts in my larboard leg, I should have
gone; but I'm not all right, you see, sir, so it won't do. Ah, there he
has him! It's all right enough--I told you so."

The progress of Ingestrie was watched by many eyes with the most intense
interest. Under no circumstances was distance so deceiving as at sea;
and although the black object in the water, which the practised eye of
Ingestrie had shown him, was a man, appeared to be only just without the
line of the surf, he (Ingestrie) knew that the distance was, in reality,
much greater, and that he would have a good swim through those troubled
waters before he could get within arm's-length of the shipwrecked
person. To be sure, as the body was drifting to the shore, he made
better progress, and the distance between him and it was diminished much
more rapidly than as if it had been stationary.

Colonel Jeffrey distinctly saw Ingestrie reach the body, at length, and
the sailor who had hold of the rope, likewise saw him, and he sung out--

"Now, pull away; but easy, my lads--a steady pull, and no jerking, or
you will hinder him instead of helping. That's it--easy now, easy."

"Ah!" said Ben, who had come down to the beach to see what was going on.
"Easy does everything, as I always said. Pray, Colonel Jeffrey, what
unfortunate animal is that you are dragging out of the water?"

"Don't you know, Ben?"

"Not I. But I suppose it is some poor half-drowned fellow from the
ship."

"It is that, as well, I hope; but the person who is with him, and who is
being hauled to the shore, is no other than our friend, Mr. Ingestrie."

"What, Johanna's husband?"

"The same."

"Oh, lor! oh, lor! I'm afraid easy won't do it then, and that my little
girl will be a widow. Give me hold of the rope. If pulling will do it,
I'll soon have him on shore again all right. The idea, now, of a man,
with the nicest young creature of a wife in the world, going into the
sea at the end of a rope, and covering himself all over with froth and
sea-weed! Oh, dear! oh, dear! It's truly dreadful, it is; and easy
certainly don't do it."

Ben would have lent his aid to pull the rope, but the colonel kept him
back, as it was not strength but skill and tact that in the process was
required, and the rope was in the hands of men who had both.

It was clear that Ingestrie had got hold of the floating object,
whatever it was, and that, as he was pulled into shore, he brought it
with him. When he reached the edge of the surf again, a quick pull
brought him at once through it, and a couple of the sailors, dashing
into the waters, got a hold of him, and drew him right up on to the
beach between them.

Half a dozen more brought to the shore the body of a man, tied to a
plank of wood.

Poor Mark was nearly exhausted. He was just able only to smile faintly
in answer to the colonel's anxious inquiries.

"He must be carried home," said the colonel. "Lend me some assistance,
my brave fellows, to do so."

"No--no!" Ingestrie managed just to say faintly. "Take him--take him!"

He pointed to the man whom he had rescued, and the colonel immediately
said,

"Make yourself easy about him, my dear friend. The sailors will carry
him to the house, and if the vital spark has not quite fled, you shall
have the pleasure of knowing that you have saved him. But it is yourself
that I wish to have got home."

"Can you walk?" said Ben.

"I--don't think--I will try."

Poor Ingestrie did try, but he was really so completely exhausted by the
efforts he had made, that it was quite evident that he was unequal to
the task of walking along the shingle.

"Give it up," said Ben. "You can't do it."

"He must be carried," said the colonel.

"To be sure he must," said Ben; "and this is the way to do it."

With these words, Ben did not hesitate another moment, but taking Mark
Ingestrie in his arms as though he had been an infant, he walked over
the pebbly beach with him as easily as though he had been only a very
ordinary kind of bundle to carry.

As he went on, it occurred to Ben that Johanna might see him carrying
her husband home, and might imagine that some fearful accident had
happened to him, so, by way of putting an end to that idea, he kept
crying out as he got near the house--

"Here we are! All alive and kicking! It's only a joke. All alive--alive
O! Here we are! it's only a joke! All alive! alive! and ready for
feeding time!"




                             CHAPTER CLXXI.
                 A RATHER IMPORTANT DISCOVERY IS MADE.


The man, who appeared to be the only one at all--dead or alive--who was
preserved from the wreck of the ship off the coast of Sussex, was
carried to the house where all our friends were staying, and being taken
into the kitchen, was there placed in the care of a couple of medical
men, who were hastily sent for, and who quickly restored animation to
the seemingly drowned person. It was reported to Ingestrie that the
stranger was all right, and as he himself had by that time thoroughly
recovered, and had changed his saturated apparel for a dry suit, the
news gave him the liveliest satisfaction.

"Well," he said, "it is something that I have not gone through that
tremendous surf in vain."

"Yes, Mark," said Johanna, with the tears starting to her eyes, "but we
must, indeed, get away from the sea-coast, and then you cannot be
tempted to expose your life in such adventures. Only think of what might
be the consequences!"

"Yes," said the colonel. "It is hardly fair, although, at the moment,
one cannot help admiring the heroism of the act."

"I don't know how it can be avoided," said Ingestrie. "If you see a poor
fellow struggling for his life, and you feel that you may save him at a
little risk to yourself, it seems a strange thing not to do it."

"It does," said old Mr. Oakley, "and I should be the last to say no to
the noble impulse; only if there are to be many storms off his coast, I
shall second the resolution of Johanna that you ought to live somewhere
else."

"And so shall I," said Arabella.

"And I," said Tobias.

"He's better, they say," cried Ben, popping his head into the room. "The
doctors say he is better, and that, after he has had a sleep, he will be
all right."

"The sailor belonging to the ship you mean?" said the colonel, "What
sort of a person is he, Ben?"

"Haven't seen him yet, so can't tell; but they have made up a good fire
in the back kitchen, and he is lying on a sofa there, and going to
sleep, and the doctor says it will do him no good to disturb him, or
bother him by talking."

"It certainly will not," said Ingestrie. "It matters very little to us
who he is, poor fellow. He is saved--that is the principal thing."

"Yes," said Johanna, "that is everything; and, at all events, Mark,
there is one human being who through life, let his position and
prospects be what they may, must look upon you as his friend and
preserver."

"Ah!" said poor Tobias, "We should all be very happy if Sweeney Todd
were but in the hands of justice. It is very strange why I tremble so
to-day at the thought of him; and I did not tremble yesterday."

"You have no occasion to tremble to-day, nor yesterday either, Tobias,"
said Arabella. "Remember how surrounded you are by your best friends,
and remember, likewise, that, after all, Todd is but a man, and by this
time he must be but a poor, weak, dispirited one, and much more intent
upon devising means for his own safety, than in carrying out his
revenges."

"If, indeed, he lives," said the colonel.

"Just so," said Ingestrie. "My opinion will very much incline to the
idea that he is dead, if Sir Richard Blunt does not very shortly get
some news of him."

"That will be a pity," said Tobias, "unless it can be proved past all
dispute, for while it continues only a likely thing, the dread of him
will still cling to my heart, and I shall never be happy."

"Nay, Tobias," said the colonel, "you must pluck up a spirit. The
probability is now, that Sweeney Todd, let him be where he may, is much
more afraid of meeting you than you can possibly be of meeting him."

"I wish I thought so," said Tobias. "But only look now how sweetly the
sun is peeping out on the water after the storm there. This is very
beautiful."

Tobias walked to the window; and his praise of the beauty of the morning
caused the breakfast-table to be, in a very few minutes, completely
deserted. To be sure, the praise that the imaginative boy had lavished
upon the young day, was by no means misapplied; for a more lovely day
than that which broke over Brighton, after that terrific gale in the
Channel, could not be conceived. It seemed as if the good genii of
earth, sea, and sky, were striving to banish from the minds of all the
inhabitants of that place the recollections of the frightful storm that
had made the world dismal and terrific.

"Indeed, it is lovely," said Johanna, "Who, now, to look at that placid
sheet of water, with scarce a ripple upon its surface to reflect the
sunbeams, would think that only a few hours ago, it presented a scene of
such fury that it was a shuddering terror to look upon it?"

"And yet," said Ingestrie, "it is these varieties that make the great
world beautiful."

"Not a doubt of it; but they require more stern minds than mine, Mark,
to stand them."

The party now, finding that the day was so delightful, sallied out to
the beach to make some inquiry among the sailors and boatmen, concerning
the damage that the gale had done. The moment Mark Ingestrie appeared
with his friends, he was recognised as the person who had performed the
gallant exploit of going through the surf to the rescue of the
shipwrecked man, and he became immediately the observed of all
observers.

This sort of homage was at once flattering and embarrassing to Johanna.
She felt proud that it was her husband who was entitled to so much
popular consideration and respect, and yet, with her natural timidity of
disposition, she shrank from sharing it with him.

Some eager inquiries were made of Ingestrie now, regarding the man he
had saved, and it was a great gratification to him to be enabled to
state that he was doing well, although he had not himself seen him since
he grappled with him in the water, and brought him to the beach.

A few fragments only of the wreck had been washed to the shore, but
nothing that could in any way enable them to identify the vessel; so
that that was a species of information that must come from the man who
had been saved, whenever he should be able to go through the fatigue of
an interview with his friend and his deliverer.

After an hour's stroll upon the beach, the party, at a slow pace,
returned to the house they had hired during their stay at Brighton. The
moment they got to the door, the colonel's servant appeared with his
horse, which he had ordered to be ready for him at twelve o'clock.

"Just walk him up and down," said the colonel, to the man; "I shall be
ready in a few minutes. Hilloa! my friend, Hector, are you here?"

The dog was with the horse, and the man said, touching his hat--

"We were half a mind, sir, to let Hector loose last night during the
storm, for he is a famous fellow in the water; but knowing how much you
valued him, we were afraid to do so."

"I am glad you didn't," said the colonel. "You were quite right to keep
him shut up. I would not have him come to any mischief for any money."

The colonel entered the house, and when he and all his friends had got
into the drawing-room, they sent for a servant to inquire how the poor
wrecked man was getting on; and after a little time, one of the
domestics of the house came to say that he was up and sitting, dressed,
in the front kitchen, and would be happy to see, and to thank those who
had saved him from death in the raging sea.

"Shall we have him up here?" said the colonel.

"Yes, if you please," said Ingestrie; "and, I daresay, a glass of wine
won't hurt him, while he tells us the name of his ship, poor fellow, and
who and what he is."

"Certainly not," said Mr. Oakley. "I will get out the decanter."

"Allow me, my dear," said Mrs. Oakley. "You know you always break every
glass that you interfere with."

"Oh, stuff!"

"But I say, Mr. Oakley, that you do."

"Easy does it," said Ben, in his deepest bass voice. "Easy does it, I
say--Easy!"

"How cold I am," said Tobias.

"Cold, Tobias!" said Ingestrie. "My good fellow, we will have a fire if
you are cold."

"Oh, no--no. Not on my account, Mr. Ingestrie, I shall be better soon;
but I feel as if something were going to happen. My heart beats so
fearfully, and at the same time, I shake as if--as if--I know not what."

"Give him a glass of wine," said Ingestrie to Johanna.

Tobias took the glass of wine, and it evidently did him some good; but
yet he looked ill and uneasy. Orders were given that the shipwrecked man
should be shown up to the drawing-room, for they were all curious to
know to what ship he had belonged, and how many had fallen victims to
the frightful gale that had made the vessel such a complete wreck.

"He is coming, poor fellow," said the colonel. "I hear his footsteps on
the stairs. He comes slowly. No doubt he is weak yet."

"Poor fellow!" sighed Johanna. "Have the wine ready to give him at once,
mother. It will put some heart into him. What must be his feelings
towards you, Mark?"

"Come now," said Ingestrie; "don't plague him, any of you, about his
being saved by me, and all that sort of thing. Just say nothing about
it. Sailors are no great orators, at the best of times, and if he begins
to make a speech about his gratitude, you may depend he will never get
to the end of it."

"Yes; but he ought to know," said Mrs. Oakley, "who he owes his life to,
under providence."

"Hem!" said Ben. He never liked to hear Mrs. Oakley begin to use
religious phrases, as they had a tendency to remind him of the late Mr.
Lupin.

The door of the drawing-room opened, and all eyes were eagerly bent in
that direction. A servant came in, and said--

"The poor man is here, if you please. Is he to come in, now? He seems
rather timid."

"Oh, yes," said Ingestrie, "let him come in, by all manner of means,
poor fellow. He and I made acquaintance in the sea, and we ought to be
good friends, now."

A tall, gigantic figure marched three paces into the room.

"_Todd!_" shouted Tobias. "_It is Todd!_"

It was Sweeney Todd! With one glance round the room, he recognised an
enemy in every face. With a perfect yell of fear and rage, he turned,
and dashed down the staircase. The servant who had conducted him up to
the drawing-room, and whom he met in his way, he knocked down with one
blow, and in another moment he was in the street. The colonel's horse
was close to the door. Todd felled the man who held it by a blow on the
top of the head, that took him so suddenly, he could not guard against
it, and then springing upon the horse, the murderer raised another wild
unearthly kind of shout, and set off at a gallop.

[Illustration: Todd Seizes The Colonel's Horse, Mounts, And Makes
Another Escape.]

So sudden--so totally unexpected, and so appalling had been the presence
of Todd in the drawing-room, that if a spectre had appeared among the
people there assembled, and they had had no possible means of escaping
from the belief that it was a spectre, they could not have been more
confounded than they were upon this occasion.

Poor Tobias, after uttering the exclamation that we have recorded, fell
flat upon the floor. Ben swung backwards in his chair, and went with a
tremendous crash right away into a corner. Ingestrie and the colonel
rose together, and impeded each other in their efforts to follow Todd.
Johanna, shrieking, clung to Ingestrie, and Arabella made a vain attempt
to delay the colonel.

"By Heaven he is off!" cried the colonel, as he heard the clatter of the
horse's feet.

"No!" shouted Ingestrie; "it cannot be!"

"Easy does it," said Ben, from the corner into which he had fallen.
"Easy--Easy!"

"Johanna, unhand me, I implore you," cried Mark Ingestrie. "Do you wish
the murderer to be lost sight of? Come on, colonel--you and I must
engage in this pursuit. God of Heaven! the idea of me saving Todd from
the waves!"

The colonel and Ingestrie seized their hats, and rushed down the stairs,
tumbling over the servant in the hall. The next object they came across
was the groom who had had charge of the horse. They found him sitting on
the pavement, looking as confused as possible.

"Which way has he gone?" cried the colonel.

"The--the man. Round that corner, and Hector has gone after him, like
mad, sir. Oh, dear!"

"Hector? Then he will be taken, for I will back Hector to hang upon him
like grim death. Come with me to the nearest stable, Ingestrie, and let
us get horses! Come--come!"




                            CHAPTER CLXXII.
                THE PURSUIT OF TODD ON THE LONDON ROAD.


The whole of these proceedings had really come with such a rush upon the
senses of Mark Ingestrie, that he might well have been excused had he
not been able to act with the energy that he did; but the strong desire
to capture Sweeney Todd, and so to put an end to all the doubts and
fears that were felt concerning him, upon the parts of those to whom he
was fondly attached, roused the young man to action.

Colonel Jeffrey was cooler than Ingestrie in the affair; but he was not
a whit the less determined upon that account.

In the course of seven or eight minutes at the outside, they were both
mounted, and as there were plenty of people who could tell them in which
direction Todd had gone, they were soon upon his track.

[Illustration: Todd Pursued By The Colonel And Mark.]

Todd had taken the London Road, and had really got a considerable
distance onward, and if he had been, which he was far from being, a good
horseman, there is very little doubt but that he would either have led
his pursuers a long distance, or possibly escaped them altogether, for
the animal that he rode was one that in skilful hands would have done
wonders.

It was no small aggravation to Colonel Jeffrey to be pursuing his own
horse, while he himself was mounted upon a hack that was by no means
equal to it.

Skill, however, will get more work out of an indifferent steed than
absolute ignorance will achieve from a first-rate one, so that after
getting to the top of a rising ground about three miles out of Brighton,
our friends saw Todd not three quarters of a mile in advance, coasting a
little water-course to find a safe place to cross at. Notwithstanding
the distance was great, the colonel knew his own horse in a moment.

"Come on, Ingestrie," he said. "There he is!"

"Are you sure?"

"Quite. That's the rascal. Ah, there he goes through the water! The
horse will carry him well across it, but he did not know that, so it is
a bold step. On--on!"

They had let their horses come rather easy up the ascent, for the
colonel was too good a horseman to break down his steed, merely with an
useless burst, when there might be a chase before it of some twenty or
thirty miles yet, for all he knew to the contrary; and so, as the
country, from the hill-top, sloped very gently right away to the north,
they got on wonderfully, and without giving the cattle too much to do.

To keep Todd in sight was everything now, for in that case they felt
certain that they must eventually have him. From his actions, it did not
seem that he was at all aware of his being so closely pursued, but
suddenly they saw him pull up on an eminence and turn his horse's head
in the direction of Brighton. They saw him shade his eyes with his
hands, and take a long look, and then by the sudden start that he gave,
and which caused the horse to plunge in alarm, they knew that he had
seen them, and that from that moment he would strain every nerve to
escape.

The slight pause that Todd had made in order to look back and see if he
were pursued or not, had given his foes the advantage of about one
hundred yards, for they had pushed on during that pause with renewed
vigour; but now bending low in the saddle, it was evident that he was
doing his best to urge the colonel's horse onwards, and it went like the
wind.

"There he goes, colonel!" cried Ingestrie. "That pace will do for us
pretty quickly. He is leaving us behind fast enough."

"He is, by Heaven, and if he gets to a turn of the road, there is no
knowing what fox-like trick he may play us. On--on, Ingestrie! There is
no help for it, but to do our very best."

For another minute and a half, now, not a word was exchanged between the
friends. The road did take a turn, and for some time they were out of
all sight of Todd, but the moment they themselves got round the elbow of
the road, the colonel raised a shout of gratification, and then cried--

"There he is! He has had a fall. On--on!"

Todd was in the middle of the road-way trying to mount the horse, from
which it would appear as though he had been thrown, for the creature was
rearing in evident alarm, and swerving every time that Todd put his foot
in the stirrup. Maddened, then, at the idea that each moment his foes
were gaining upon him, Todd made such a vigorous effort to mount, that
he succeeded in doing so, although both his feet were out of the
stirrups. He clung to the horse with desperation, and kicked it
violently with his heels, striking it at the same time on the head
violently with his clenched fist.

The animal was driven half crazy by such unusual treatment, and after
plunging and rearing for a few seconds, set off at such a gallop as no
one could have believed any mortal horse could have achieved.

"Off again!" cried the colonel. "I could have shot him, I think,
Ingestrie, just now."

"Then, why, in the name of all that's tantalising, did you not do so?"

"Why, to tell the truth, I was afraid of hitting the horse. If it had
kept still for a moment, it would have been all right; but I could not
be certain of my aim as it was. Now, mind, we must have him, and I think
he begins to find that fact out."

Certainly, if any judgment could be come to, by the desperate manner in
which Todd rode, it would appear as though he considered his career as
all but at an end. Oh, how at that time he roared and raved that he had
no fire-arms, by the aid of which he might turn and cope with his foes!
If he had only had but a pair of pistols, he thought that not only would
he have escaped, but escaped likewise with the intense gratification of
destroying two of his enemies; but, then, he was totally unarmed, and if
they should succeed in coming up with him, he had not even the means of
self-destruction about him.

Indifferent horseman, however, as Todd was, even he could not help
seeing that he was far better mounted than those who were pursuing him
and so, from that circumstance, he gathered just a faint hope that he
might distance them by knocking up their steeds. From what he had
already experienced of the mettle of the horse he had got hold of so
providentially for him, he felt certain that if his pursuers were
obliged to come to a pause only for a quarter of an hour, he should be
able to place such a distance between him and them, that he might
consider himself to be in comparative, if not absolute safety.

To accomplish such a result, then, he felt that his plan was to keep
right on within their sight, and let them sooner be tired out by the
unwonted exertions that they would compel their inefficient cattle to
make, with the vain hope of overtaking him. But Todd had to do with a
man, in Colonel Jeffrey, who was quite equal to such an emergency.

A stern chace is a long chace, but an escape even at considerable speed
is a weary affair, with a foe directly behind; and the colonel
calculated that allowing Todd all the difference in speed between the
horses, it would be yet a long distance before he could throw them back
so far that they would not be in a position to take advantage of any
accident that might occur to him.

"Cool and easy, Ingestrie," he said; "it's a question of time, now. The
longer we can keep our horses on their legs, the better for us. Don't
urge your horse too much."

Todd had now reached a very wild and romantic part of the road. It wound
through a cutting in a mass of chalk, which, as it would be impossible
to surmount, and a tedious thing to go round, had been very roughly
levelled to the width of a road, and the sides were covered with rank
vegetation, for successive rains had washed down upon the face of the
chalk a facing of loam, from which had sprung up gigantic weeds, and
innumerable wild flowers.

Todd had got about half way through this place, when, from the other end
of it, there came a party of five horsemen.

One man rode at the head of the party upon a black horse, which had
evidently gone far that day. Todd and this man met face to face, and
they simultaneously pronounced each other's names.

"Sir Richard Blunt!" shrieked Todd.

"Sweeney Todd!" said the magistrate.

"Stop him!" shouted Ingestrie, as he and the colonel just got a sight of
the horsemen beyond Todd. "Stop him!"

With a yell, like that which might be supposed to come from a fiend,
Todd swerved from the grasp of Sir Richard Blunt, who made a dart at his
throat, and then, drawing up his knees, he gave his horse the rein, and
darting past Sir Richard, he dashed right into the midst of the party of
officers, who were behind, and fairly broke his way through them.

"Not yet--not yet!" he shouted. "Ha!--ha! not yet!"

"Fire!" cried Sir Richard Blunt.

The sharp report of four holster-pistols sounded in the narrow road-way.
Todd fell from his horse, and, terrified by the shots, the steed went
off without him at a mad gallop.

Twice Todd rolled over, and grasped handfuls of chalk and dust from the
road; and then he lay upon his back profoundly still. In an instant, Sir
Richard Blunt dismounted; and then Colonel Jeffrey and Mark Ingestrie
rode up to the spot.

"You have--have--" cried Ingestrie.

"Yes, at last, Mr. Ingestrie," said Sir Richard. "I had some information
that he was hovering about the coast, and came here to see you all. I am
sorry to defraud the gallows of its due: but there lies Todd!"

A couple of the officers now dismounted, while the others held their
horses, and they dragged the wretched man to the side of the road.

"Is he dead?" said Ingestrie.

"No," said Todd, opening his eyes. "He still lives to curse you all!
I--"

It was evident that he wished to say more; but he was bleeding
internally, and he began to struggle with the volumes of blood that rose
to his throat. With a horrible shriek, he rolled over on to his face,
and then, after one sharp convulsion of his limbs, he lay perfectly
still.

One of the officers turned him round again. One glance at the face was
sufficient. The guilty spirit of Sweeney Todd had fled at last to its
account!

"Dead," said Sir Richard Blunt. "Let the body lie here, and we will all
ride on to Brighton, and from there send some conveyance for it. Mr.
Ingestrie and you, Colonel Jeffrey, are witnesses of his end, and I can
only say that I feel now as if a heavy weight were lifted off my breast.
The good, and the kind, and true, need no longer live in fear of the
wild vengeance of this man. Let us hope that Heaven will have more mercy
upon his guilty soul than ever he had consideration for the sufferings
of others."

[Illustration: The Death Of Sweeney Todd.]




                            CHAPTER CLXXIII.
                            THE CONCLUSION.


We have little to say in conclusion, now that the chief actor in the
fearful Domestic Drama it has been our fate to record, is no more. Todd
was buried in the old church-yard at Brighton, but no record of the spot
where the murderer's bones decayed was preserved.

Sir Richard Blunt lived long to enjoy the respect and the admiration of
all who knew him, and died full of years and honours.

The sunshine of the existence of Johanna and Mark was perfectly
unclouded, and the colonel and Arabella, likewise, presented a true
picture of connubial felicity. In due time Tobias was married to her
whom he loved so well; and as he got older and more used to the world,
that timidity of disposition that Todd by his cruelties had induced,
entirely left him.

Ben did not marry after all, and he never ceased to congratulate himself
upon his escape. Mr. and Mrs. Oakley were happy in the happiness of
Johanna.

The mad-house at Peckham was completely pulled down, and in the well at
the back of it was found the skeleton of the wretched victim of Fogg's
villany. It was by his own hand that Fogg really died.

Often as Johanna would sit on a winter's evening, with her children
climbing upon her knee, she would, with a faltering voice, tell them
what their dear father had suffered to procure for her and for them THE
STRING OF PEARLS.

PUBLISHED BY E. LLOYD, SALISBURY-SQUARE, FLEET-STREET.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Archaic and colloquial spelling and punctuation were retained.

Chapter numbers were retained, even when mis-numbered.

Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.

Typographical errors were silently corrected. Three unpaired
double quotation marks could not be corrected with confidence.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRING OF PEARLS; OR, THE BARBER OF FLEET STREET. A DOMESTIC ROMANCE. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Complete Works of William Shakespeare
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Complete Works of William Shakespeare

Author: William Shakespeare


        
Release date: January 1, 1994 [eBook #100]
                Most recently updated: August 24, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/100


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE ***




The Complete Works of William Shakespeare

by William Shakespeare




                    Contents

    THE SONNETS
    ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS WELL
    THE TRAGEDY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
    AS YOU LIKE IT
    THE COMEDY OF ERRORS
    THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS
    CYMBELINE
    THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK
    THE FIRST PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH
    THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH
    THE LIFE OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH
    THE FIRST PART OF HENRY THE SIXTH
    THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH
    THE THIRD PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH
    KING HENRY THE EIGHTH
    THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING JOHN
    THE TRAGEDY OF JULIUS CAESAR
    THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR
    LOVE’S LABOUR’S LOST
    THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH
    MEASURE FOR MEASURE
    THE MERCHANT OF VENICE
    THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR
    A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM
    MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING
    THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE
    PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE
    KING RICHARD THE SECOND
    KING RICHARD THE THIRD
    THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET
    THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
    THE TEMPEST
    THE LIFE OF TIMON OF ATHENS
    THE TRAGEDY OF TITUS ANDRONICUS
    TROILUS AND CRESSIDA
    TWELFTH NIGHT; OR, WHAT YOU WILL
    THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA
    THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN
    THE WINTER’S TALE
    A LOVER’S COMPLAINT
    THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM
    THE PHOENIX AND THE TURTLE
    THE RAPE OF LUCRECE
    VENUS AND ADONIS




THE SONNETS

                    1

From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty’s rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thou that art now the world’s fresh ornament,
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And, tender churl, mak’st waste in niggarding:
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
  To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.


                    2

When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,
Thy youth’s proud livery so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held:
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserv’d thy beauty’s use,
If thou couldst answer ‘This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,’
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.


                    3

Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother’s glass and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
  But if thou live remembered not to be,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.


                    4

Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend,
Upon thyself thy beauty’s legacy?
Nature’s bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free:
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which used lives th’ executor to be.


                    5

Those hours that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
Will play the tyrants to the very same,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o’er-snowed and bareness every where:
Then were not summer’s distillation left
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty’s effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
  But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.


                    6

Then let not winter’s ragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place,
With beauty’s treasure ere it be self-killed:
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
That’s for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-willed for thou art much too fair,
  To be death’s conquest and make worms thine heir.


                    7

Lo in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But when from highmost pitch with weary car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes (fore duteous) now converted are
From his low tract and look another way:
  So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon:
  Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.


                    8

Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Why lov’st thou that which thou receiv’st not gladly,
Or else receiv’st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:
Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
  Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee, ‘Thou single wilt prove none’.


                    9

Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye,
That thou consum’st thyself in single life?
Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife,
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep,
By children’s eyes, her husband’s shape in mind:
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty’s waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused the user so destroys it:
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murd’rous shame commits.


                    10

For shame deny that thou bear’st love to any
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none lov’st is most evident:
For thou art so possessed with murd’rous hate,
That ’gainst thyself thou stick’st not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
O change thy thought, that I may change my mind,
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove,
  Make thee another self for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.


                    11

As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow’st,
Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
And threescore year would make the world away:
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
Look whom she best endowed, she gave thee more;
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.


                    12

When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silvered o’er with white:
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd
And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
And die as fast as they see others grow,
  And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence
  Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.


                    13

O that you were your self, but love you are
No longer yours, than you yourself here live,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination, then you were
Yourself again after yourself’s decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Against the stormy gusts of winter’s day
And barren rage of death’s eternal cold?
  O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
  You had a father, let your son say so.


                    14

Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck,
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons’ quality,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell;
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And constant stars in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert:
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
  Thy end is truth’s and beauty’s doom and date.


                    15

When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory.
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
  And all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.


                    16

But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time?
And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair
Which this (Time’s pencil) or my pupil pen
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
  To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
  And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.


                    17

Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts:
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say this poet lies,
Such heavenly touches ne’er touched earthly faces.
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be termed a poet’s rage,
And stretched metre of an antique song.
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice,—in it, and in my rhyme.


                    18

Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature’s changing course untrimmed:
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand’rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.


                    19

Devouring Time blunt thou the lion’s paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger’s jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet’st,
And do whate’er thou wilt swift-footed Time
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
O carve not with thy hours my love’s fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen,
Him in thy course untainted do allow,
For beauty’s pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet do thy worst, old Time; despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.


                    20

A woman’s face with nature’s own hand painted,
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion,
A woman’s gentle heart but not acquainted
With shifting change as is false women’s fashion,
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling:
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
A man in hue all hues in his controlling,
Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she pricked thee out for women’s pleasure,
  Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.


                    21

So is it not with me as with that muse,
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven it self for ornament doth use,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a couplement of proud compare
With sun and moon, with earth and sea’s rich gems:
With April’s first-born flowers and all things rare,
That heaven’s air in this huge rondure hems.
O let me true in love but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair,
As any mother’s child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fixed in heaven’s air:
  Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.


                    22

My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
But when in thee time’s furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me,
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O therefore love be of thyself so wary,
As I not for my self, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
  Thou gav’st me thine not to give back again.


                    23

As an unperfect actor on the stage,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strength’s abundance weakens his own heart;
So I for fear of trust, forget to say,
The perfect ceremony of love’s rite,
And in mine own love’s strength seem to decay,
O’ercharged with burthen of mine own love’s might:
O let my looks be then the eloquence,
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
  O learn to read what silent love hath writ,
  To hear with eyes belongs to love’s fine wit.


                    24

Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled,
Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart,
My body is the frame wherein ’tis held,
And perspective it is best painter’s art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictured lies,
Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


                    25

Let those who are in favour with their stars,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars
Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
Great princes’ favourites their fair leaves spread,
But as the marigold at the sun’s eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled:
  Then happy I that love and am beloved
  Where I may not remove nor be removed.


                    26

Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit;
To thee I send this written embassage
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul’s thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.


                    27

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired.
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
Save that my soul’s imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which like a jewel (hung in ghastly night)
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
  Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.


                    28

How can I then return in happy plight
That am debarred the benefit of rest?
When day’s oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night and night by day oppressed.
And each (though enemies to either’s reign)
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild’st the even.
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  And night doth nightly make grief’s length seem stronger


                    29

When in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon my self and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this man’s art, and that man’s scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
(Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven’s gate,
  For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


                    30

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste:
Then can I drown an eye (unused to flow)
For precious friends hid in death’s dateless night,
And weep afresh love’s long since cancelled woe,
And moan th’ expense of many a vanished sight.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o’er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
  All losses are restored, and sorrows end.


                    31

Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love’s loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol’n from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
  Their images I loved, I view in thee,
  And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.


                    32

If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:
Compare them with the bett’ring of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
’Had my friend’s Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought
To march in ranks of better equipage:
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style I’ll read, his for his love’.


                    33

Full many a glorious morning have I seen,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy:
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow,
But out alack, he was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
  Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
  Suns of the world may stain, when heaven’s sun staineth.


                    34

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o’ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy brav’ry in their rotten smoke?
’Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
Th’ offender’s sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offence’s cross.
  Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.


                    35

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense;
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,
And ’gainst my self a lawful plea commence:
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
  That I an accessary needs must be,
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.


                    36

Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love’s sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love’s delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                    37

As a decrepit father takes delight,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortune’s dearest spite
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
And by a part of all thy glory live:
  Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
  This wish I have, then ten times happy me.


                    38

How can my Muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe that pour’st into my verse,
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O give thyself the thanks if aught in me,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


                    39

O how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring:
And what is’t but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this, let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give:
That due to thee which thou deserv’st alone:
O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.


                    40

Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear greater wrong, than hate’s known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.


                    41

Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
And when a woman woos, what woman’s son,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.


                    42

That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
Thou dost love her, because thou know’st I love her,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suff’ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love’s gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross,
  But here’s the joy, my friend and I are one,
  Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.


                    43

When most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright
How would thy shadow’s form, form happy show,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.


                    44

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay,
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend, time’s leisure with my moan.
  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  But heavy tears, badges of either’s woe.


                    45

The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life being made of four, with two alone,
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
Until life’s composition be recured,
By those swift messengers returned from thee,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
  This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
  I send them back again and straight grow sad.


                    46

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
Mine eye, my heart thy picture’s sight would bar,
My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To side this title is impanelled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eye’s moiety, and the dear heart’s part.
  As thus, mine eye’s due is thy outward part,
  And my heart’s right, thy inward love of heart.


                    47

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other,
When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
With my love’s picture then my eye doth feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
Another time mine eye is my heart’s guest,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
So either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself away, art present still with me,
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them, and they with thee.
  Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart, to heart’s and eye’s delight.


                    48

How careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part,
  And even thence thou wilt be stol’n I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.


                    49

Against that time (if ever that time come)
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Called to that audit by advised respects,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love converted from the thing it was
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
  To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love, I can allege no cause.


                    50

How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek (my weary travel’s end)
Doth teach that case and that repose to say
’Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.’
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side,
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.


                    51

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
Till I return of posting is no need.
O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
Therefore desire (of perfect’st love being made)
Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade:
  Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
  Towards thee I’ll run, and give him leave to go.


                    52

So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since seldom coming in that long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special-blest,
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.


                    53

What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
And you but one, can every shadow lend:
Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
Is poorly imitated after you,
On Helen’s cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you for constant heart.


                    54

O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live:
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly,
When summer’s breath their masked buds discloses:
But for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed, and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.


                    55

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war’s quick fire shall burn:
The living record of your memory.
’Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So till the judgement that yourself arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.


                    56

Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but to-day by feeding is allayed,
To-morrow sharpened in his former might.
So love be thou, although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
Return of love, more blest may be the view.
  Or call it winter, which being full of care,
  Makes summer’s welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.


                    57

Being your slave what should I do but tend,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend;
Nor services to do till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But like a sad slave stay and think of nought
Save where you are, how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love, that in your will,
  (Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.


                    58

That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand th’ account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
O let me suffer (being at your beck)
Th’ imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
That you yourself may privilage your time
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.


                    59

If there be nothing new, but that which is,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which labouring for invention bear amiss
The second burthen of a former child!
O that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done.
That I might see what the old world could say,
To this composed wonder of your frame,
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
  O sure I am the wits of former days,
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.


                    60

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
Crooked eclipses ’gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
And delves the parallels in beauty’s brow,
Feeds on the rarities of nature’s truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.


                    61

Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
O no, thy love though much, is not so great,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
  For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.


                    62

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And for my self mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me my self indeed
beated and chopt with tanned antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:
Self, so self-loving were iniquity.
  ’Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.


                    63

Against my love shall be as I am now
With Time’s injurious hand crushed and o’erworn,
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
Hath travelled on to age’s steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he’s king
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age’s cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love’s beauty, though my lover’s life.
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.


                    64

When I have seen by Time’s fell hand defaced
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
When I have seen such interchange of State,
Or state it self confounded, to decay,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate:
That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death which cannot choose
  But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.


                    65

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality o’ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O how shall summer’s honey breath hold out,
Against the wrackful siege of batt’ring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
O fearful meditation, where alack,
Shall Time’s best jewel from Time’s chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


                    66

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry:
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that to die, I leave my love alone.


                    67

Ah wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
And lace it self with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
  O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
  In days long since, before these last so bad.


                    68

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
To live a second life on second head,
Ere beauty’s dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, it self and true,
Making no summer of another’s green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false Art what beauty was of yore.


                    69

Those parts of thee that the world’s eye doth view,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.


                    70

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slander’s mark was ever yet the fair,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven’s sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve,
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present’st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.


                    71

No longer mourn for me when I am dead,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O if, I say, you look upon this verse,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
But let your love even with my life decay.
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
  And mock you with me after I am gone.


                    72

O lest the world should task you to recite,
What merit lived in me that you should love
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I,
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.


                    73

That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death’s second self that seals up all in rest.
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
  This thou perceiv’st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.


                    74

But be contented when that fell arrest,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
The earth can have but earth, which is his due,
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered,
  The worth of that, is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.


                    75

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As ’twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look,
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.


                    76

Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O know sweet love I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument:
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told.


                    77

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
These vacant leaves thy mind’s imprint will bear,
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
Thou by thy dial’s shady stealth mayst know,
Time’s thievish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.


                    78

So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
As every alien pen hath got my use,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learned’s wing,
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
In others’ works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
  But thou art all my art, and dost advance
  As high as learning, my rude ignorance.


                    79

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
And my sick muse doth give an other place.
I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.


                    80

O how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark (inferior far to his)
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
Or (being wrecked) I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
  Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this: my love was my decay.


                    81

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read,
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
  You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen,
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.


                    82

I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o’erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
And do so love, yet when they have devised,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathized,
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend.
  And their gross painting might be better used,
  Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.


                    83

I never saw that you did painting need,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
That barren tender of a poet’s debt:
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself being extant well might show,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory being dumb,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.


                    84

Who is it that says most, which can say more,
Than this rich praise: that you alone are you,
In whose confine immured is the store,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.


                    85

My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
In polished form of well refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say ’tis so, ’tis true,
And to the most of praise add something more,
But that is in my thought, whose love to you
(Though words come hindmost) holds his rank before,
  Then others, for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.


                    86

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
  But when your countenance filled up his line,
  Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.


                    87

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know’st thy estimate,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gav’st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me to whom thou gav’st it, else mistaking,
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
  Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.


                    88

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side, against my self I’ll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted:
That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too,
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to my self I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.


                    89

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offence,
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt:
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As I’ll my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee, against my self I’ll vow debate,
  For I must ne’er love him whom thou dost hate.


                    90

Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah do not, when my heart hath ’scaped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come, so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune’s might.
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.


                    91

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their body’s force,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
But these particulars are not my measure,
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments’ costs,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be:
And having thee, of all men’s pride I boast.
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
  All this away, and me most wretched make.


                    92

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end,
I see, a better state to me belongs
Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie,
O what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what’s so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.


                    93

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband, so love’s face,
May still seem love to me, though altered new:
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
In many’s looks, the false heart’s history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
Whate’er thy thoughts, or thy heart’s workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve’s apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.


                    94

They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
That do not do the thing, they most do show,
Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
They rightly do inherit heaven’s graces,
And husband nature’s riches from expense,
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
The summer’s flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to it self, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
  Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.


                    95

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
(Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
O what a mansion have those vices got,
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty’s veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see!
  Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
  The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.


                    96

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:
Thou mak’st faults graces, that to thee resort:
As on the finger of a throned queen,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed:
So are those errors that in thee are seen,
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                    97

How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December’s bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer’s time,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords’ decease:
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
  Or if they sing, ’tis with so dull a cheer,
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter’s near.


                    98

From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing:
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summer’s story tell:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
They were but sweet, but figures of delight:
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seemed it winter still, and you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play.


                    99

The forward violet thus did I chide,
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love’s breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells,
In my love’s veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol’n thy hair,
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair:
A third nor red, nor white, had stol’n of both,
And to his robbery had annexed thy breath,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
  But sweet, or colour it had stol’n from thee.


                    100

Where art thou Muse that thou forget’st so long,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise resty Muse, my love’s sweet face survey,
If time have any wrinkle graven there,
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make time’s spoils despised everywhere.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
  So thou prevent’st his scythe, and crooked knife.


                    101

O truant Muse what shall be thy amends,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends:
So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
Make answer Muse, wilt thou not haply say,
’Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed,
Beauty no pencil, beauty’s truth to lay:
But best is best, if never intermixed’?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for’t lies in thee,
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb:
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
  To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.


                    102

My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming,
I love not less, though less the show appear,
That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming,
The owner’s tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer’s front doth sing,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
  Because I would not dull you with my song.


                    103

Alack what poverty my muse brings forth,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
O blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass and there appears a face,
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
  And more, much more than in my verse can sit,
  Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.


                    104

To me fair friend you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still: three winters cold,
Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
Ah yet doth beauty like a dial hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
  For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred,
  Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.


                    105

Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument,
Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words,
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.
  Which three till now, never kept seat in one.


                    106

When in the chronicle of wasted time,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
  For we which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.


                    107

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage,
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since spite of him I’ll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o’er dull and speechless tribes.
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
  When tyrants’ crests and tombs of brass are spent.


                    108

What’s in the brain that ink may character,
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
What’s new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine,
I must each day say o’er the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love’s fresh case,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.


                    109

O never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
As easy might I from my self depart,
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that my self bring water for my stain,
Never believe though in my nature reigned,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.


                    110

Alas ’tis true, I have gone here and there,
And made my self a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is, that I have looked on truth
Askance and strangely: but by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end,
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


                    111

O for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide,
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:
Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
Whilst like a willing patient I will drink,
Potions of eisel ’gainst my strong infection,
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance to correct correction.
  Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.


                    112

Your love and pity doth th’ impression fill,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow,
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o’er-green my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others’ voices, that my adder’s sense,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are:
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.


                    113

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which governs me to go about,
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch,
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformed’st creature,
The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.


                    114

Or whether doth my mind being crowned with you
Drink up the monarch’s plague this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy?
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble:
O ’tis the first, ’tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up,
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is ’greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
  If it be poisoned, ’tis the lesser sin,
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.


                    115

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer,
Yet then my judgement knew no reason why,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
Creep in ’twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp’st intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of alt’ring things:
Alas why fearing of time’s tyranny,
Might I not then say ‘Now I love you best,’
When I was certain o’er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe, then might I not say so
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow.


                    116

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments, love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand’ring bark,
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken.
Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle’s compass come,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom:
  If this be error and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved.


                    117

Accuse me thus, that I have scanted all,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day,
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchased right,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise, accumulate,
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate:
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.


                    118

Like as to make our appetite more keen
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
As to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Even so being full of your ne’er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And sick of welfare found a kind of meetness,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love t’ anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.
  But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
  Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.


                    119

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw my self to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill, now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better.
And ruined love when it is built anew
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content,
  And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.


                    120

That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, y’have passed a hell of time,
And I a tyrant have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.


                    121

’Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
When not to be, receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
Not by our feeling, but by others’ seeing.
For why should others’ false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses, reckon up their own,
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.


                    122

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date even to eternity.
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist,
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.


                    123

No! Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange,
They are but dressings of a former sight:
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire,
Than think that we before have heard them told:
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wond’ring at the present, nor the past,
For thy records, and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste:
  This I do vow and this shall ever be,
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.


                    124

If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for Fortune’s bastard be unfathered,
As subject to time’s love or to time’s hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
No it was builded far from accident,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th’ inviting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy that heretic,
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.


                    125

Were’t aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul
  When most impeached, stands least in thy control.


                    126

O thou my lovely boy who in thy power,
Dost hold Time’s fickle glass his fickle hour:
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st,
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow’st.
If Nature (sovereign mistress over wrack)
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her O thou minion of her pleasure,
She may detain, but not still keep her treasure!
  Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
  And her quietus is to render thee.


                    127

In the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it were it bore not beauty’s name:
But now is black beauty’s successive heir,
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame,
For since each hand hath put on nature’s power,
Fairing the foul with art’s false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress’ eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
Slandering creation with a false esteem,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.


                    128

How oft when thou, my music, music play’st,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway’st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
At the wood’s boldness by thee blushing stand.
To be so tickled they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O’er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips,
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.


                    129

Th’ expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Is perjured, murd’rous, bloody full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme,
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Before a joy proposed behind a dream.
  All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.


                    130

My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun,
Coral is far more red, than her lips red,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head:
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks,
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.
  And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
  As any she belied with false compare.


                    131

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know’st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err, I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to my self alone.
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,
One on another’s neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgement’s place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander as I think proceeds.


                    132

Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
O let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.


                    133

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
Is’t not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet’st friend must be?
Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed,
Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom’s ward,
But then my friend’s heart let my poor heart bail,
Whoe’er keeps me, let my heart be his guard,
Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.
  And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine and all that is in me.


                    134

So now I have confessed that he is thine,
And I my self am mortgaged to thy will,
My self I’ll forfeit, so that other mine,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
He learned but surety-like to write for me,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer that put’st forth all to use,
And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake,
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me,
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.


                    135

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And Will to boot, and Will in overplus,
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
  Think all but one, and me in that one Will.


                    136

If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will,
And will thy soul knows is admitted there,
Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.
Will will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one,
In things of great receipt with case we prove,
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy store’s account I one must be,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lov’st me for my name is Will.


                    137

Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes’ falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgement of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Which my heart knows the wide world’s common place?
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferred.


                    138

When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe, her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the world’s false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue;
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O love’s best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flattered be.


                    139

O call not me to justify the wrong,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue,
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Tell me thou lov’st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside,
What need’st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o’erpressed defence can bide?
Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  Yet do not so, but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.


                    140

Be wise as thou art cruel, do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain:
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express,
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit better it were,
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,
As testy sick men when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For if I should despair I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.


                    141

In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
But ’tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue’s tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits, nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud heart’s slave and vassal wretch to be:
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.


                    142

Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
O but with mine, compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others’ beds’ revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov’st those,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied.


                    143

Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch,
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
To follow that which flies before her face:
Not prizing her poor infant’s discontent;
So run’st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind,
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me:
And play the mother’s part, kiss me, be kind.
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.


                    144

Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
Which, like two spirits, do suggest me still:
The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
But being both from me both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another’s hell.
  Yet this shall I ne’er know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.


                    145

Those lips that Love’s own hand did make,
Breathed forth the sound that said ‘I hate’,
To me that languished for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet,
Was used in giving gentle doom:
And taught it thus anew to greet:
‘I hate’ she altered with an end,
That followed it as gentle day,
Doth follow night who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away.
  ‘I hate’, from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life saying ‘not you’.


                    146

Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms inheritors of this excess
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body’s end?
Then soul live thou upon thy servant’s loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
  So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
  And death once dead, there’s no more dying then.


                    147

My love is as a fever longing still,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th’ uncertain sickly appetite to please:
My reason the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve,
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as mad men’s are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.


                    148

O me! what eyes hath love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
Or if they have, where is my judgement fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote,
Love’s eye is not so true as all men’s: no,
How can it? O how can love’s eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view,
The sun it self sees not, till heaven clears.
  O cunning love, with tears thou keep’st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.


                    149

Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
When I against my self with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
On whom frown’st thou that I do fawn upon,
Nay if thou lour’st on me do I not spend
Revenge upon my self with present moan?
What merit do I in my self respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But love hate on for now I know thy mind,
  Those that can see thou lov’st, and I am blind.


                    150

O from what power hast thou this powerful might,
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee.


                    151

Love is too young to know what conscience is,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then gentle cheater urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
For thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body’s treason,
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call,
  Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.


                    152

In loving thee thou know’st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But why of two oaths’ breach do I accuse thee,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee:
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness:
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
  For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I,
  To swear against the truth so foul a lie.


                    153

Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep,
A maid of Dian’s this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground:
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love,
A dateless lively heat still to endure,
And grew a seething bath which yet men prove,
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure:
But at my mistress’ eye Love’s brand new-fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast,
I sick withal the help of bath desired,
And thither hied a sad distempered guest.
  But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
  Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress’ eyes.


                    154

The little Love-god lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed,
And so the general of hot desire,
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love’s fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men diseased; but I, my mistress’ thrall,
  Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
  Love’s fire heats water, water cools not love.


THE END



ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS WELL



Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.
Scene II. Paris. A room in the King’s palace.
Scene III. Rossillon. A Room in the Palace.


ACT II
Scene I. Paris. A room in the King’s palace.
Scene II. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.
Scene III. Paris. The King’s palace.
Scene IV. Paris. The King’s palace.
Scene V. Another room in the same.


ACT III
Scene I. Florence. A room in the Duke’s palace.
Scene II. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.
Scene III. Florence. Before the Duke’s palace.
Scene IV. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.
Scene V. Without the walls of Florence.
Scene VI. Camp before Florence.
Scene VII. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.


ACT IV
Scene I. Without the Florentine camp.
Scene II. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.
Scene III. The Florentine camp.
Scene IV. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.
Scene V. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.


ACT V
Scene I. Marseilles. A street.
Scene II. Rossillon. The inner court of the Countess’s palace.
Scene III. The same. A room in the Countess’s palace.


 Dramatis Personæ

KING OF FRANCE.
THE DUKE OF FLORENCE.
BERTRAM, Count of Rossillon.
LAFEW, an old Lord.
PAROLLES, a follower of Bertram.
Several young French Lords, that serve with Bertram in the Florentine
War.
RYNALDO, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
Clown, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
A Page, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
COUNTESS OF ROSSILLON, mother to Bertram.
HELENA, a Gentlewoman protected by the Countess.
An old WIDOW of Florence.
DIANA, daughter to the Widow.
VIOLENTA, neighbour and friend to the Widow.
MARIANA, neighbour and friend to the Widow.

Lords attending on the KING; Officers; Soldiers, &c., French and
Florentine.

SCENE: Partly in France, and partly in Tuscany.


ACT I

SCENE I. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Bertram, the Countess of Rossillon, Helena, and Lafew, all in
 black.

COUNTESS.
In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.

BERTRAM.
And I in going, madam, weep o’er my father’s death anew; but I must
attend his majesty’s command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore in
subjection.

LAFEW.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a father. He
that so generally is at all times good, must of necessity hold his
virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted,
rather than lack it where there is such abundance.

COUNTESS.
What hope is there of his majesty’s amendment?

LAFEW.
He hath abandon’d his physicians, madam; under whose practices he hath
persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process
but only the losing of hope by time.

COUNTESS.
This young gentlewoman had a father—O that “had!”, how sad a passage
’tis!—whose skill was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretch’d
so far, would have made nature immortal, and death should have play for
lack of work. Would for the king’s sake he were living! I think it
would be the death of the king’s disease.

LAFEW.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?

COUNTESS.
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his great right to be
so: Gerard de Narbon.

LAFEW.
He was excellent indeed, madam; the king very lately spoke of him
admiringly, and mourningly; he was skilful enough to have liv’d still,
if knowledge could be set up against mortality.

BERTRAM.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?

LAFEW.
A fistula, my lord.

BERTRAM.
I heard not of it before.

LAFEW.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman the daughter of
Gerard de Narbon?

COUNTESS.
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my overlooking. I have those
hopes of her good that her education promises her dispositions she
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an unclean mind
carries virtuous qualities, there commendations go with pity, they are
virtues and traitors too. In her they are the better for their
simpleness; she derives her honesty, and achieves her goodness.

LAFEW.
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.

COUNTESS.
’Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in. The remembrance
of her father never approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows
takes all livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena; go to, no
more, lest it be rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have.

HELENA.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.

LAFEW.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead; excessive grief the
enemy to the living.

COUNTESS.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it soon mortal.

BERTRAM.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.

LAFEW.
How understand we that?

COUNTESS.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape! Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use; and keep thy friend
Under thy own life’s key. Be check’d for silence,
But never tax’d for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell. My lord,
’Tis an unseason’d courtier; good my lord,
Advise him.

LAFEW.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.

COUNTESS.
Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.

 [_Exit Countess._]

BERTRAM.
The best wishes that can be forg’d in your thoughts be servants to you!
[_To Helena._] Be comfortable to my mother, your mistress, and make
much of her.

LAFEW.
Farewell, pretty lady, you must hold the credit of your father.

 [_Exeunt Bertram and Lafew._]

HELENA.
O, were that all! I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him; my imagination
Carries no favour in’t but Bertram’s.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. ’Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star,
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Th’ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. ’Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour; to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart’s table,—heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour.
But now he’s gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?

 Enter Parolles.

One that goes with him: I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
Yet these fix’d evils sit so fit in him
That they take place when virtue’s steely bones
Looks bleak i’ th’ cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.

PAROLLES.
Save you, fair queen!

HELENA.
And you, monarch!

PAROLLES.
No.

HELENA.
And no.

PAROLLES.
Are you meditating on virginity?

HELENA.
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you; let me ask you a question.
Man is enemy to virginity; how may we barricado it against him?

PAROLLES.
Keep him out.

HELENA.
But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant, in the defence, yet
is weak. Unfold to us some warlike resistance.

PAROLLES.
There is none. Man setting down before you will undermine you and blow
you up.

HELENA.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and blowers-up! Is there no
military policy how virgins might blow up men?

PAROLLES.
Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be blown up; marry, in
blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves made, you lose your
city. It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve
virginity. Loss of virginity is rational increase, and there was never
virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
metal to make virgins. Virginity, by being once lost, may be ten times
found; by being ever kept, it is ever lost. ’Tis too cold a companion.
Away with it!

HELENA.
I will stand for’t a little, though therefore I die a virgin.

PAROLLES.
There’s little can be said in’t; ’tis against the rule of nature. To
speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your mothers; which is most
infallible disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin: virginity
murders itself, and should be buried in highways out of all sanctified
limit, as a desperate offendress against nature. Virginity breeds
mites, much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so
dies with feeding his own stomach. Besides, virginity is peevish,
proud, idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by’t. Out with’t! Within
the year it will make itself two, which is a goodly increase, and the
principal itself not much the worse. Away with it!

HELENA.
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?

PAROLLES.
Let me see. Marry, ill, to like him that ne’er it likes. ’Tis a
commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept, the less
worth. Off with’t while ’tis vendible; answer the time of request.
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of fashion, richly
suited, but unsuitable, just like the brooch and the toothpick, which
wear not now. Your date is better in your pie and your porridge than in
your cheek. And your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our
French wither’d pears; it looks ill, it eats drily; marry, ’tis a
wither’d pear; it was formerly better; marry, yet ’tis a wither’d pear.
Will you anything with it?

HELENA.
Not my virginity yet.
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear:
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he—
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The court’s a learning-place; and he is one.

PAROLLES.
What one, i’ faith?

HELENA.
That I wish well. ’Tis pity—

PAROLLES.
What’s pity?

HELENA.
That wishing well had not a body in’t
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.

 Enter a Page.

PAGE.
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.

 [_Exit Page._]

PAROLLES.
Little Helen, farewell. If I can remember thee, I will think of thee at
court.

HELENA.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.

PAROLLES.
Under Mars, I.

HELENA.
I especially think, under Mars.

PAROLLES.
Why under Mars?

HELENA.
The wars hath so kept you under, that you must needs be born under
Mars.

PAROLLES.
When he was predominant.

HELENA.
When he was retrograde, I think rather.

PAROLLES.
Why think you so?

HELENA.
You go so much backward when you fight.

PAROLLES.
That’s for advantage.

HELENA.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety: but the composition
that your valour and fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, and
I like the wear well.

PAROLLES.
I am so full of business I cannot answer thee acutely. I will return
perfect courtier; in the which my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier’s counsel, and understand
what advice shall thrust upon thee; else thou diest in thine
unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes thee away. Farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast none, remember thy
friends. Get thee a good husband, and use him as he uses thee. So,
farewell.

 [_Exit._]

HELENA.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope; only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes, and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love?
The king’s disease,—my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fix’d, and will not leave me.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Paris. A room in the King’s palace.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the King of France, with letters; Lords and
 others attending.

KING.
The Florentines and Senoys are by th’ ears;
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war.

FIRST LORD.
So ’tis reported, sir.

KING.
Nay, ’tis most credible, we here receive it,
A certainty, vouch’d from our cousin Austria,
With caution, that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business, and would seem
To have us make denial.

FIRST LORD.
His love and wisdom,
Approv’d so to your majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.

KING.
He hath arm’d our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.

SECOND LORD.
It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.

KING.
What’s he comes here?

 Enter Bertram, Lafew and Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
It is the Count Rossillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.

KING.
Youth, thou bear’st thy father’s face;
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well compos’d thee. Thy father’s moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.

BERTRAM.
My thanks and duty are your majesty’s.

KING.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership. He did look far
Into the service of the time, and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on,
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father; in his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
Today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awak’d them, and his honour,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obey’d his hand. Who were below him
He us’d as creatures of another place,
And bow’d his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.

BERTRAM.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.

KING.
Would I were with him! He would always say,—
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scatter’d not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear,—“Let me not live,”
This his good melancholy oft began
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out,—“Let me not live” quoth he,
“After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
Expire before their fashions.” This he wish’d.
I, after him, do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive
To give some labourers room.

SECOND LORD.
You’re lov’d, sir;
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

KING.
I fill a place, I know’t. How long is’t, Count,
Since the physician at your father’s died?
He was much fam’d.

BERTRAM.
Some six months since, my lord.

KING.
If he were living, I would try him yet;—
Lend me an arm;—the rest have worn me out
With several applications; nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, Count;
My son’s no dearer.

BERTRAM.
Thank your majesty.

 [_Exeunt. Flourish._]

SCENE III. Rossillon. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Countess, Steward and Clown.

COUNTESS.
I will now hear. What say you of this gentlewoman?

STEWARD.
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I wish might be found
in the calendar of my past endeavours; for then we wound our modesty,
and make foul the clearness of our deservings, when of ourselves we
publish them.

COUNTESS.
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah. The complaints I have
heard of you I do not all believe; ’tis my slowness that I do not; for
I know you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability enough to
make such knaveries yours.

CLOWN.
’Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.

COUNTESS.
Well, sir.

CLOWN.
No, madam, ’tis not so well that I am poor, though many of the rich are
damned; but if I may have your ladyship’s good will to go to the world,
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.

COUNTESS.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

CLOWN.
I do beg your good will in this case.

COUNTESS.
In what case?

CLOWN.
In Isbel’s case and mine own. Service is no heritage, and I think I
shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue of my body; for
they say barnes are blessings.

COUNTESS.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

CLOWN.
My poor body, madam, requires it; I am driven on by the flesh, and he
must needs go that the devil drives.

COUNTESS.
Is this all your worship’s reason?

CLOWN.
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such as they are.

COUNTESS.
May the world know them?

CLOWN.
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and all flesh and blood
are; and indeed I do marry that I may repent.

COUNTESS.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.

CLOWN.
I am out of friends, madam, and I hope to have friends for my wife’s
sake.

COUNTESS.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

CLOWN.
Y’are shallow, madam, in great friends; for the knaves come to do that
for me which I am a-weary of. He that ears my land spares my team, and
gives me leave to in the crop: if I be his cuckold, he’s my drudge. He
that comforts my wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that
cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my
flesh and blood is my friend; ergo, he that kisses my wife is my
friend. If men could be contented to be what they are, there were no
fear in marriage; for young Charbon the puritan and old Poysam the
papist, howsome’er their hearts are sever’d in religion, their heads
are both one; they may jowl horns together like any deer i’ the herd.

COUNTESS.
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouth’d and calumnious knave?

CLOWN.
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next way:
   _For I the ballad will repeat,
   Which men full true shall find;
   Your marriage comes by destiny,
   Your cuckoo sings by kind._

COUNTESS.
Get you gone, sir; I’ll talk with you more anon.

STEWARD.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to you; of her I am to
speak.

COUNTESS.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her; Helen I mean.

CLOWN.
[_Sings._]
_   Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
     Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
   Fond done, done fond,
      Was this King Priam’s joy?
   With that she sighed as she stood,
   With that she sighed as she stood,
      And gave this sentence then:
   Among nine bad if one be good,
   Among nine bad if one be good,
     There’s yet one good in ten._

COUNTESS.
What, one good in ten? You corrupt the song, sirrah.

CLOWN.
One good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o’ the song. Would
God would serve the world so all the year! We’d find no fault with the
tithe-woman, if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth ’a! And we might
have a good woman born but or every blazing star, or at an earthquake,
’twould mend the lottery well; a man may draw his heart out ere he
pluck one.

COUNTESS.
You’ll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you!

CLOWN.
That man should be at woman’s command, and yet no hurt done! Though
honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the
surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am going,
forsooth; the business is for Helen to come hither.

 [_Exit._]

COUNTESS.
Well, now.

STEWARD.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.

COUNTESS.
Faith I do. Her father bequeath’d her to me, and she herself, without
other advantage, may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds;
there is more owing her than is paid, and more shall be paid her than
she’ll demand.

STEWARD.
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think she wish’d me; alone
she was, and did communicate to herself her own words to her own ears;
she thought, I dare vow for her, they touch’d not any stranger sense.
Her matter was, she loved your son. Fortune, she said, was no goddess,
that had put such difference betwixt their two estates; Love no god,
that would not extend his might only where qualities were level; Diana
no queen of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surpris’d,
without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward. This she
deliver’d in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e’er I heard virgin
exclaim in, which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal;
sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns you something to
know it.

COUNTESS.
You have discharg’d this honestly; keep it to yourself; many
likelihoods inform’d me of this before, which hung so tottering in the
balance that I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you leave me;
stall this in your bosom; and I thank you for your honest care. I will
speak with you further anon.

 [_Exit Steward._]

 Enter Helena.

Even so it was with me when I was young;
If ever we are nature’s, these are ours; this thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
It is the show and seal of nature’s truth,
Where love’s strong passion is impress’d in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on’t; I observe her now.

HELENA.
What is your pleasure, madam?

COUNTESS.
You know, Helen,
I am a mother to you.

HELENA.
Mine honourable mistress.

COUNTESS.
Nay, a mother.
Why not a mother? When I said a mother,
Methought you saw a serpent. What’s in mother,
That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine. ’Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds.
You ne’er oppress’d me with a mother’s groan,
Yet I express to you a mother’s care.
God’s mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What’s the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colour’d Iris, rounds thine eye?
—Why, that you are my daughter?

HELENA.
That I am not.

COUNTESS.
I say, I am your mother.

HELENA.
Pardon, madam;
The Count Rossillon cannot be my brother.
I am from humble, he from honoured name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble,
My master, my dear lord he is; and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother.

COUNTESS.
Nor I your mother?

HELENA.
You are my mother, madam; would you were—
So that my lord your son were not my brother,—
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Can’t no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?

COUNTESS.
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse. What! pale again?
My fear hath catch’d your fondness; now I see
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Your salt tears’ head. Now to all sense ’tis gross
You love my son; invention is asham’d,
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true;
But tell me then, ’tis so; for, look, thy cheeks
Confess it, t’one to th’other; and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours,
That in their kind they speak it; only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, is’t so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear’t: howe’er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly.

HELENA.
Good madam, pardon me.

COUNTESS.
Do you love my son?

HELENA.
Your pardon, noble mistress.

COUNTESS.
Love you my son?

HELENA.
Do not you love him, madam?

COUNTESS.
Go not about; my love hath in’t a bond
Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeach’d.

HELENA.
Then I confess,
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
I love your son.
My friends were poor, but honest; so’s my love.
Be not offended; for it hurts not him
That he is lov’d of me; I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and inteemable sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love,
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever, in so true a flame of liking,
Wish chastely, and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love; O then, give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies!

COUNTESS.
Had you not lately an intent,—speak truly,—
To go to Paris?

HELENA.
Madam, I had.

COUNTESS.
Wherefore? tell true.

HELENA.
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and prov’d effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he will’d me
In heedfull’st reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
There is a remedy, approv’d, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The king is render’d lost.

COUNTESS.
This was your motive
For Paris, was it? Speak.

HELENA.
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the king,
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.

COUNTESS.
But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his physicians
Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him;
They, that they cannot help. How shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowell’d of their doctrine, have let off
The danger to itself?

HELENA.
There’s something in’t
More than my father’s skill, which was the great’st
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th’ luckiest stars in heaven; and would your honour
But give me leave to try success, I’d venture
The well-lost life of mine on his grace’s cure.
By such a day, an hour.

COUNTESS.
Dost thou believe’t?

HELENA.
Ay, madam, knowingly.

COUNTESS.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court. I’ll stay at home,
And pray God’s blessing into thy attempt.
Be gone tomorrow; and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to, thou shalt not miss.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT II.

SCENE I. Paris. A room in the King’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter the King with young Lords taking leave for the
 Florentine war; Bertram, Parolles and Attendants.

KING.
Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles
Do not throw from you; and you, my lords, farewell;
Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as ’tis receiv’d,
And is enough for both.

FIRST LORD.
’Tis our hope, sir,
After well-ent’red soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.

KING.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen; let higher Italy,—
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy—see that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it, when
The bravest questant shrinks: find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.

SECOND LORD.
Health, at your bidding serve your majesty!

KING.
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them;
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand; beware of being captives
Before you serve.

BOTH.
Our hearts receive your warnings.

KING.
Farewell.—Come hither to me.

 [_The King retires to a couch._]

FIRST LORD.
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

PAROLLES.
’Tis not his fault; the spark.

SECOND LORD.
O, ’tis brave wars!

PAROLLES.
Most admirable! I have seen those wars.

BERTRAM.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with,
“Too young”, and “the next year” and “’tis too early”.

PAROLLES.
An thy mind stand to’t, boy, steal away bravely.

BERTRAM.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I’ll steal away.

FIRST LORD.
There’s honour in the theft.

PAROLLES.
Commit it, count.

SECOND LORD.
I am your accessary; and so farewell.

BERTRAM.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortur’d body.

FIRST LORD.
Farewell, captain.

SECOND LORD.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!

PAROLLES.
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good sparks and lustrous, a
word, good metals. You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here on his
sinister cheek; it was this very sword entrench’d it. Say to him I
live; and observe his reports for me.

FIRST LORD.
We shall, noble captain.

PAROLLES.
Mars dote on you for his novices!

 [_Exeunt Lords._]

What will ye do?

BERTRAM.
Stay the king.

PAROLLES.
Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have restrain’d
yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. Be more expressive to
them; for they wear themselves in the cap of the time; there do muster
true gait; eat, speak, and move, under the influence of the most
receiv’d star; and though the devil lead the measure, such are to be
followed. After them, and take a more dilated farewell.

BERTRAM.
And I will do so.

PAROLLES.
Worthy fellows, and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.

 [_Exeunt Bertram and Parolles._]

 Enter Lafew.

LAFEW.
Pardon, my lord [_kneeling_], for me and for my tidings.

KING.
I’ll fee thee to stand up.

LAFEW.
Then here’s a man stands that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneel’d, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

KING.
I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
And ask’d thee mercy for’t.

LAFEW.
Good faith, across;
But, my good lord, ’tis thus: will you be cur’d
Of your infirmity?

KING.
No.

LAFEW.
O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, and if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That’s able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion; whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen in’s hand
And write to her a love-line.

KING.
What ‘her’ is this?

LAFEW.
Why, doctor ‘she’! My lord, there’s one arriv’d,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy, hath amaz’d me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her,
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

KING.
Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration; that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond’ring how thou took’st it.

LAFEW.
Nay, I’ll fit you,
And not be all day neither.

 [_Exit Lafew._]

KING.
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

 Enter Lafew with Helena.

LAFEW.
Nay, come your ways.

KING.
This haste hath wings indeed.

LAFEW.
Nay, come your ways.
This is his majesty, say your mind to him.
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His majesty seldom fears; I am Cressid’s uncle,
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.

 [_Exit._]

KING.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

HELENA.
Ay, my good lord.
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess, well found.

KING.
I knew him.

HELENA.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On his bed of death
Many receipts he gave me; chiefly one,
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience the only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two; more dear I have so,
And hearing your high majesty is touch’d
With that malignant cause, wherein the honour
Of my dear father’s gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance,
With all bound humbleness.

KING.
We thank you, maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us, and
The congregated college have concluded
That labouring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidable estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.

HELENA.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one to bear me back again.

KING.
I cannot give thee less, to be call’d grateful.
Thou thought’st to help me; and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know’st no part;
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

HELENA.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest ’gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great’st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises; and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest, and despair most fits.

KING.
I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid.
Thy pains, not us’d, must by thyself be paid;
Proffers, not took, reap thanks for their reward.

HELENA.
Inspired merit so by breath is barr’d.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As ’tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor, that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think, and think I know most sure,
My art is not past power nor you past cure.

KING.
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop’st thou my cure?

HELENA.
The greatest grace lending grace.
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quench’d her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilot’s glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass;
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.

KING.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar’st thou venture?

HELENA.
Tax of impudence,
A strumpet’s boldness, a divulged shame,
Traduc’d by odious ballads; my maiden’s name
Sear’d otherwise; nay worse of worst extended
With vilest torture, let my life be ended.

KING.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak;
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite, or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

HELENA.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserv’d. Not helping, death’s my fee;
But if I help, what do you promise me?

KING.
Make thy demand.

HELENA.
But will you make it even?

KING.
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.

HELENA.
Then shalt thou give me, with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

KING.
Here is my hand; the premises observ’d,
Thy will by my performance shall be serv’d;
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolv’d patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou cam’st, how tended on; but rest
Unquestion’d welcome, and undoubted bless’d.
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Countess and Clown.

COUNTESS.
Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of your breeding.

CLOWN.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I know my business is
but to the court.

COUNTESS.
To the court! Why, what place make you special, when you put off that
with such contempt? But to the court!

CLOWN.
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may easily put it
off at court: he that cannot make a leg, put off’s cap, kiss his hand,
and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed such
a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the court; but for me, I have
an answer will serve all men.

COUNTESS.
Marry, that’s a bountiful answer that fits all questions.

CLOWN.
It is like a barber’s chair, that fits all buttocks—the pin-buttock,
the quatch-buttock, the brawn-buttock, or any buttock.

COUNTESS.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

CLOWN.
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your French
crown for your taffety punk, as Tib’s rush for Tom’s forefinger, as a
pancake for Shrove-Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding quean to a wrangling
knave, as the nun’s lip to the friar’s mouth; nay, as the pudding to
his skin.

COUNTESS.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all questions?

CLOWN.
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit any
question.

COUNTESS.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit all demands.

CLOWN.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should speak truth
of it. Here it is, and all that belongs to’t. Ask me if I am a
courtier; it shall do you no harm to learn.

COUNTESS.
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in question, hoping to
be the wiser by your answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! There’s a simple putting off. More, more, a hundred of
them.

COUNTESS.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick; spare not me.

COUNTESS.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to’t, I warrant you.

COUNTESS.
You were lately whipp’d, sir, as I think.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Spare not me.

COUNTESS.
Do you cry ‘O Lord, sir!’ at your whipping, and ‘spare not me’? Indeed
your ‘O Lord, sir!’ is very sequent to your whipping. You would answer
very well to a whipping, if you were but bound to’t.

CLOWN.
I ne’er had worse luck in my life in my ‘O Lord, sir!’ I see things may
serve long, but not serve ever.

COUNTESS.
I play the noble housewife with the time, to entertain it so merrily
with a fool.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Why, there’t serves well again.

COUNTESS.
An end, sir! To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.

CLOWN.
Not much commendation to them?

COUNTESS.
Not much employment for you. You understand me?

CLOWN.
Most fruitfully. I am there before my legs.

COUNTESS.
Haste you again.

 [_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE III. Paris. The King’s palace.

 Enter Bertram, Lafew and Parolles.

LAFEW.
They say miracles are past; and we have our philosophical persons to
make modern and familiar things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it
that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves into seeming
knowledge when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

PAROLLES.
Why, ’tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot out in our
latter times.

BERTRAM.
And so ’tis.

LAFEW.
To be relinquish’d of the artists,—

PAROLLES.
So I say; both of Galen and Paracelsus.

LAFEW.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,—

PAROLLES.
Right; so I say.

LAFEW.
That gave him out incurable,—

PAROLLES.
Why, there ’tis; so say I too.

LAFEW.
Not to be helped.

PAROLLES.
Right; as ’twere a man assur’d of a—

LAFEW.
Uncertain life and sure death.

PAROLLES.
Just; you say well. So would I have said.

LAFEW.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.

PAROLLES.
It is indeed; if you will have it in showing, you shall read it in what
do you call there?

LAFEW.
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.

PAROLLES.
That’s it; I would have said the very same.

LAFEW.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier; fore me, I speak in respect—

PAROLLES.
Nay, ’tis strange, ’tis very strange; that is the brief and the tedious
of it; and he’s of a most facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge
it to be the—

LAFEW.
Very hand of heaven.

PAROLLES.
Ay, so I say.

LAFEW.
In a most weak—

PAROLLES.
And debile minister, great power, great transcendence, which should
indeed give us a further use to be made than alone the recov’ry of the
king, as to be—

LAFEW.
Generally thankful.

PAROLLES.
I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.

 Enter King, Helena and Attendants.

LAFEW.
Lustique, as the Dutchman says. I’ll like a maid the better, whilst I
have a tooth in my head. Why, he’s able to lead her a coranto.

PAROLLES.
_Mor du vinager!_ is not this Helen?

LAFEW.
Fore God, I think so.

KING.
Go, call before me all the lords in court.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

Sit, my preserver, by thy patient’s side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banish’d sense
Thou has repeal’d, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promis’d gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

 Enter several Lords.

Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O’er whom both sovereign power and father’s voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make;
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

HELENA.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall, when love please! Marry, to each but one!

LAFEW.
I’d give bay curtal and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken than these boys’,
And writ as little beard.

KING.
Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.

 She addresses her to a Lord.

HELENA.
Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restor’d the king to health.

ALL.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.

HELENA.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it, your majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
“We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
We’ll ne’er come there again.”

KING.
Make choice; and, see,
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

HELENA.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream. [_To first Lord._] Sir, will you hear my suit?

FIRST LORD.
And grant it.

HELENA.
Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.

LAFEW.
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for my life.

HELENA.
[_To second Lord._] The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threat’ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love!

SECOND LORD.
No better, if you please.

HELENA.
My wish receive,
Which great Love grant; and so I take my leave.

LAFEW.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine I’d have them whipp’d;
or I would send them to th’ Turk to make eunuchs of.

HELENA.
[_To third Lord._] Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
I’ll never do you wrong for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!

LAFEW.
These boys are boys of ice, they’ll none have her. Sure, they are
bastards to the English; the French ne’er got ’em.

HELENA.
[_To fourth Lord._] You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood.

FOURTH LORD.
Fair one, I think not so.

LAFEW.
There’s one grape yet. I am sure thy father drank wine. But if thou
beest not an ass, I am a youth of fourteen; I have known thee already.

HELENA.
[_To Bertram._] I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. This is the man.

KING.
Why, then, young Bertram, take her; she’s thy wife.

BERTRAM.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

KING.
Know’st thou not, Bertram,
What she has done for me?

BERTRAM.
Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.

KING.
Thou know’st she has rais’d me from my sickly bed.

BERTRAM.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father’s charge:
A poor physician’s daughter my wife! Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!

KING.
’Tis only title thou disdain’st in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of colour, weight, and heat, pour’d all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik’st,
A poor physician’s daughter,—thou dislik’st—
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doer’s deed.
Where great additions swell’s, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Is good without a name; vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she’s immediate heir;
And these breed honour: that is honour’s scorn
Which challenges itself as honour’s born,
And is not like the sire. Honours thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our fore-goers. The mere word’s a slave,
Debauch’d on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damn’d oblivion is the tomb
Of honour’d bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest. Virtue and she
Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.

BERTRAM.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do ’t.

KING.
Thou wrong’st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.

HELENA.
That you are well restor’d, my lord, I am glad.
Let the rest go.

KING.
My honour’s at the stake, which to defeat,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honour where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good;
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims;
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak! Thine answer!

BERTRAM.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation, and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the king; who, so ennobled,
Is as ’twere born so.

KING.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine; to whom I promise
A counterpoise; if not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.

BERTRAM.
I take her hand.

KING.
Good fortune and the favour of the king
Smile upon this contract; whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
And be perform’d tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov’st her,
Thy love’s to me religious; else, does err.

 [_Exeunt King, Bertram, Helena, Lords, and Attendants._]

LAFEW.
Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

PAROLLES.
Your pleasure, sir.

LAFEW.
Your lord and master did well to make his recantation.

PAROLLES.
Recantation! My lord! My master!

LAFEW.
Ay. Is it not a language I speak?

PAROLLES.
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody succeeding.
My master!

LAFEW.
Are you companion to the Count Rossillon?

PAROLLES.
To any count; to all counts; to what is man.

LAFEW.
To what is count’s man: count’s master is of another style.

PAROLLES.
You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.

LAFEW.
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which title age cannot bring
thee.

PAROLLES.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.

LAFEW.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty wise fellow; thou
didst make tolerable vent of thy travel; it might pass. Yet the scarfs
and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from believing
thee a vessel of too great a burden. I have now found thee; when I lose
thee again I care not. Yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and
that thou art scarce worth.

PAROLLES.
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee—

LAFEW.
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou hasten thy trial;
which if—Lord have mercy on thee for a hen! So, my good window of
lattice, fare thee well; thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.

PAROLLES.
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.

LAFEW.
Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.

PAROLLES.
I have not, my lord, deserv’d it.

LAFEW.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it; and I will not bate thee a scruple.

PAROLLES.
Well, I shall be wiser.

LAFEW.
Ev’n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a smack o’ th’
contrary. If ever thou beest bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt
find what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold my
acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the
default, “He is a man I know.”

PAROLLES.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.

LAFEW.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor doing eternal; for
doing I am past, as I will by thee, in what motion age will give me
leave.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me; scurvy, old,
filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient; there is no fettering of
authority. I’ll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any
convenience, an he were double and double a lord. I’ll have no more
pity of his age than I would have of—I’ll beat him, and if I could but
meet him again.

 Enter Lafew.

LAFEW.
Sirrah, your lord and master’s married; there’s news for you; you have
a new mistress.

PAROLLES.
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some reservation of
your wrongs. He is my good lord; whom I serve above is my master.

LAFEW.
Who? God?

PAROLLES.
Ay, sir.

LAFEW.
The devil it is that’s thy master. Why dost thou garter up thy arms o’
this fashion? Dost make hose of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou
wert best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine honour, if
I were but two hours younger, I’d beat thee. Methink’st thou art a
general offence, and every man should beat thee. I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.

PAROLLES.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.

LAFEW.
Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a
pomegranate; you are a vagabond, and no true traveller. You are more
saucy with lords and honourable personages than the commission of your
birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not worth another word,
else I’d call you knave. I leave you.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Bertram.

PAROLLES.
Good, very good, it is so then. Good, very good; let it be conceal’d
awhile.

BERTRAM.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!

PAROLLES.
What’s the matter, sweetheart?

BERTRAM.
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.

PAROLLES.
What, what, sweetheart?

BERTRAM.
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I’ll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.

PAROLLES.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
The tread of a man’s foot: to the wars!

BERTRAM.
There’s letters from my mother; what th’ import is
I know not yet.

PAROLLES.
Ay, that would be known. To th’ wars, my boy, to th’ wars!
He wears his honour in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars’s fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable; we that dwell in’t, jades,
Therefore, to th’ war!

BERTRAM.
It shall be so; I’ll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the king
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. War is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.

PAROLLES.
Will this caprichio hold in thee, art sure?

BERTRAM.
Go with me to my chamber and advise me.
I’ll send her straight away. Tomorrow
I’ll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

PAROLLES.
Why, these balls bound; there’s noise in it. ’Tis hard:
A young man married is a man that’s marr’d.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
The king has done you wrong; but hush ’tis so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Paris. The King’s palace.

 Enter Helena and Clown.

HELENA.
My mother greets me kindly: is she well?

CLOWN.
She is not well, but yet she has her health; she’s very merry, but yet
she is not well. But thanks be given, she’s very well, and wants
nothing i’ the world; but yet she is not well.

HELENA.
If she be very well, what does she ail that she’s not very well?

CLOWN.
Truly, she’s very well indeed, but for two things.

HELENA.
What two things?

CLOWN.
One, that she’s not in heaven, whither God send her quickly! The other,
that she’s in earth, from whence God send her quickly!

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Bless you, my fortunate lady!

HELENA.
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own good fortune.

PAROLLES.
You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them on, have them
still. O, my knave how does my old lady?

CLOWN.
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I would she did as you
say.

PAROLLES.
Why, I say nothing.

CLOWN.
Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man’s tongue shakes out his
master’s undoing. To say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and
to have nothing, is to be a great part of your title; which is within a
very little of nothing.

PAROLLES.
Away! Thou art a knave.

CLOWN.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou art a knave; that is
before me thou art a knave. This had been truth, sir.

PAROLLES.
Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.

CLOWN.
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you taught to find me? The
search, sir, was profitable; and much fool may you find in you, even to
the world’s pleasure and the increase of laughter.

PAROLLES.
A good knave, i’ faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and right of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
But puts it off to a compell’d restraint;
Whose want, and whose delay, is strew’d with sweets;
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour o’erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.

HELENA.
What’s his will else?

PAROLLES.
That you will take your instant leave o’ the king,
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthen’d with what apology you think
May make it probable need.

HELENA.
What more commands he?

PAROLLES.
That, having this obtain’d, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

HELENA.
In everything I wait upon his will.

PAROLLES.
I shall report it so.

HELENA.
I pray you. Come, sirrah.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another room in the same.

 Enter Lafew and Bertram.

LAFEW.
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.

BERTRAM.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.

LAFEW.
You have it from his own deliverance.

BERTRAM.
And by other warranted testimony.

LAFEW.
Then my dial goes not true; I took this lark for a bunting.

BERTRAM.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in knowledge, and
accordingly valiant.

LAFEW.
I have, then, sinned against his experience and transgressed against
his valour; and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find
in my heart to repent. Here he comes; I pray you make us friends; I
will pursue the amity.

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
[_To Bertram._] These things shall be done, sir.

LAFEW.
Pray you, sir, who’s his tailor?

PAROLLES.
Sir!

LAFEW.
O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, is a good workman, a very good
tailor.

BERTRAM.
[_Aside to Parolles._] Is she gone to the king?

PAROLLES.
She is.

BERTRAM.
Will she away tonight?

PAROLLES.
As you’ll have her.

BERTRAM.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses; and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.

LAFEW.
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner; but one
that lies three-thirds and uses a known truth to pass a thousand
nothings with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.— God save you,
Captain.

BERTRAM.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?

PAROLLES.
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord’s displeasure.

LAFEW.
You have made shift to run into ’t, boots and spurs and all, like him
that leapt into the custard; and out of it you’ll run again, rather
than suffer question for your residence.

BERTRAM.
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.

LAFEW.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at his prayers. Fare you well,
my lord; and believe this of me, there can be no kernal in this light
nut; the soul of this man is his clothes; trust him not in matter of
heavy consequence; I have kept of them tame, and know their natures.
Farewell, monsieur; I have spoken better of you than you have or will
to deserve at my hand; but we must do good against evil.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
An idle lord, I swear.

BERTRAM.
I think so.

PAROLLES.
Why, do you not know him?

BERTRAM.
Yes, I do know him well; and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.

 Enter Helena.

HELENA.
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the king, and have procur’d his leave
For present parting; only he desires
Some private speech with you.

BERTRAM.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you;
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you:
For my respects are better than they seem;
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother.

 [_Giving a letter._]

’Twill be two days ere I shall see you; so
I leave you to your wisdom.

HELENA.
Sir, I can nothing say
But that I am your most obedient servant.

BERTRAM.
Come, come, no more of that.

HELENA.
And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail’d
To equal my great fortune.

BERTRAM.
Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell; hie home.

HELENA.
Pray, sir, your pardon.

BERTRAM.
Well, what would you say?

HELENA.
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe;
Nor dare I say ’tis mine, and yet it is;
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

BERTRAM.
What would you have?

HELENA.
Something; and scarce so much; nothing indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. Faith, yes,
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

BERTRAM.
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.

HELENA.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur?
Farewell,

 [_Exit Helena._]

BERTRAM.
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
Away, and for our flight.

PAROLLES.
Bravely, coragio!

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT III.

SCENE I. Florence. A room in the Duke’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence attended; two French Lords, and
 Soldiers.

DUKE.
So that, from point to point, now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth,
And more thirsts after.

FIRST LORD.
Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace’s part; black and fearful
On the opposer.

DUKE.
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would, in so just a business, shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

SECOND LORD.
Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guess’d.

DUKE.
Be it his pleasure.

FIRST LORD.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.

DUKE.
Welcome shall they be;
And all the honours that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well;
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to the field.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Countess and Clown.

COUNTESS.
It hath happen’d all as I would have had it, save that he comes not
along with her.

CLOWN.
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very melancholy man.

COUNTESS.
By what observance, I pray you?

CLOWN.
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and sing; ask
questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. I know a man that had this
trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

COUNTESS.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.

 [_Opening a letter._]

CLOWN.
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our old lings and our
Isbels o’ th’ country are nothing like your old ling and your Isbels o’
th’ court. The brains of my Cupid’s knock’d out, and I begin to love,
as an old man loves money, with no stomach.

COUNTESS.
What have we here?

CLOWN.
E’en that you have there.

 [_Exit._]

COUNTESS.
[_Reads._] _I have sent you a daughter-in-law; she hath recovered the
king and undone me. I have wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to
make the “not” eternal. You shall hear I am run away; know it before
the report come. If there be breadth enough in the world, I will hold a
long distance. My duty to you.
              Your unfortunate son,_
                            BERTRAM.

This is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
To fly the favours of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers and my young
lady.

COUNTESS.
What is the matter?

CLOWN.
Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort; your son will not
be kill’d so soon as I thought he would.

COUNTESS.
Why should he be kill’d?

CLOWN.
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does; the danger is in
standing to’t; that’s the loss of men, though it be the getting of
children. Here they come will tell you more. For my part, I only hear
your son was run away.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Helena and the two Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Save you, good madam.

HELENA.
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Do not say so.

COUNTESS.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,—
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto ’t. Where is my son, I pray you?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Madam, he’s gone to serve the Duke of Florence;
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some despatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.

HELENA.
Look on this letter, madam; here’s my passport.

[_Reads._] _When thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which never
shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy body that I am
father to, then call me husband; but in such a “then” I write a
“never”._
This is a dreadful sentence.

COUNTESS.
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam; And for the contents’ sake, are sorry for our pains.

COUNTESS.
I pr’ythee, lady, have a better cheer;
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb’st me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam.

COUNTESS.
And to be a soldier?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Such is his noble purpose, and, believe’t,
The duke will lay upon him all the honour
That good convenience claims.

COUNTESS.
Return you thither?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

HELENA.
[_Reads._] _Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France._
’Tis bitter.

COUNTESS.
Find you that there?

HELENA.
Ay, madam.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis but the boldness of his hand haply, which his heart was not
consenting to.

COUNTESS.
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
There’s nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
A servant only, and a gentleman which I have sometime known.

COUNTESS.
Parolles, was it not?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, my good lady, he.

COUNTESS.
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
Which holds him much to have.

COUNTESS.
Y’are welcome, gentlemen.
I will entreat you, when you see my son,
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honour that he loses: more I’ll entreat you
Written to bear along.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.

COUNTESS.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?

 [_Exeunt Countess and Gentlemen._]

HELENA.
“Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.”
Nothing in France until he has no wife!
Thou shalt have none, Rossillon, none in France;
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, is’t I
That chase thee from thy country, and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-peering air,
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to’t;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better ’twere
I met the ravin lion when he roar’d
With sharp constraint of hunger; better ’twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No; come thou home, Rossillon,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone;
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to do’t? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house,
And angels offic’d all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, I’ll steal away.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. Florence. Before the Duke’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, Bertram, drum and trumpets,
 Soldiers, Parolles.

DUKE.
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.

BERTRAM.
Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
We’ll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th’extreme edge of hazard.

DUKE.
Then go thou forth;
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
As thy auspicious mistress!

BERTRAM.
This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file;
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Countess and Steward.

COUNTESS.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done,
By sending me a letter? Read it again.

STEWARD.
[_Reads._] _I am Saint Jaques’ pilgrim, thither gone.
Ambitious love hath so in me offended
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
His name with zealous fervour sanctify.
His taken labours bid him me forgive;
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth.
He is too good and fair for death and me;
Whom I myself embrace to set him free._

COUNTESS.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rynaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so; had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.

STEWARD.
Pardon me, madam;
If I had given you this at over-night,
She might have been o’erta’en; and yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

COUNTESS.
What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rynaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife;
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth,
That he does weigh too light; my greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Without the walls of Florence.

 Enter an old Widow of Florence, Diana, Violenta, Mariana and other
 Citizens.

WIDOW.
Nay, come; for if they do approach the city, we shall lose all the
sight.

DIANA.
They say the French count has done most honourable service.

WIDOW.
It is reported that he has taken their great’st commander, and that
with his own hand he slew the duke’s brother.

 [_A tucket afar off._]

We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. Hark! you may
know by their trumpets.

MARIANA.
Come, let’s return again, and suffice ourselves with the report of it.
Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl; the honour of a maid is her
name; and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

WIDOW.
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a gentleman his
companion.

MARIANA.
I know that knave; hang him! one Parolles; a filthy officer he is in
those suggestions for the young earl. Beware of them, Diana; their
promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of lust,
are not the things they go under; many a maid hath been seduced by
them; and the misery is, example, that so terrible shows in the wreck
of maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession, but that they
are limed with the twigs that threaten them. I hope I need not to
advise you further; but I hope your own grace will keep you where you
are, though there were no further danger known but the modesty which is
so lost.

DIANA.
You shall not need to fear me.

 Enter Helena in the dress of a pilgrim.

WIDOW.
I hope so. Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at my house;
thither they send one another; I’ll question her. God save you,
pilgrim! Whither are bound?

HELENA.
To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

WIDOW.
At the Saint Francis here, beside the port.

HELENA.
Is this the way?

 [_A march afar._]

WIDOW.
Ay, marry, is’t. Hark you, they come this way.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodg’d;
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.

HELENA.
Is it yourself?

WIDOW.
If you shall please so, pilgrim.

HELENA.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

WIDOW.
You came, I think, from France?

HELENA.
I did so.

WIDOW.
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.

HELENA.
His name, I pray you.

DIANA.
The Count Rossillon. Know you such a one?

HELENA.
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
His face I know not.

DIANA.
Whatsome’er he is,
He’s bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As ’tis reported, for the king had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

HELENA.
Ay, surely, mere the truth; I know his lady.

DIANA.
There is a gentleman that serves the count
Reports but coarsely of her.

HELENA.
What’s his name?

DIANA.
Monsieur Parolles.

HELENA.
O, I believe with him,
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated; all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examin’d.

DIANA.
Alas, poor lady!
’Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.

WIDOW.
Ay, right; good creature, wheresoe’er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleas’d.

HELENA.
How do you mean?
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose.

WIDOW.
He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
But she is arm’d for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defence.

 Enter, with a drum and colours, a party of the Florentine army,
 Bertram and Parolles.

MARIANA.
The gods forbid else!

WIDOW.
So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Duke’s eldest son;
That Escalus.

HELENA.
Which is the Frenchman?

DIANA.
He;
That with the plume; ’tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he lov’d his wife; if he were honester
He were much goodlier. Is’t not a handsome gentleman?

HELENA.
I like him well.

DIANA.
’Tis pity he is not honest. Yond’s that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady
I would poison that vile rascal.

HELENA.
Which is he?

DIANA.
That jack-an-apes with scarfs. Why is he melancholy?

HELENA.
Perchance he’s hurt i’ the battle.

PAROLLES.
Lose our drum! Well.

MARIANA.
He’s shrewdly vex’d at something. Look, he has spied us.

WIDOW.
Marry, hang you!

MARIANA.
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!

 [_Exeunt Bertram, Parolles, Officers and Soldiers._]

WIDOW.
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host; of enjoin’d penitents
There’s four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.

HELENA.
I humbly thank you.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight; the charge and thanking
Shall be for me; and, to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
Worthy the note.

BOTH.
We’ll take your offer kindly.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Camp before Florence.

 Enter Bertram and the two French Lords.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, good my lord, put him to’t; let him have his way.

SECOND LORD.
If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no more in your
respect.

FIRST LORD.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.

BERTRAM.
Do you think I am so far deceived in him?

FIRST LORD.
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge, without any malice,
but to speak of him as my kinsman, he’s a most notable coward, an
infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner of no
one good quality worthy your lordship’s entertainment.

SECOND LORD.
It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his virtue, which
he hath not, he might at some great and trusty business, in a main
danger fail you.

BERTRAM.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.

SECOND LORD.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which you hear him so
confidently undertake to do.

FIRST LORD.
I with a troop of Florentines will suddenly surprise him; such I will
have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy; we will bind and
hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried
into the leaguer of the adversaries when we bring him to our own tents.
Be but your lordship present at his examination; if he do not for the
promise of his life, and in the highest compulsion of base fear, offer
to betray you, and deliver all the intelligence in his power against
you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never
trust my judgment in anything.

SECOND LORD.
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he says he has a
stratagem for’t. When your lordship sees the bottom of his success
in’t, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be melted, if
you give him not John Drum’s entertainment, your inclining cannot be
removed. Here he comes.

 Enter Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
O, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour of his design: let
him fetch off his drum in any hand.

BERTRAM.
How now, monsieur! This drum sticks sorely in your disposition.

SECOND LORD.
A pox on ’t; let it go; ’tis but a drum.

PAROLLES.
But a drum! Is’t but a drum? A drum so lost! There was excellent
command, to charge in with our horse upon our own wings, and to rend
our own soldiers.

SECOND LORD.
That was not to be blam’d in the command of the service; it was a
disaster of war that Caesar himself could not have prevented, if he had
been there to command.

BERTRAM.
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some dishonour we had in
the loss of that drum, but it is not to be recovered.

PAROLLES.
It might have been recovered.

BERTRAM.
It might, but it is not now.

PAROLLES.
It is to be recovered. But that the merit of service is seldom
attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have that drum or
another, or _hic jacet_.

BERTRAM.
Why, if you have a stomach, to’t, monsieur, if you think your mystery
in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour again into his native
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise, and go on; I will grace the
attempt for a worthy exploit; if you speed well in it, the duke shall
both speak of it and extend to you what further becomes his greatness,
even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness.

PAROLLES.
By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

BERTRAM.
But you must not now slumber in it.

PAROLLES.
I’ll about it this evening; and I will presently pen down my dilemmas,
encourage myself in my certainty, put myself into my mortal
preparation; and by midnight look to hear further from me.

BERTRAM.
May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?

PAROLLES.
I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the attempt I vow.

BERTRAM.
I know th’art valiant; and to the possibility of thy soldiership, will
subscribe for thee. Farewell.

PAROLLES.
I love not many words.

 [_Exit._]

FIRST LORD.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a strange fellow, my lord,
that so confidently seems to undertake this business, which he knows is
not to be done; damns himself to do, and dares better be damn’d than to
do’t.

SECOND LORD.
You do not know him, my lord, as we do; certain it is that he will
steal himself into a man’s favour, and for a week escape a great deal
of discoveries, but when you find him out, you have him ever after.

BERTRAM.
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of this, that so
seriously he does address himself unto?

FIRST LORD.
None in the world; but return with an invention, and clap upon you two
or three probable lies; but we have almost embossed him; you shall see
his fall tonight; for indeed he is not for your lordship’s respect.

SECOND LORD.
We’ll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him. He was first
smok’d by the old Lord Lafew; when his disguise and he is parted, tell
me what a sprat you shall find him; which you shall see this very
night.

FIRST LORD.
I must go look my twigs. He shall be caught.

BERTRAM.
Your brother, he shall go along with me.

FIRST LORD.
As’t please your lordship. I’ll leave you.

 [_Exit._]

BERTRAM.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The lass I spoke of.

SECOND LORD.
But you say she’s honest.

BERTRAM.
That’s all the fault. I spoke with her but once,
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her
By this same coxcomb that we have i’ the wind
Tokens and letters which she did re-send,
And this is all I have done. She’s a fair creature;
Will you go see her?

SECOND LORD.
With all my heart, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.

 Enter Helena and Widow.

HELENA.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

WIDOW.
Though my estate be fall’n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

HELENA.
Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust, the count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

WIDOW.
I should believe you,
For you have show’d me that which well approves
Y’are great in fortune.

HELENA.
Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay, and pay again
When I have found it. The count he woos your daughter
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolv’d to carry her; let her in fine consent,
As we’ll direct her how ’tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That she’ll demand; a ring the county wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice; yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
Howe’er repented after.

WIDOW.
Now I see
The bottom of your purpose.

HELENA.
You see it lawful then; it is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, I’ll add three thousand crowns
To what is pass’d already.

WIDOW.
I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts, and songs compos’d
To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves; for he persists
As if his life lay on ’t.

HELENA.
Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let’s about it.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT IV.

SCENE I. Without the Florentine camp.

 Enter first Lord with five or six Soldiers in ambush.

FIRST LORD.
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner. When you sally upon
him, speak what terrible language you will; though you understand it
not yourselves, no matter; for we must not seem to understand him,
unless someone among us, whom we must produce for an interpreter.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Good captain, let me be th’ interpreter.

FIRST LORD.
Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy voice?

FIRST SOLDIER.
No sir, I warrant you.

FIRST LORD.
But what linsey-woolsey has thou to speak to us again?

FIRST SOLDIER.
E’en such as you speak to me.

FIRST LORD.
He must think us some band of strangers i’ the adversary’s
entertainment. Now he hath a smack of all neighbouring languages,
therefore we must every one be a man of his own fancy; not to know what
we speak one to another, so we seem to know, is to know straight our
purpose: choughs’ language, gabble enough, and good enough. As for you,
interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch, ho! Here he comes;
to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies
he forges.

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Ten o’clock. Within these three hours ’twill be time enough to go home.
What shall I say I have done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces have of late knock’d
too often at my door. I find my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart
hath the fear of Mars before it, and of his creatures, not daring the
reports of my tongue.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] This is the first truth that e’er thine own tongue was
guilty of.

PAROLLES.
What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum,
being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing I had no such
purpose? I must give myself some hurts, and say I got them in exploit;
yet slight ones will not carry it. They will say “Came you off with so
little?” and great ones I dare not give. Wherefore, what’s the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman’s mouth, and buy
myself another of Bajazet’s mule, if you prattle me into these perils.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Is it possible he should know what he is, and be that he is?

PAROLLES.
I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn, or the
breaking of my Spanish sword.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] We cannot afford you so.

PAROLLES.
Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in stratagem.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] ’Twould not do.

PAROLLES.
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Hardly serve.

PAROLLES.
Though I swore I leap’d from the window of the citadel,—

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] How deep?

PAROLLES.
Thirty fathom.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.

PAROLLES.
I would I had any drum of the enemy’s; I would swear I recover’d it.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] You shall hear one anon.

PAROLLES.
A drum now of the enemy’s!

 [_Alarum within._]

FIRST LORD.
_Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo._

ALL.
_Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo._

 [_They seize and blindfold him._]

PAROLLES.
O, ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Boskos thromuldo boskos._

PAROLLES.
I know you are the Muskos’ regiment,
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me,
I’ll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Boskos vauvado._ I understand thee, and can speak thy tongue.
_Kerelybonto._ Sir, Betake thee to thy faith, for seventeen poniards
are at thy bosom.

PAROLLES.
O!

FIRST SOLDIER.
O, pray, pray, pray!
_Manka revania dulche._

FIRST LORD.
_Oscorbidulchos volivorco._

FIRST SOLDIER.
The General is content to spare thee yet;
And, hoodwink’d as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.

PAROLLES.
O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I’ll show,
Their force, their purposes; nay, I’ll speak that
Which you will wonder at.

FIRST SOLDIER.
But wilt thou faithfully?

PAROLLES.
If I do not, damn me.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Acordo linta._
Come on; thou art granted space.

 [_Exit, with Parolles guarded._]

 A short alarum within.

FIRST LORD.
Go tell the Count Rossillon and my brother
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.

SECOND SOLDIER.
Captain, I will.

FIRST LORD.
’A will betray us all unto ourselves;
Inform on that.

SECOND SOLDIER.
So I will, sir.

FIRST LORD.
Till then I’ll keep him dark, and safely lock’d.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.

 Enter Bertram and Diana.

BERTRAM.
They told me that your name was Fontybell.

DIANA.
No, my good lord, Diana.

BERTRAM.
Titled goddess;
And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument;
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now; for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.

DIANA.
She then was honest.

BERTRAM.
So should you be.

DIANA.
No.
My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.

BERTRAM.
No more a’ that!
I pr’ythee do not strive against my vows;
I was compell’d to her; but I love thee
By love’s own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIANA.
Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you; but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
And mock us with our bareness.

BERTRAM.
How have I sworn?

DIANA.
’Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vow’d true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the highest to witness: then, pray you, tell me,
If I should swear by Jove’s great attributes
I lov’d you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions; but unseal’d,—
At least in my opinion.

BERTRAM.
Change it, change it.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy;
And my integrity ne’er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.

DIANA.
I see that men make hopes in such a case,
That we’ll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.

BERTRAM.
I’ll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.

DIANA.
Will you not, my lord?

BERTRAM.
It is an honour ’longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i’ the world
In me to lose.

DIANA.
Mine honour’s such a ring;
My chastity’s the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i’ the world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion honour on my part
Against your vain assault.

BERTRAM.
Here, take my ring;
My house, mine honour, yea, my life be thine,
And I’ll be bid by thee.

DIANA.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber window;
I’ll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquer’d my yet maiden-bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be deliver’d;
And on your finger in the night, I’ll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

BERTRAM.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.

 [_Exit._]

DIANA.
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat in’s heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wife’s dead; therefore I’ll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise, I think’t no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. The Florentine camp.

 Enter the two French Lords and two or three Soldiers.

FIRST LORD.
You have not given him his mother’s letter?

SECOND LORD.
I have deliv’red it an hour since; there is something in’t that stings
his nature; for on the reading it, he chang’d almost into another man.

FIRST LORD.
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off so good a wife
and so sweet a lady.

SECOND LORD.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king,
who had even tun’d his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

FIRST LORD.
When you have spoken it, ’tis dead, and I am the grave of it.

SECOND LORD.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence, of a most
chaste renown, and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her
honour; he hath given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself made
in the unchaste composition.

FIRST LORD.
Now, God delay our rebellion! As we are ourselves, what things are we!

SECOND LORD.
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of all treasons,
we still see them reveal themselves till they attain to their abhorr’d
ends; so he that in this action contrives against his own nobility, in
his proper stream, o’erflows himself.

FIRST LORD.
Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of our unlawful
intents? We shall not then have his company tonight?

SECOND LORD.
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.

FIRST LORD.
That approaches apace. I would gladly have him see his company
anatomized, that he might take a measure of his own judgments, wherein
so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

SECOND LORD.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his presence must be the
whip of the other.

FIRST LORD.
In the meantime, what hear you of these wars?

SECOND LORD.
I hear there is an overture of peace.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

SECOND LORD.
What will Count Rossillon do then? Will he travel higher, or return
again into France?

FIRST LORD.
I perceive by this demand, you are not altogether of his council.

SECOND LORD.
Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a great deal of his act.

FIRST LORD.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his house. Her pretence
is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques le Grand; which holy undertaking with
most austere sanctimony she accomplished; and there residing, the
tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a
groan of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.

SECOND LORD.
How is this justified?

FIRST LORD.
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which makes her story true,
even to the point of her death. Her death itself, which could not be
her office to say is come, was faithfully confirm’d by the rector of
the place.

SECOND LORD.
Hath the count all this intelligence?

FIRST LORD.
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from point, to the full
arming of the verity.

SECOND LORD.
I am heartily sorry that he’ll be glad of this.

FIRST LORD.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!

SECOND LORD.
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in tears! The great
dignity that his valour hath here acquir’d for him shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample.

FIRST LORD.
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together; our
virtues would be proud if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes
would despair if they were not cherish’d by our virtues.

 Enter a Messenger.

How now? Where’s your master?

MESSENGER.
He met the duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath taken a solemn
leave: his lordship will next morning for France. The duke hath offered
him letters of commendations to the king.

SECOND LORD.
They shall be no more than needful there, if they were more than they
can commend.

 Enter Bertram.

FIRST LORD.
They cannot be too sweet for the king’s tartness. Here’s his lordship
now. How now, my lord, is’t not after midnight?

BERTRAM.
I have tonight despatch’d sixteen businesses, a month’s length apiece;
by an abstract of success: I have congied with the duke, done my adieu
with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn’d for her, writ to my lady
mother I am returning, entertained my convoy, and between these main
parcels of despatch effected many nicer needs: the last was the
greatest, but that I have not ended yet.

SECOND LORD.
If the business be of any difficulty and this morning your departure
hence, it requires haste of your lordship.

BERTRAM.
I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter.
But shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and the Soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module has deceiv’d me like a
double-meaning prophesier.

SECOND LORD.
Bring him forth.

 [_Exeunt Soldiers._]

Has sat i’ the stocks all night, poor gallant knave.

BERTRAM.
No matter; his heels have deserv’d it, in usurping his spurs so long.
How does he carry himself?

FIRST LORD.
I have told your lordship already; the stocks carry him. But to answer
you as you would be understood: he weeps like a wench that had shed her
milk; he hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes to be a
friar, from the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster
of his setting i’ the stocks. And what think you he hath confessed?

BERTRAM.
Nothing of me, has he?

SECOND LORD.
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his face; if your
lordship be in’t, as I believe you are, you must have the patience to
hear it.

 Enter Soldiers with Parolles.

BERTRAM.
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of me; hush, hush!

FIRST LORD.
Hoodman comes! _Portotartarossa._

FIRST SOLDIER.
He calls for the tortures. What will you say without ’em?

PAROLLES.
I will confess what I know without constraint. If ye pinch me like a
pasty I can say no more.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Bosko chimurcho._

FIRST LORD.
_Boblibindo chicurmurco._

FIRST SOLDIER.
You are a merciful general. Our general bids you answer to what I shall
ask you out of a note.

PAROLLES.
And truly, as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
‘First demand of him how many horse the duke is strong.’ What say you
to that?

PAROLLES.
Five or six thousand; but very weak and unserviceable: the troops are
all scattered, and the commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit, and as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Shall I set down your answer so?

PAROLLES.
Do. I’ll take the sacrament on ’t, how and which way you will.

BERTRAM.
All’s one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!

FIRST LORD.
You are deceived, my lord; this is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant
militarist (that was his own phrase), that had the whole theoric of war
in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the chape of his dagger.

SECOND LORD.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword clean, nor believe
he can have everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, that’s set down.

PAROLLES.
‘Five or six thousand horse’ I said—I will say true—or thereabouts, set
down,—for I’ll speak truth.

FIRST LORD.
He’s very near the truth in this.

BERTRAM.
But I con him no thanks for’t in the nature he delivers it.

PAROLLES.
Poor rogues, I pray you say.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, that’s set down.

PAROLLES.
I humbly thank you, sir; a truth’s a truth, the rogues are marvellous
poor.

FIRST SOLDIER.
‘Demand of him of what strength they are a-foot.’ What say you to that?

PAROLLES.
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell
true. Let me see: Spurio, a hundred and fifty, Sebastian, so many;
Corambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowick, and
Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own company, Chitopher, Vaumond,
Bentii, two hundred fifty each: so that the muster-file, rotten and
sound, upon my life, amounts not to fifteen thousand poll; half of the
which dare not shake the snow from off their cassocks lest they shake
themselves to pieces.

BERTRAM.
What shall be done to him?

FIRST LORD.
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my condition, and what
credit I have with the duke.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, that’s set down. ‘You shall demand of him whether one Captain
Dumaine be i’ the camp, a Frenchman; what his reputation is with the
duke, what his valour, honesty and expertness in wars; or whether he
thinks it were not possible with well-weighing sums of gold to corrupt
him to a revolt.’ What say you to this? What do you know of it?

PAROLLES.
I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the inter’gatories.
Demand them singly.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Do you know this Captain Dumaine?

PAROLLES.
I know him: he was a botcher’s ’prentice in Paris, from whence he was
whipped for getting the shrieve’s fool with child, a dumb innocent that
could not say him nay.

 [_First Lord lifts up his hand in anger._]

BERTRAM.
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though I know his brains are
forfeit to the next tile that falls.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, is this captain in the Duke of Florence’s camp?

PAROLLES.
Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your lordship anon.

FIRST SOLDIER.
What is his reputation with the duke?

PAROLLES.
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of mine, and writ to
me this other day to turn him out o’ the band. I think I have his
letter in my pocket.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Marry, we’ll search.

PAROLLES.
In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there or it is upon a
file, with the duke’s other letters, in my tent.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Here ’tis; here’s a paper; shall I read it to you?

PAROLLES.
I do not know if it be it or no.

BERTRAM.
Our interpreter does it well.

FIRST LORD.
Excellently.

FIRST SOLDIER.
[_Reads._] _Dian, the Count’s a fool, and full of gold._

PAROLLES.
That is not the duke’s letter, sir; that is an advertisement to a
proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take heed of the allurement of
one Count Rossillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very ruttish.
I pray you, sir, put it up again.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Nay, I’ll read it first by your favour.

PAROLLES.
My meaning in’t, I protest, was very honest in the behalf of the maid;
for I knew the young count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is
a whale to virginity, and devours up all the fry it finds.

BERTRAM.
Damnable both sides rogue!

FIRST SOLDIER.
[_Reads._]
_When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
After he scores, he never pays the score.
Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
He ne’er pays after-debts, take it before.
And say a soldier, ‘Dian,’ told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
For count of this, the count’s a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vow’d to thee in thine ear,_
                                     PAROLLES.

BERTRAM.
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme in’s forehead.

SECOND LORD.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold linguist, and the
armipotent soldier.

BERTRAM.
I could endure anything before but a cat, and now he’s a cat to me.

FIRST SOLDIER.
I perceive, sir, by our general’s looks we shall be fain to hang you.

PAROLLES.
My life, sir, in any case. Not that I am afraid to die, but that, my
offences being many, I would repent out the remainder of nature. Let me
live, sir, in a dungeon, i’ the stocks, or anywhere, so I may live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
We’ll see what may be done, so you confess freely. Therefore, once more
to this Captain Dumaine: you have answer’d to his reputation with the
duke, and to his valour. What is his honesty?

PAROLLES.
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for rapes and ravishments
he parallels Nessus. He professes not keeping of oaths; in breaking
them he is stronger than Hercules. He will lie, sir, with such
volubility that you would think truth were a fool: drunkenness is his
best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does
little harm, save to his bedclothes about him; but they know his
conditions and lay him in straw. I have but little more to say, sir, of
his honesty; he has everything that an honest man should not have; what
an honest man should have, he has nothing.

FIRST LORD.
I begin to love him for this.

BERTRAM.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him for me, he’s more
and more a cat.

FIRST SOLDIER.
What say you to his expertness in war?

PAROLLES.
Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English tragedians,—to belie
him I will not,—and more of his soldiership I know not, except in that
country he had the honour to be the officer at a place there called
Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of files. I would do the man
what honour I can, but of this I am not certain.

FIRST LORD.
He hath out-villain’d villainy so far that the rarity redeems him.

BERTRAM.
A pox on him! He’s a cat still.

FIRST SOLDIER.
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not to ask you if gold
will corrupt him to revolt.

PAROLLES.
Sir, for a quart d’ecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation,
the inheritance of it, and cut the entail from all remainders, and a
perpetual succession for it perpetually.

FIRST SOLDIER.
What’s his brother, the other Captain Dumaine?

SECOND LORD.
Why does he ask him of me?

FIRST SOLDIER.
What’s he?

PAROLLES.
E’en a crow o’ the same nest; not altogether so great as the first in
goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He excels his brother for a
coward, yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a
retreat he outruns any lackey; marry, in coming on he has the cramp.

FIRST SOLDIER.
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray the Florentine?

PAROLLES.
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rossillon.

FIRST SOLDIER.
I’ll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.

PAROLLES.
[_Aside._] I’ll no more drumming; a plague of all drums! Only to seem
to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious
young boy the count, have I run into this danger: yet who would have
suspected an ambush where I was taken?

FIRST SOLDIER.
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die. The general says you that
have so traitorously discovered the secrets of your army, and made such
pestiferous reports of men very nobly held, can serve the world for no
honest use; therefore you must die. Come, headsman, off with his head.

PAROLLES.
O Lord! sir, let me live, or let me see my death.

FIRST SOLDIER.
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.

 [_Unmuffling him._]

So, look about you; know you any here?

BERTRAM.
Good morrow, noble captain.

SECOND LORD.
God bless you, Captain Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
God save you, noble captain.

SECOND LORD.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafew? I am for France.

FIRST LORD.
Good Captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana
in behalf of the Count Rossillon? And I were not a very coward I’d
compel it of you; but fare you well.

 [_Exeunt Bertram, Lords &c._]

FIRST SOLDIER.
You are undone, captain: all but your scarf; that has a knot on’t yet.

PAROLLES.
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?

FIRST SOLDIER.
If you could find out a country where but women were that had received
so much shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare ye well, sir. I
am for France too; we shall speak of you there.

 [_Exeunt._]

PAROLLES.
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great
’Twould burst at this. Captain I’ll be no more,
But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this; for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, Parolles live
Safest in shame; being fool’d, by foolery thrive.
There’s place and means for every man alive.
I’ll after them.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Florence. A room in the Widow’s house.

 Enter Helena, Widow and Diana.

HELENA.
That you may well perceive I have not wrong’d you
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety; fore whose throne ’tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was I did him a desired office,
Dear almost as his life; which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar’s bosom would peep forth,
And answer thanks. I duly am inform’d
His grace is at Marseilles; to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding,
And by the leave of my good lord the king,
We’ll be before our welcome.

WIDOW.
Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

HELENA.
Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter’s dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But, O strange men!
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozen’d thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night; so lust doth play
With what it loathes, for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter. You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

DIANA.
Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

HELENA.
Yet, I pray you;
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away;
Our waggon is prepar’d, and time revives us.
All’s well that ends well; still the fine’s the crown.
Whate’er the course, the end is the renown.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Rossillon. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Clown, Countess and Lafew.

LAFEW.
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow there,
whose villanous saffron would have made all the unbak’d and doughy
youth of a nation in his colour. Your daughter-in-law had been alive at
this hour, and your son here at home, more advanc’d by the king than by
that red-tail’d humble-bee I speak of.

COUNTESS.
I would I had not known him; it was the death of the most virtuous
gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating. If she had
partaken of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I
could not have owed her a more rooted love.

LAFEW.
’Twas a good lady, ’twas a good lady. We may pick a thousand salads ere
we light on such another herb.

CLOWN.
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the salad, or, rather, the
herb of grace.

LAFEW.
They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.

CLOWN.
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not much skill in grass.

LAFEW.
Whether dost thou profess thyself,—a knave or a fool?

CLOWN.
A fool, sir, at a woman’s service, and a knave at a man’s.

LAFEW.
Your distinction?

CLOWN.
I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.

LAFEW.
So you were a knave at his service indeed.

CLOWN.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.

LAFEW.
I will subscribe for thee; thou art both knave and fool.

CLOWN.
At your service.

LAFEW.
No, no, no.

CLOWN.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a prince as you
are.

LAFEW.
Who’s that? a Frenchman?

CLOWN.
Faith, sir, ’a has an English name; but his phisnomy is more hotter in
France than there.

LAFEW.
What prince is that?

CLOWN.
The black prince, sir; alias the prince of darkness; alias the devil.

LAFEW.
Hold thee, there’s my purse. I give thee not this to suggest thee from
thy master thou talk’st of; serve him still.

CLOWN.
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire, and the
master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But sure he is the prince of
the world; let his nobility remain in’s court. I am for the house with
the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some
that humble themselves may, but the many will be too chill and tender,
and they’ll be for the flow’ry way that leads to the broad gate and the
great fire.

LAFEW.
Go thy ways, I begin to be a-weary of thee; and I tell thee so before,
because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways; let my horses be
well look’d to, without any tricks.

CLOWN.
If I put any tricks upon ’em, sir, they shall be jades’ tricks, which
are their own right by the law of nature.

 [_Exit._]

LAFEW.
A shrewd knave, and an unhappy.

COUNTESS.
So he is. My lord that’s gone made himself much sport out of him; by
his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his
sauciness; and indeed he has no pace, but runs where he will.

LAFEW.
I like him well; ’tis not amiss. And I was about to tell you, since I
heard of the good lady’s death, and that my lord your son was upon his
return home, I moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of my
daughter; which, in the minority of them both, his majesty out of a
self-gracious remembrance did first propose. His highness hath promis’d
me to do it; and, to stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against
your son, there is no fitter matter. How does your ladyship like it?

COUNTESS.
With very much content, my lord, and I wish it happily effected.

LAFEW.
His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able body as when he
number’d thirty; he will be here tomorrow, or I am deceived by him that
in such intelligence hath seldom fail’d.

COUNTESS.
It rejoices me that I hope I shall see him ere I die. I have letters
that my son will be here tonight. I shall beseech your lordship to
remain with me till they meet together.

LAFEW.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted.

COUNTESS.
You need but plead your honourable privilege.

LAFEW.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but, I thank my God, it holds
yet.

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
O madam, yonder’s my lord your son with a patch of velvet on’s face;
whether there be a scar under’t or no, the velvet knows; but ’tis a
goodly patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a
half, but his right cheek is worn bare.

LAFEW.
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery of honour; so
belike is that.

CLOWN.
But it is your carbonado’d face.

LAFEW.
Let us go see your son, I pray you. I long to talk with the young noble
soldier.

CLOWN.
Faith, there’s a dozen of ’em, with delicate fine hats, and most
courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every man.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT V.

SCENE I. Marseilles. A street.

 Enter Helena, Widow and Diana with two Attendants.

HELENA.
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you. In happy time;—

 Enter a Gentleman.

This man may help me to his majesty’s ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you, sir.

GENTLEMAN.
And you.

HELENA.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

GENTLEMAN.
I have been sometimes there.

HELENA.
I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness;
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

GENTLEMAN.
What’s your will?

HELENA.
That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the king,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

GENTLEMAN.
The king’s not here.

HELENA.
Not here, sir?

GENTLEMAN.
Not indeed.
He hence remov’d last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.

WIDOW.
Lord, how we lose our pains!

HELENA.
All’s well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

GENTLEMAN.
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillon;
Whither I am going.

HELENA.
I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the king before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame,
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

GENTLEMAN.
This I’ll do for you.

HELENA.
And you shall find yourself to be well thank’d,
Whate’er falls more. We must to horse again.
Go, go, provide.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. The inner court of the Countess’s palace.

 Enter Clown and Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafew this letter; I have ere now,
sir, been better known to you, when I have held familiarity with
fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in Fortune’s mood, and
smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.

CLOWN.
Truly, Fortune’s displeasure is but sluttish, if it smell so strongly
as thou speak’st of. I will henceforth eat no fish of Fortune’s
buttering. Pr’ythee, allow the wind.

PAROLLES.
Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir. I spake but by a metaphor.

CLOWN.
Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my nose, or against
any man’s metaphor. Pr’ythee, get thee further.

PAROLLES.
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

CLOWN.
Foh, pr’ythee stand away. A paper from Fortune’s close-stool to give to
a nobleman! Look here he comes himself.

 Enter Lafew.

Here is a pur of Fortune’s, sir, or of Fortune’s cat, but not a
musk-cat, that has fallen into the unclean fishpond of her displeasure,
and as he says, is muddied withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp as you
may, for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish, rascally
knave. I do pity his distress in my similes of comfort, and leave him
to your lordship.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath cruelly scratch’d.

LAFEW.
And what would you have me to do? ’Tis too late to pare her nails now.
Wherein have you played the knave with Fortune that she should scratch
you, who of herself is a good lady, and would not have knaves thrive
long under her? There’s a quart d’ecu for you. Let the justices make
you and Fortune friends; I am for other business.

PAROLLES.
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.

LAFEW.
You beg a single penny more. Come, you shall ha’t; save your word.

PAROLLES.
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.

LAFEW.
You beg more than word then. Cox my passion! Give me your hand. How
does your drum?

PAROLLES.
O my good lord, you were the first that found me.

LAFEW.
Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost thee.

PAROLLES.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, for you did bring
me out.

LAFEW.
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once both the office of
God and the devil? One brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee
out.

 [_Trumpets sound._]

The king’s coming; I know by his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further
after me. I had talk of you last night; though you are a fool and a
knave, you shall eat. Go to; follow.

PAROLLES.
I praise God for you.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A room in the Countess’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafew, Lords, Gentlemen, Guards &c.

KING.
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it; but your son,
As mad in folly, lack’d the sense to know
Her estimation home.

COUNTESS.
’Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done i’ the blaze of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason’s force,
O’erbears it and burns on.

KING.
My honour’d lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watch’d the time to shoot.

LAFEW.
This I must say,—
But first, I beg my pardon,—the young lord
Did to his majesty, his mother, and his lady,
Offence of mighty note; but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes; whose words all ears took captive;
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn’d to serve
Humbly call’d mistress.

KING.
Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither;
We are reconcil’d, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon;
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper than oblivion do we bury
Th’ incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So ’tis our will he should.

GENTLEMAN.
I shall, my liege.

 [_Exit Gentleman._]

KING.
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?

LAFEW.
All that he is hath reference to your highness.

KING.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.

 Enter Bertram.

LAFEW.
He looks well on ’t.

KING.
I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth;
The time is fair again.

BERTRAM.
My high-repented blames
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

KING.
All is whole.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let’s take the instant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quick’st decrees
Th’inaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?

BERTRAM.
Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold herald of my tongue:
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warp’d the line of every other favour,
Scorn’d a fair colour, or express’d it stolen,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men prais’d, and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have lov’d, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

KING.
Well excus’d:
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
From the great compt: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offence,
Crying, That’s good that’s gone. Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust:
Our own love waking cries to see what’s done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen’s knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we’ll stay
To see our widower’s second marriage-day.

COUNTESS.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

LAFEW.
Come on, my son, in whom my house’s name
Must be digested; give a favour from you,
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.

 [_Bertram gives a ring to Lafew._]

By my old beard,
And ev’ry hair that’s on ’t, Helen that’s dead
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that e’er I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger.

BERTRAM.
Hers it was not.

KING.
Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fasten’d to it.
This ring was mine; and when I gave it Helen
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft to ’reave her
Of what should stead her most?

BERTRAM.
My gracious sovereign,
Howe’er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

COUNTESS.
Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it; and she reckon’d it
At her life’s rate.

LAFEW.
I am sure I saw her wear it.

BERTRAM.
You are deceiv’d, my lord; she never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapp’d in a paper, which contain’d the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood engag’d; but when I had subscrib’d
To mine own fortune, and inform’d her fully
I could not answer in that course of honour
As she had made the overture, she ceas’d,
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the ring again.

KING.
Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
Hath not in nature’s mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. ’Twas mine, ’twas Helen’s,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess ’twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She call’d the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

BERTRAM.
She never saw it.

KING.
Thou speak’st it falsely, as I love mine honour,
And mak’st conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman,—’twill not prove so:
And yet I know not, thou didst hate her deadly.
And she is dead; which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe
More than to see this ring. Take him away.

 [_Guards seize Bertram._]

My fore-past proofs, howe’er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly fear’d too little. Away with him.
We’ll sift this matter further.

BERTRAM.
If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where she yet never was.

 [_Exit, guarded._]

KING.
I am wrapp’d in dismal thinkings.

 Enter a Gentleman.

GENTLEMAN.
Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
Here’s a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquish’d thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this, I know,
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your highness with herself.

KING.
[_Reads._] _Upon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was
dead, I blush to say it, he won me. Now is the Count Rossillon a
widower; his vows are forfeited to me, and my honour’s paid to him. He
stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow him to his country
for justice. Grant it me, O king, in you it best lies; otherwise a
seducer flourishes, and a poor maid is undone._
                                    DIANA CAPILET.

LAFEW.
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this. I’ll none of
him.

KING.
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the count.

 [_Exeunt Gentleman and some Attendants._]

I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatch’d.

COUNTESS.
Now, justice on the doers!

 Enter Bertram, guarded.

KING.
I wonder, sir, since wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry. What woman’s that?

 Enter Widow and Diana.

DIANA.
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet;
My suit, as I do understand, you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

WIDOW.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.

KING.
Come hither, count; do you know these women?

BERTRAM.
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?

DIANA.
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?

BERTRAM.
She’s none of mine, my lord.

DIANA.
If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine,
You give away heaven’s vows, and those are mine,
You give away myself, which is known mine;
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.

LAFEW.
[_To Bertram_] Your reputation comes too short for my daughter; you are
no husband for her.

BERTRAM.
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature
Whom sometime I have laugh’d with. Let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
Than for to think that I would sink it here.

KING.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them; fairer prove your honour
Than in my thought it lies!

DIANA.
Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
He had not my virginity.

KING.
What say’st thou to her?

BERTRAM.
She’s impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.

DIANA.
He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel; yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o’ the camp,
If I be one.

COUNTESS.
He blushes, and ’tis it.
Of six preceding ancestors, that gem
Conferr’d by testament to th’ sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife;
That ring’s a thousand proofs.

KING.
Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.

DIANA.
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument; his name’s Parolles.

LAFEW.
I saw the man today, if man he be.

KING.
Find him, and bring him hither.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

BERTRAM.
What of him?
He’s quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o’ the world tax’d and debauch’d:
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he’ll utter,
That will speak anything?

KING.
She hath that ring of yours.

BERTRAM.
I think she has. Certain it is I lik’d her
And boarded her i’ the wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy’s course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine,
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace,
Subdu’d me to her rate; she got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market-price have bought.

DIANA.
I must be patient.
You that have turn’d off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet,—
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband—
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

BERTRAM.
I have it not.

KING.
What ring was yours, I pray you?

DIANA.
Sir, much like
The same upon your finger.

KING.
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

DIANA.
And this was it I gave him, being abed.

KING.
The story then goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement.

DIANA.
I have spoke the truth.

 Enter Attendant with Parolles.

BERTRAM.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.

KING.
You boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
Is this the man you speak of?

DIANA.
Ay, my lord.

KING.
Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which on your just proceeding, I’ll keep off,—
By him and by this woman here what know you?

PAROLLES.
So please your majesty, my master hath been an honourable gentleman.
Tricks he hath had in him, which gentlemen have.

KING.
Come, come, to the purpose. Did he love this woman?

PAROLLES.
Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?

KING.
How, I pray you?

PAROLLES.
He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.

KING.
How is that?

PAROLLES.
He lov’d her, sir, and lov’d her not.

KING.
As thou art a knave and no knave.
What an equivocal companion is this!

PAROLLES.
I am a poor man, and at your majesty’s command.

LAFEW.
He’s a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.

DIANA.
Do you know he promised me marriage?

PAROLLES.
Faith, I know more than I’ll speak.

KING.
But wilt thou not speak all thou know’st?

PAROLLES.
Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them as I said; but more
than that, he loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and talked of
Satan, and of Limbo, and of furies, and I know not what: yet I was in
that credit with them at that time that I knew of their going to bed;
and of other motions, as promising her marriage, and things which would
derive me ill will to speak of; therefore I will not speak what I know.

KING.
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they are married;
but thou art too fine in thy evidence; therefore stand aside. This
ring, you say, was yours?

DIANA.
Ay, my good lord.

KING.
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?

DIANA.
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

KING.
Who lent it you?

DIANA.
It was not lent me neither.

KING.
Where did you find it then?

DIANA.
I found it not.

KING.
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

DIANA.
I never gave it him.

LAFEW.
This woman’s an easy glove, my lord; she goes off and on at pleasure.

KING.
This ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.

DIANA.
It might be yours or hers for ought I know.

KING.
Take her away, I do not like her now.
To prison with her. And away with him.
Unless thou tell’st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.

DIANA.
I’ll never tell you.

KING.
Take her away.

DIANA.
I’ll put in bail, my liege.

KING.
I think thee now some common customer.

DIANA.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, ’twas you.

KING.
Wherefore hast thou accus’d him all this while?

DIANA.
Because he’s guilty, and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he’ll swear to’t:
I’ll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great King, I am no strumpet, by my life;
I am either maid, or else this old man’s wife.

 [_Pointing to Lafew._]

KING.
She does abuse our ears; to prison with her.

DIANA.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir;

 [_Exit Widow._]

The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abus’d me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harm’d me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defil’d;
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
So there’s my riddle: one that’s dead is quick,
And now behold the meaning.

 Enter Widow with Helena.

KING.
Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is’t real that I see?

HELENA.
No, my good lord;
’Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name, and not the thing.

BERTRAM.
Both, both. O, pardon!

HELENA.
O, my good lord, when I was like this maid;
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
And, look you, here’s your letter. This it says,
‘When from my finger you can get this ring,
And is by me with child, &c.’ This is done;
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

BERTRAM.
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I’ll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

HELENA.
If it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
O my dear mother, do I see you living?

LAFEW.
Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon.
[_to Parolles_] Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home, I’ll make sport with thee.
Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.

KING.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
[_To Diana._] If thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I’ll pay thy dower;
For I can guess that by thy honest aid,
Thou kept’st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.

 [_Flourish._]

[EPILOGUE]

_The king’s a beggar, now the play is done;
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content; which we will pay
With strife to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts;
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts._

 [_Exeunt omnes._]




THE TRAGEDY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA


Contents

ACT I
Scene I.
Alexandria. A Room in Cleopatra’s palace.
Scene II.
Alexandria. Another Room in Cleopatra’s palace.
Scene III.
Alexandria. A Room in Cleopatra’s palace.
Scene IV.
Rome. An Apartment in Caesar’s House
Scene V.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

ACT II
Scene I.
Messina. A Room in Pompey’s house.
Scene II.
Rome. A Room in the House of Lepidus.
Scene III.
Rome. A Room in Caesar’s House.
Scene IV.
Rome. A street.
Scene V.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene VI.
Near Misenum.
Scene VII.
On board Pompey’s Galley, lying near Misenum.

ACT III
Scene I.
A plain in Syria.
Scene II.
Rome. An Ante-chamber in Caesar’s house.
Scene III.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene IV.
Athens. A Room in Antony’s House.
Scene V.
Athens. Another Room in Antony’s House.
Scene VI.
Rome. A Room in Caesar’s House.
Scene VII.
Antony’s Camp near the Promontory of Actium.
Scene VIII.
A plain near Actium.
Scene IX.
Another part of the Plain.
Scene X.
Another part of the Plain.
Scene XI.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene XII.
Caesar’s camp in Egypt.
Scene XIII.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

ACT IV
Scene I.
Caesar’s Camp at Alexandria.
Scene II.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene III.
Alexandria. Before the Palace.
Scene IV.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene V.
Antony’s camp near Alexandria.
Scene VI.
Alexandria. Caesar’s camp.
Scene VII.
Field of battle between the Camps.
Scene VIII.
Under the Walls of Alexandria.
Scene IX.
Caesar’s camp.
Scene X.
Ground between the two Camps.
Scene XI.
Another part of the Ground.
Scene XII.
Another part of the Ground.
Scene XIII.
Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.
Scene XIV.
Alexandria. Another Room.
Scene XV.
Alexandria. A monument.

ACT V
Scene I.
Caesar’s Camp before Alexandria.
Scene II.
Alexandria. A Room in the Monument.


Dramatis Personæ

MARK ANTONY, Triumvir
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, Triumvir
LEPIDUS, Triumvir
SEXTUS POMPEIUS,
DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, friend to Antony
VENTIDIUS, friend to Antony
EROS, friend to Antony
SCARUS, friend to Antony
DERCETUS, friend to Antony
DEMETRIUS, friend to Antony
PHILO, friend to Antony
MAECENAS, friend to Caesar
AGRIPPA, friend to Caesar
DOLABELLA, friend to Caesar
PROCULEIUS, friend to Caesar
THIDIAS, friend to Caesar
GALLUS, friend to Caesar
MENAS, friend to Pompey
MENECRATES, friend to Pompey
VARRIUS, friend to Pompey
TAURUS, Lieutenant-General to Caesar
CANIDIUS, Lieutenant-General to Antony
SILIUS, an Officer in Ventidius’s army
EUPHRONIUS, an Ambassador from Antony to Caesar
ALEXAS, attendant on Cleopatra
MARDIAN, attendant on Cleopatra
SELEUCUS, attendant on Cleopatra
DIOMEDES, attendant on Cleopatra
A SOOTHSAYER
A CLOWN

CLEOPATRA, Queen of Egypt
OCTAVIA, sister to Caesar and wife to Antony
CHARMIAN, Attendant on Cleopatra
IRAS, Attendant on Cleopatra

Officers, Soldiers, Messengers, and other Attendants

SCENE: Dispersed, in several parts of the Roman Empire.




ACT I


SCENE I. Alexandria. A Room in Cleopatra’s palace.

 Enter Demetrius and Philo.

PHILO.
Nay, but this dotage of our general’s
O’erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes,
That o’er the files and musters of the war
Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front. His captain’s heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gipsy’s lust.

 Flourish. Enter Antony and Cleopatra, her Ladies, the Train, with
 Eunuchs fanning her.

Look where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
The triple pillar of the world transform’d
Into a strumpet’s fool. Behold and see.

CLEOPATRA.
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.

ANTONY.
There’s beggary in the love that can be reckoned.

CLEOPATRA.
I’ll set a bourn how far to be beloved.

ANTONY.
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
News, my good lord, from Rome.

ANTONY.
Grates me, the sum.

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry; or who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you: “Do this or this;
Take in that kingdom and enfranchise that.
Perform’t, or else we damn thee.”

ANTONY.
How, my love?

CLEOPATRA.
Perchance! Nay, and most like.
You must not stay here longer; your dismission
Is come from Caesar; therefore hear it, Antony.
Where’s Fulvia’s process?—Caesar’s I would say? Both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt’s queen,
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar’s homager; else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!

ANTONY.
Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life
Is to do thus [_Embracing_]; when such a mutual pair
And such a twain can do’t, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.

CLEOPATRA.
Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her?
I’ll seem the fool I am not. Antony
Will be himself.

ANTONY.
But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Let’s not confound the time with conference harsh.
There’s not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?

CLEOPATRA.
Hear the ambassadors.

ANTONY.
Fie, wrangling queen!
Whom everything becomes—to chide, to laugh,
To weep; whose every passion fully strives
To make itself, in thee fair and admired!
No messenger but thine, and all alone
Tonight we’ll wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen,
Last night you did desire it. Speak not to us.

 [_Exeunt Antony and Cleopatra with the Train._]

DEMETRIUS.
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?

PHILO.
Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony,
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.

DEMETRIUS.
I am full sorry
That he approves the common liar who
Thus speaks of him at Rome, but I will hope
Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Alexandria. Another Room in Cleopatra’s palace.

 Enter Enobarbus, a Soothsayer, Charmian, Iras, Mardian and Alexas.

CHARMIAN.
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost most absolute
Alexas, where’s the soothsayer that you praised so to th’ queen? O,
that I knew this husband which you say must charge his horns with
garlands!

ALEXAS.
Soothsayer!

SOOTHSAYER.
Your will?

CHARMIAN.
Is this the man? Is’t you, sir, that know things?

SOOTHSAYER.
In nature’s infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.

ALEXAS.
Show him your hand.

ENOBARBUS.
Bring in the banquet quickly; wine enough
Cleopatra’s health to drink.

CHARMIAN.
Good, sir, give me good fortune.

SOOTHSAYER.
I make not, but foresee.

CHARMIAN.
Pray, then, foresee me one.

SOOTHSAYER.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.

CHARMIAN.
He means in flesh.

IRAS.
No, you shall paint when you are old.

CHARMIAN.
Wrinkles forbid!

ALEXAS.
Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.

CHARMIAN.
Hush!

SOOTHSAYER.
You shall be more beloving than beloved.

CHARMIAN.
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.

ALEXAS.
Nay, hear him.

CHARMIAN.
Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married to three kings in a
forenoon and widow them all. Let me have a child at fifty, to whom
Herod of Jewry may do homage. Find me to marry me with Octavius Caesar,
and companion me with my mistress.

SOOTHSAYER.
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.

CHARMIAN.
O, excellent! I love long life better than figs.

SOOTHSAYER.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.

CHARMIAN.
Then belike my children shall have no names. Prithee, how many boys and
wenches must I have?

SOOTHSAYER.
If every of your wishes had a womb,
And fertile every wish, a million.

CHARMIAN.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.

ALEXAS.
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.

CHARMIAN.
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.

ALEXAS.
We’ll know all our fortunes.

ENOBARBUS.
Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight, shall be drunk to bed.

IRAS.
There’s a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.

CHARMIAN.
E’en as the o’erflowing Nilus presageth famine.

IRAS.
Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.

CHARMIAN.
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, I cannot
scratch mine ear. Prithee, tell her but workaday fortune.

SOOTHSAYER.
Your fortunes are alike.

IRAS.
But how, but how? give me particulars.

SOOTHSAYER.
I have said.

IRAS.
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?

CHARMIAN.
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I, where would you
choose it?

IRAS.
Not in my husband’s nose.

CHARMIAN.
Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas—come, his fortune! his
fortune! O, let him marry a woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech
thee, and let her die too, and give him a worse, and let worse follow
worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave,
fiftyfold a cuckold! Good Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny
me a matter of more weight; good Isis, I beseech thee!

IRAS.
Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as it is a
heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived, so it is a deadly
sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore, dear Isis, keep
decorum and fortune him accordingly!

CHARMIAN.
Amen.

ALEXAS.
Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they would make
themselves whores but they’d do’t!

 Enter Cleopatra.

ENOBARBUS.
Hush, Here comes Antony.

CHARMIAN.
Not he, the queen.

CLEOPATRA.
Saw you my lord?

ENOBARBUS.
No, lady.

CLEOPATRA.
Was he not here?

CHARMIAN.
No, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
He was disposed to mirth; but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!

ENOBARBUS.
Madam?

CLEOPATRA.
Seek him and bring him hither. Where’s Alexas?

ALEXAS.
Here, at your service. My lord approaches.

 Enter Antony with a Messenger.

CLEOPATRA.
We will not look upon him. Go with us.

 [_Exeunt Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, Iras, Alexas and
 Soothsayer._]

MESSENGER.
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.

ANTONY.
Against my brother Lucius.

MESSENGER.
Ay.
But soon that war had end, and the time’s state
Made friends of them, jointing their force ’gainst Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy
Upon the first encounter drave them.

ANTONY.
Well, what worst?

MESSENGER.
The nature of bad news infects the teller.

ANTONY.
When it concerns the fool or coward. On.
Things that are past are done with me. ’Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.

MESSENGER.
Labienus—
This is stiff news—hath with his Parthian force
Extended Asia from Euphrates
His conquering banner shook from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia,
Whilst—

ANTONY.
“Antony”, thou wouldst say—

MESSENGER.
O, my lord!

ANTONY.
Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvia’s phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full licence as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.

MESSENGER.
At your noble pleasure.

 [_Exit Messenger._]

 Enter another Messenger.

ANTONY.
From Sicyon, ho, the news? Speak there!

SECOND MESSENGER.
The man from Sicyon—

ANTONY.
Is there such a one?

SECOND MESSENGER.
He stays upon your will.

ANTONY.
Let him appear.

 [_Exit second Messenger._]

These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.

 Enter another Messenger with a letter.

What are you?

THIRD MESSENGER.
Fulvia thy wife is dead.

ANTONY.
Where died she?

THIRD MESSENGER.
In Sicyon:
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.

 [_Gives a letter._]

ANTONY.
Forbear me.

 [_Exit third Messenger._]

There’s a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself. She’s good, being gone.
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
I must from this enchanting queen break off.
Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
My idleness doth hatch. How now, Enobarbus!

 Enter Enobarbus.

ENOBARBUS.
What’s your pleasure, sir?

ANTONY.
I must with haste from hence.

ENOBARBUS.
Why then we kill all our women. We see how mortal an unkindness is to
them. If they suffer our departure, death’s the word.

ANTONY.
I must be gone.

ENOBARBUS.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die. It were pity to cast them
away for nothing, though, between them and a great cause they should be
esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of this, dies
instantly. I have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I
do think there is mettle in death which commits some loving act upon
her, she hath such a celerity in dying.

ANTONY.
She is cunning past man’s thought.

ENOBARBUS.
Alack, sir, no; her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of
pure love. We cannot call her winds and waters sighs and tears; they
are greater storms and tempests than almanacs can report. This cannot
be cunning in her; if it be, she makes a shower of rain as well as
Jove.

ANTONY.
Would I had never seen her!

ENOBARBUS.
O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work, which not
to have been blest withal would have discredited your travel.

ANTONY.
Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS.
Sir?

ANTONY.
Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS.
Fulvia?

ANTONY.
Dead.

ENOBARBUS.
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it pleaseth their
deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors
of the earth; comforting therein that when old robes are worn out,
there are members to make new. If there were no more women but Fulvia,
then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief is
crowned with consolation; your old smock brings forth a new petticoat:
and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.

ANTONY.
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.

ENOBARBUS.
And the business you have broached here cannot be without you,
especially that of Cleopatra’s, which wholly depends on your abode.

ANTONY.
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the Queen,
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
The empire of the sea. Our slippery people,
Whose love is never linked to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son, who, high in name and power,
Higher than both in blood and life, stands up
For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
The sides o’ th’ world may danger. Much is breeding
Which, like the courser’s hair, hath yet but life
And not a serpent’s poison. Say our pleasure
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.

ENOBARBUS.
I shall do’t.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Alexandria. A Room in Cleopatra’s palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Alexas and Iras.

CLEOPATRA.
Where is he?

CHARMIAN.
I did not see him since.

CLEOPATRA.
See where he is, who’s with him, what he does.
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.

 [_Exit Alexas._]

CHARMIAN.
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.

CLEOPATRA.
What should I do I do not?

CHARMIAN.
In each thing give him way; cross him in nothing.

CLEOPATRA.
Thou teachest like a fool: the way to lose him.

CHARMIAN.
Tempt him not so too far; I wish, forbear.
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Antony.

 Enter Antony.

CLEOPATRA.
I am sick and sullen.

ANTONY.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose—

CLEOPATRA.
Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.
It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.

ANTONY.
Now, my dearest queen—

CLEOPATRA.
Pray you, stand farther from me.

ANTONY.
What’s the matter?

CLEOPATRA.
I know by that same eye there’s some good news.
What, says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come!
Let her not say ’tis I that keep you here.
I have no power upon you; hers you are.

ANTONY.
The gods best know—

CLEOPATRA.
O, never was there queen
So mightily betrayed! Yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.

ANTONY.
Cleopatra—

CLEOPATRA.
Why should I think you can be mine and true,
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows
Which break themselves in swearing!

ANTONY.
Most sweet queen—

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, pray you seek no colour for your going,
But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words. No going then,
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows’ bent; none our parts so poor
But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest liar.

ANTONY.
How now, lady!

CLEOPATRA.
I would I had thy inches, thou shouldst know
There were a heart in Egypt.

ANTONY.
Hear me, queen:
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile, but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines o’er with civil swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction; the hated, grown to strength,
Are newly grown to love; the condemned Pompey,
Rich in his father’s honour, creeps apace
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change. My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvia’s death.

CLEOPATRA.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?

ANTONY.
She’s dead, my queen.
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked; at the last, best,
See when and where she died.

CLEOPATRA.
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia’s death how mine received shall be.

ANTONY.
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear; which are, or cease,
As you shall give th’ advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus’ slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war
As thou affects.

CLEOPATRA.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
But let it be; I am quickly ill and well,
So Antony loves.

ANTONY.
My precious queen, forbear,
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honourable trial.

CLEOPATRA.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee, turn aside and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect honour.

ANTONY.
You’ll heat my blood. No more.

CLEOPATRA.
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.

ANTONY.
Now, by my sword—

CLEOPATRA.
And target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.

ANTONY.
I’ll leave you, lady.

CLEOPATRA.
Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part, but that’s not it;
Sir, you and I have loved, but there’s not it;
That you know well. Something it is I would—
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten.

ANTONY.
But that your royalty
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.

CLEOPATRA.
’Tis sweating labour
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me when they do not
Eye well to you. Your honour calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword
Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewed before your feet!

ANTONY.
Let us go. Come.
Our separation so abides and flies
That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Rome. An Apartment in Caesar’s House.

 Enter Octavius [Caesar], Lepidus and their train.

CAESAR.
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar’s natural vice to hate
Our great competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel: is not more manlike
Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall find there
A man who is the abstract of all faults
That all men follow.

LEPIDUS.
I must not think there are
Evils enough to darken all his goodness.
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by night’s blackness; hereditary
Rather than purchased; what he cannot change
Than what he chooses.

CAESAR.
You are too indulgent. Let’s grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
With knaves that smell of sweat. Say this becomes him—
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish—yet must Antony
No way excuse his foils when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
Call on him for’t. But to confound such time
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours, ’tis to be chid
As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure
And so rebel to judgment.

 Enter a Messenger.

LEPIDUS.
Here’s more news.

MESSENGER.
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour,
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How ’tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar. To the ports
The discontents repair, and men’s reports
Give him much wronged.

CAESAR.
I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from the primal state
That he which is was wished until he were,
And the ebbed man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love,
Comes deared by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
To rot itself with motion.

 Enter a second Messenger.

SECOND MESSENGER.
Caesar, I bring thee word
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
They make in Italy—the borders maritime
Lack blood to think on’t—and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth but ’tis as soon
Taken as seen; for Pompey’s name strikes more
Than could his war resisted.

CAESAR.
Antony,
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew’st
Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow, whom thou fought’st against,
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink
The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.
Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsed. On the Alps
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh
Which some did die to look on. And all this—
It wounds thine honour that I speak it now—
Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
So much as lanked not.

LEPIDUS.
’Tis pity of him.

CAESAR.
Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome. ’Tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i’ th’ field, and to that end
Assemble we immediate council. Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.

LEPIDUS.
Tomorrow, Caesar,
I shall be furnished to inform you rightly
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.

CAESAR.
Till which encounter
It is my business too. Farewell.

LEPIDUS.
Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.

CAESAR.
Doubt not, sir.
I knew it for my bond.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras and Mardian.

CLEOPATRA.
Charmian!

CHARMIAN.
Madam?

CLEOPATRA.
Ha, ha!
Give me to drink mandragora.

CHARMIAN.
Why, madam?

CLEOPATRA.
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.

CHARMIAN.
You think of him too much.

CLEOPATRA.
O, ’tis treason!

CHARMIAN.
Madam, I trust not so.

CLEOPATRA.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!

MARDIAN.
What’s your highness’ pleasure?

CLEOPATRA.
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has. ’Tis well for thee
That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?

MARDIAN.
Yes, gracious madam.

CLEOPATRA.
Indeed?

MARDIAN.
Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing
But what indeed is honest to be done.
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.

CLEOPATRA.
O, Charmian,
Where think’st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse, for wot’st thou whom thou mov’st?
The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He’s speaking now,
Or murmuring “Where’s my serpent of old Nile?”
For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phœbus’ amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect, and die
With looking on his life.

 Enter Alexas.

ALEXAS.
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!

CLEOPATRA.
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet, coming from him, that great medicine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?

ALEXAS.
Last thing he did, dear queen,
He kissed—the last of many doubled kisses—
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.

CLEOPATRA.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.

ALEXAS.
“Good friend,” quoth he,
“Say, the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the east,
Say thou, shall call her mistress.” So he nodded
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumbed by him.

CLEOPATRA.
What, was he sad or merry?

ALEXAS.
Like to the time o’ th’ year between the extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.

CLEOPATRA.
O well-divided disposition!—Note him,
Note him, good Charmian, ’tis the man; but note him:
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
O heavenly mingle!—Be’st thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man else.—Met’st thou my posts?

ALEXAS.
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
Why do you send so thick?

CLEOPATRA.
Who’s born that day
When I forget to send to Antony
Shall die a beggar.—Ink and paper, Charmian.—
Welcome, my good Alexas.—Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?

CHARMIAN.
O that brave Caesar!

CLEOPATRA.
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say “the brave Antony.”

CHARMIAN.
The valiant Caesar!

CLEOPATRA.
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.

CHARMIAN.
By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.

CLEOPATRA.
My salad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say as I said then. But come, away,
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I’ll unpeople Egypt.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II


SCENE I. Messina. A Room in Pompey’s house.

 Enter Pompey, Menecrates and Menas in warlike manner.

POMPEY.
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.

MENECRATES.
Know, worthy Pompey,
That what they do delay they not deny.

POMPEY.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.

MENECRATES.
We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.

POMPEY.
I shall do well.
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th’ full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered; but he neither loves
Nor either cares for him.

MENAS.
Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.

POMPEY.
Where have you this? ’Tis false.

MENAS.
From Silvius, sir.

POMPEY.
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy waned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts;
Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
Even till a Lethe’d dullness—

 Enter Varrius.

How now, Varrius!

VARRIUS.
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt ’tis
A space for farther travel.

POMPEY.
I could have given less matter
A better ear.—Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm
For such a petty war. His soldiership
Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt’s widow pluck
The ne’er lust-wearied Antony.

MENAS.
I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
His wife that’s dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warred upon him, although I think,
Not moved by Antony.

POMPEY.
I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were’t not that we stand up against them all,
’Twere pregnant they should square between themselves,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
May cement their divisions, and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Be’t as our gods will have’t! It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rome. A Room in the House of Lepidus.

 Enter Enobarbus and Lepidus.

LEPIDUS.
Good Enobarbus, ’tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.

ENOBARBUS.
I shall entreat him
To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar’s head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonius’ beard,
I would not shave’t today.

LEPIDUS.
’Tis not a time
For private stomaching.

ENOBARBUS.
Every time
Serves for the matter that is then born in’t.

LEPIDUS.
But small to greater matters must give way.

ENOBARBUS.
Not if the small come first.

LEPIDUS.
Your speech is passion;
But pray you stir no embers up. Here comes
The noble Antony.

 Enter Antony and Ventidius.

ENOBARBUS.
And yonder Caesar.

 Enter Caesar, Maecenas and Agrippa.

ANTONY.
If we compose well here, to Parthia.
Hark, Ventidius.

CAESAR.
I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.

LEPIDUS.
Noble friends,
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. What’s amiss,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to th’ matter.

ANTONY.
’Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.

CAESAR.
Welcome to Rome.

ANTONY.
Thank you.

CAESAR.
Sit.

ANTONY.
Sit, sir.

CAESAR.
Nay, then.

ANTONY.
I learn you take things ill which are not so,
Or being, concern you not.

CAESAR.
I must be laughed at
If, or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i’ th’ world; more laughed at that I should
Once name you derogately when to sound your name
It not concerned me.

ANTONY.
My being in Egypt, Caesar,
What was’t to you?

CAESAR.
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there
Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.

ANTONY.
How intend you, practised?

CAESAR.
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was theme for you; you were the word of war.

ANTONY.
You do mistake your business. My brother never
Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it,
And have my learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If you’ll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have not to make it with,
It must not be with this.

CAESAR.
You praise yourself
By laying defects of judgment to me; but
You patched up your excuses.

ANTONY.
Not so, not so.
I know you could not lack—I am certain on’t—
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause ’gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another.
The third o’ th’ world is yours, which with a snaffle
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.

ENOBARBUS.
Would we had all such wives, that the men
Might go to wars with the women.

ANTONY.
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
Made out of her impatience—which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too—I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet. For that you must
But say I could not help it.

CAESAR.
I wrote to you
When rioting in Alexandria; you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.

ANTONY.
Sir,
He fell upon me ere admitted, then.
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i’ th’ morning. But next day
I told him of myself, which was as much
As to have asked him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
Out of our question wipe him.

CAESAR.
You have broken
The article of your oath, which you shall never
Have tongue to charge me with.

LEPIDUS.
Soft, Caesar!

ANTONY.
No, Lepidus, let him speak.
The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lacked it. But on, Caesar:
The article of my oath?

CAESAR.
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
The which you both denied.

ANTONY.
Neglected, rather;
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may
I’ll play the penitent to you. But mine honesty
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
To stoop in such a case.

LEPIDUS.
’Tis noble spoken.

MAECENAS.
If it might please you to enforce no further
The griefs between ye; to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.

LEPIDUS.
Worthily spoken, Maecenas.

ENOBARBUS.
Or, if you borrow one another’s love for the instant, you may, when you
hear no more words of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.

ANTONY.
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.

ENOBARBUS.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.

ANTONY.
You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.

ENOBARBUS.
Go to, then. Your considerate stone!

CAESAR.
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech; for’t cannot be
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So differing in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us staunch, from edge to edge
O’ th’ world I would pursue it.

AGRIPPA.
Give me leave, Caesar.

CAESAR.
Speak, Agrippa.

AGRIPPA.
Thou hast a sister by the mother’s side,
Admired Octavia. Great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.

CAESAR.
Say not so, Agrippa.
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.

ANTONY.
I am not married, Caesar. Let me hear
Agrippa further speak.

AGRIPPA.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife; whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both
Would each to other, and all loves to both,
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For ’tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.

ANTONY.
Will Caesar speak?

CAESAR.
Not till he hears how Antony is touched
With what is spoke already.

ANTONY.
What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say “Agrippa, be it so,”
To make this good?

CAESAR.
The power of Caesar, and
His power unto Octavia.

ANTONY.
May I never
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand.
Further this act of grace; and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs!

CAESAR.
There’s my hand.
A sister I bequeath you, whom no brother
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
Fly off our loves again!

LEPIDUS.
Happily, amen!

ANTONY.
I did not think to draw my sword ’gainst Pompey,
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
At heel of that, defy him.

LEPIDUS.
Time calls upon ’s.
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.

ANTONY.
Where lies he?

CAESAR.
About the Mount Misena.

ANTONY.
What is his strength by land?

CAESAR.
Great and increasing; but by sea
He is an absolute master.

ANTONY.
So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it.
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.

CAESAR.
With most gladness,
And do invite you to my sister’s view,
Whither straight I’ll lead you.

ANTONY.
Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.

LEPIDUS.
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt all except Enobarbus, Agrippa and Maecenas._]

MAECENAS.
Welcome from Egypt, sir.

ENOBARBUS.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honourable friend,
Agrippa!

AGRIPPA.
Good Enobarbus!

MAECENAS.
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested. You stayed
well by ’t in Egypt.

ENOBARBUS.
Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance and made the night light
with drinking.

MAECENAS.
Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and but twelve persons
there. Is this true?

ENOBARBUS.
This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had much more monstrous matter of
feast, which worthily deserved noting.

MAECENAS.
She’s a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.

ENOBARBUS.
When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up his heart upon the river
of Cydnus.

AGRIPPA.
There she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.

ENOBARBUS.
I will tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne,
Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold;
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggared all description: she did lie
In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold of tissue,
O’erpicturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature. On each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-coloured fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.

AGRIPPA.
O, rare for Antony!

ENOBARBUS.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i’ th’ eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm
A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her, and Antony,
Enthroned i’ th’ market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to th’ air, which, but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.

AGRIPPA.
Rare Egyptian!

ENOBARBUS.
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest,
Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne’er the word of “No” woman heard speak,
Being barbered ten times o’er, goes to the feast,
And, for his ordinary, pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.

AGRIPPA.
Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed.
He ploughed her, and she cropped.

ENOBARBUS.
I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street
And, having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And, breathless, pour breath forth.

MAECENAS.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.

ENOBARBUS.
Never. He will not.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies. For vilest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.

MAECENAS.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
A blessed lottery to him.

AGRIPPA.
Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.

ENOBARBUS.
Humbly, sir, I thank you.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Rome. A Room in Caesar’s House.

 Enter Antony, Caesar, Octavia between them.

ANTONY.
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.

OCTAVIA.
All which time
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.

ANTONY.
Good night, sir.—My Octavia,
Read not my blemishes in the world’s report.
I have not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done by th’ rule. Good night, dear lady.

OCTAVIA.
Good night, sir.

CAESAR.
Good night.

 [_Exeunt Caesar and Octavia._]

 Enter Soothsayer.

ANTONY.
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?

SOOTHSAYER.
Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither!

ANTONY.
If you can, your reason.

SOOTHSAYER.
I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue.
But yet hie you to Egypt again.

ANTONY.
Say to me,
Whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesar’s or mine?

SOOTHSAYER.
Caesar’s.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
Thy dæmon—that thy spirit which keeps thee—is
Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
Where Caesar’s is not. But near him, thy angel
Becomes afeard, as being o’erpowered. Therefore
Make space enough between you.

ANTONY.
Speak this no more.

SOOTHSAYER.
To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose; and of that natural luck
He beats thee ’gainst the odds. Thy lustre thickens
When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
But, he away, ’tis noble.

ANTONY.
Get thee gone.
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.

 [_Exit Soothsayer._]

He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds;
His cocks do win the battle still of mine
When it is all to naught, and his quails ever
Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I’ th’ East my pleasure lies.

 Enter Ventidius.

O, come, Ventidius,
You must to Parthia. Your commission’s ready.
Follow me and receive ’t.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Rome. A street.

 Enter Lepidus, Maecenas and Agrippa.

LEPIDUS.
Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
Your generals after.

AGRIPPA.
Sir, Mark Antony
Will e’en but kiss Octavia, and we’ll follow.

LEPIDUS.
Till I shall see you in your soldier’s dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.

MAECENAS.
We shall,
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS.
Your way is shorter;
My purposes do draw me much about.
You’ll win two days upon me.

BOTH.
Sir, good success!

LEPIDUS.
Farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, Alexas.

CLEOPATRA.
Give me some music—music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.

ALL.
The music, ho!

 Enter Mardian, the eunuch.

CLEOPATRA.
Let it alone. Let’s to billiards. Come, Charmian.

CHARMIAN.
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.

CLEOPATRA.
As well a woman with an eunuch played
As with a woman. Come, you’ll play with me, sir?

MARDIAN.
As well as I can, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
And when good will is showed, though’t come too short,
The actor may plead pardon. I’ll none now.
Give me mine angle; we’ll to the river. There,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up
I’ll think them every one an Antony,
And say “Ah, ha! You’re caught.”

CHARMIAN.
’Twas merry when
You wagered on your angling; when your diver
Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.

CLEOPATRA.
That time?—O times!—
I laughed him out of patience; and that night
I laughed him into patience, and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.

 Enter Messenger.

O! from Italy!
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.

MESSENGER.
Madam, madam—

CLEOPATRA.
Antony’s dead! If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill’st thy mistress. But well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
Have lipped, and trembled kissing.

MESSENGER.
First, madam, he’s well.

CLEOPATRA.
Why, there’s more gold.
But sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.

MESSENGER.
Good madam, hear me.

CLEOPATRA.
Well, go to, I will.
But there’s no goodness in thy face if Antony
Be free and healthful. So tart a favour
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes,
Not like a formal man.

MESSENGER.
Will’t please you hear me?

CLEOPATRA.
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak’st.
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
I’ll set thee in a shower of gold and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.

MESSENGER.
Madam, he’s well.

CLEOPATRA.
Well said.

MESSENGER.
And friends with Caesar.

CLEOPATRA.
Th’ art an honest man.

MESSENGER.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.

CLEOPATRA.
Make thee a fortune from me.

MESSENGER.
But yet, madam—

CLEOPATRA.
I do not like “But yet”, it does allay
The good precedence. Fie upon “But yet”!
“But yet” is as a gaoler to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he’s friends with Caesar,
In state of health, thou say’st; and, thou say’st, free.

MESSENGER.
Free, madam? No. I made no such report.
He’s bound unto Octavia.

CLEOPATRA.
For what good turn?

MESSENGER.
For the best turn i’ th’ bed.

CLEOPATRA.
I am pale, Charmian.

MESSENGER.
Madam, he’s married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!

 [_Strikes him down._]

MESSENGER.
Good madam, patience.

CLEOPATRA.
What say you?

 [_Strikes him again._]

Hence, horrible villain, or I’ll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me! I’ll unhair thy head!

 [_She hales him up and down._]

Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine,
Smarting in ling’ring pickle.

MESSENGER.
Gracious madam,
I that do bring the news made not the match.

CLEOPATRA.
Say ’tis not so, a province I will give thee,
And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.

MESSENGER.
He’s married, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.

 [_Draws a knife._]

MESSENGER.
Nay then I’ll run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.

 [_Exit._]

CHARMIAN.
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself.
The man is innocent.

CLEOPATRA.
Some innocents ’scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!

CHARMIAN.
He is afeard to come.

CLEOPATRA.
I will not hurt him.

 [_Exit Charmian._]

These hands do lack nobility that they strike
A meaner than myself, since I myself
Have given myself the cause.

 Enter the Messenger again with Charmian.

Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.

MESSENGER.
I have done my duty.

CLEOPATRA.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do
If thou again say “Yes.”

MESSENGER.
He’s married, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still!

MESSENGER.
Should I lie, madam?

CLEOPATRA.
O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?

MESSENGER.
I crave your highness’ pardon.

CLEOPATRA.
He is married?

MESSENGER.
Take no offence that I would not offend you.
To punish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal. He’s married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA.
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
That art not what thou’rt sure of! Get thee hence!
The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by ’em!

 [_Exit Messenger._]

CHARMIAN.
Good your highness, patience.

CLEOPATRA.
In praising Antony I have dispraised Caesar.

CHARMIAN.
Many times, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
I am paid for’t now.
Lead me from hence;
I faint. O Iras, Charmian! ’Tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas, bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination; let him not leave out
The colour of her hair. Bring me word quickly.

 [_Exit Alexas._]

Let him for ever go—let him not, Charmian.
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way ’s a Mars. [_To Mardian_] Bid you Alexas
Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Near Misenum.

 Flourish. Enter Pompey and Menas at one door, with drum and trumpet;
 at another, Caesar, Lepidus, Antony, Enobarbus, Maecenas, Agrippa,
 with Soldiers marching.

POMPEY.
Your hostages I have, so have you mine,
And we shall talk before we fight.

CAESAR.
Most meet
That first we come to words, and therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let us know
If ’twill tie up thy discontented sword
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.

POMPEY.
To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What was’t
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made the all-honoured, honest Roman, Brutus,
With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
The angered ocean foams, with which I meant
To scourge th’ ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.

CAESAR.
Take your time.

ANTONY.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.
We’ll speak with thee at sea. At land thou know’st
How much we do o’ercount thee.

POMPEY.
At land indeed
Thou dost o’ercount me of my father’s house;
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in’t as thou mayst.

LEPIDUS.
Be pleased to tell us—
For this is from the present—how you take
The offers we have sent you.

CAESAR.
There’s the point.

ANTONY.
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.

CAESAR.
And what may follow
To try a larger fortune.

POMPEY.
You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
Measures of wheat to Rome. This ’greed upon,
To part with unhacked edges and bear back
Our targes undinted.

CAESAR, ANTONY, and LEPIDUS.
That’s our offer.

POMPEY.
Know, then,
I came before you here a man prepared
To take this offer. But Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience. Though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.

ANTONY.
I have heard it, Pompey,
And am well studied for a liberal thanks
Which I do owe you.

POMPEY.
Let me have your hand.
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.

ANTONY.
The beds i’ th’ East are soft; and thanks to you,
That called me timelier than my purpose hither,
For I have gained by ’t.

CAESAR.
Since I saw you last,
There is a change upon you.

POMPEY.
Well, I know not
What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come
To make my heart her vassal.

LEPIDUS.
Well met here.

POMPEY.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may be written
And sealed between us.

CAESAR.
That’s the next to do.

POMPEY.
We’ll feast each other ere we part, and let’s
Draw lots who shall begin.

ANTONY.
That will I, Pompey.

POMPEY.
No, Antony, take the lot.
But, first or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.

ANTONY.
You have heard much.

POMPEY.
I have fair meanings, sir.

ANTONY.
And fair words to them.

POMPEY.
Then so much have I heard.
And I have heard Apollodorus carried—

ENOBARBUS.
No more of that. He did so.

POMPEY.
What, I pray you?

ENOBARBUS.
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

POMPEY.
I know thee now. How far’st thou, soldier?

ENOBARBUS.
Well;
And well am like to do, for I perceive
Four feasts are toward.

POMPEY.
Let me shake thy hand.
I never hated thee. I have seen thee fight
When I have envied thy behaviour.

ENOBARBUS.
Sir,
I never loved you much, but I ha’ praised ye
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.

POMPEY.
Enjoy thy plainness;
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Aboard my galley I invite you all.
Will you lead, lords?

CAESAR, ANTONY, and LEPIDUS.
Show’s the way, sir.

POMPEY.
Come.

 [_Exeunt all but Enobarbus and Menas._]

MENAS.
[_Aside_.] Thy father, Pompey, would ne’er have made this treaty.—
You and I have known, sir.

ENOBARBUS.
At sea, I think.

MENAS.
We have, sir.

ENOBARBUS.
You have done well by water.

MENAS.
And you by land.

ENOBARBUS.
I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied
what I have done by land.

MENAS.
Nor what I have done by water.

ENOBARBUS.
Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great
thief by sea.

MENAS.
And you by land.

ENOBARBUS.
There I deny my land service. But give me your hand, Menas. If our eyes
had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.

MENAS.
All men’s faces are true, whatsome’er their hands are.

ENOBARBUS.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.

MENAS.
No slander. They steal hearts.

ENOBARBUS.
We came hither to fight with you.

MENAS.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking. Pompey doth this
day laugh away his fortune.

ENOBARBUS.
If he do, sure he cannot weep ’t back again.

MENAS.
You have said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony here. Pray you, is he
married to Cleopatra?

ENOBARBUS.
Caesar’s sister is called Octavia.

MENAS.
True, sir. She was the wife of Caius Marcellus.

ENOBARBUS.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.

MENAS.
Pray you, sir?

ENOBARBUS.
’Tis true.

MENAS.
Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.

ENOBARBUS.
If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not prophesy so.

MENAS.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the
love of the parties.

ENOBARBUS.
I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie their
friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity. Octavia
is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.

MENAS.
Who would not have his wife so?

ENOBARBUS.
Not he that himself is not so; which is Mark Antony. He will to his
Egyptian dish again. Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up
in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the strength of their
amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance. Antony will
use his affection where it is. He married but his occasion here.

MENAS.
And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a health for
you.

ENOBARBUS.
I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats in Egypt.

MENAS.
Come, let’s away.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. On board Pompey’s Galley, lying near Misenum.

 Music. Enter two or three Servants with a banquet.

FIRST SERVANT.
Here they’ll be, man. Some o’ their plants are ill-rooted already; the
least wind i’ th’ world will blow them down.

SECOND SERVANT.
Lepidus is high-coloured.

FIRST SERVANT.
They have made him drink alms-drink.

SECOND SERVANT.
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out “no more”,
reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th’ drink.

FIRST SERVANT.
But it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.

SECOND SERVANT.
Why, this it is to have a name in great men’s fellowship. I had as lief
have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.

FIRST SERVANT.
To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in ’t, are
the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.

 A sennet sounded. Enter Caesar, Antony, Pompey, Lepidus, Agrippa,
 Maecenas, Enobarbus, Menas with other Captains.

ANTONY.
[_To Caesar_.] Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o’ th’ Nile
By certain scales i’ th’ pyramid; they know
By th’ height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.

LEPIDUS.
You’ve strange serpents there?

ANTONY.
Ay, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS.
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your
sun; so is your crocodile.

ANTONY.
They are so.

POMPEY.
Sit, and some wine! A health to Lepidus!

LEPIDUS.
I am not so well as I should be, but I’ll ne’er out.

ENOBARBUS.
Not till you have slept. I fear me you’ll be in till then.

LEPIDUS.
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies’ pyramises are very goodly
things. Without contradiction I have heard that.

MENAS.
[_Aside to Pompey_.] Pompey, a word.

POMPEY.
[_Aside to Menas_.] Say in mine ear what is ’t?

MENAS.
[_Whispers in ’s ear._] Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.

POMPEY.
[_Aside to Menas._] Forbear me till anon.—
This wine for Lepidus!

LEPIDUS.
What manner o’ thing is your crocodile?

ANTONY.
It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it hath breadth.
It is just so high as it is, and moves with it own organs. It lives by
that which nourisheth it, and the elements once out of it, it
transmigrates.

LEPIDUS.
What colour is it of?

ANTONY.
Of its own colour too.

LEPIDUS.
’Tis a strange serpent.

ANTONY.
’Tis so, and the tears of it are wet.

CAESAR.
Will this description satisfy him?

ANTONY.
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.

POMPEY.
[_Aside to Menas._] Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.—Where’s this cup I called for?

MENAS.
[_Aside to Pompey_.] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.

POMPEY.
[_Aside to Menas_.] I think thou’rt mad.

 [_Rises and walks aside._]

The matter?

MENAS.
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.

POMPEY.
Thou hast served me with much faith. What’s else to say?—
Be jolly, lords.

ANTONY.
These quicksands, Lepidus,
Keep off them, for you sink.

MENAS.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?

POMPEY.
What sayst thou?

MENAS.
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world?
That’s twice.

POMPEY.
How should that be?

MENAS.
But entertain it,
And though you think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.

POMPEY.
Hast thou drunk well?

MENAS.
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou dar’st be, the earthly Jove.
Whate’er the ocean pales or sky inclips
Is thine, if thou wilt have’t.

POMPEY.
Show me which way.

MENAS.
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
All then is thine.

POMPEY.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done
And not have spoke on ’t! In me ’tis villainy;
In thee ’t had been good service. Thou must know
’Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour;
Mine honour it. Repent that e’er thy tongue
Hath so betray’d thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.

MENAS.
[_Aside_.] For this,
I’ll never follow thy palled fortunes more.
Who seeks, and will not take when once ’tis offered,
Shall never find it more.

POMPEY.
This health to Lepidus!

ANTONY.
Bear him ashore. I’ll pledge it for him, Pompey.

ENOBARBUS.
Here’s to thee, Menas!

MENAS.
Enobarbus, welcome!

POMPEY.
Fill till the cup be hid.

ENOBARBUS.
There’s a strong fellow, Menas.

 [_Pointing to the servant who carries off Lepidus._]

MENAS.
Why?

ENOBARBUS.
’A bears the third part of the world, man. Seest not?

MENAS.
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
That it might go on wheels!

ENOBARBUS.
Drink thou. Increase the reels.

MENAS.
Come.

POMPEY.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.

ANTONY.
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
Here is to Caesar!

CAESAR.
I could well forbear’t.
It’s monstrous labour when I wash my brain
And it grows fouler.

ANTONY.
Be a child o’ the time.

CAESAR.
Possess it, I’ll make answer.
But I had rather fast from all, four days,
Than drink so much in one.

ENOBARBUS.
[_To Antony_.] Ha, my brave emperor,
Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals
And celebrate our drink?

POMPEY.
Let’s ha’t, good soldier.

ANTONY.
Come, let’s all take hands
Till that the conquering wine hath steeped our sense
In soft and delicate Lethe.

ENOBARBUS.
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
The while I’ll place you; then the boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud
As his strong sides can volley.

 Music plays. Enobarbus places them hand in hand.

       THE SONG.
  Come, thou monarch of the vine,
  Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
  In thy vats our cares be drowned,
  With thy grapes our hairs be crowned.
  Cup us till the world go round,
  Cup us till the world go round!

CAESAR.
What would you more? Pompey, good night. Good brother,
Let me request you off. Our graver business
Frowns at this levity.—Gentle lords, let’s part.
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost
Anticked us all. What needs more words. Good night.
Good Antony, your hand.

POMPEY.
I’ll try you on the shore.

ANTONY.
And shall, sir. Give’s your hand.

POMPEY.
O Antony,
You have my father’s house.
But, what? We are friends. Come, down into the boat.

ENOBARBUS.
Take heed you fall not.

 [_Exeunt Pompey, Caesar, Antony and Attendants._]

Menas, I’ll not on shore.

MENAS.
No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets, flutes! What!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows. Sound and be hanged, sound out!

 [_Sound a flourish with drums._]

ENOBARBUS.
Hoo, says ’a! There’s my cap!

MENAS.
Hoo! Noble captain, come.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III


SCENE I. A plain in Syria.

 Enter Ventidius as it were in triumph, with Silius and other Romans,
 Officers and Soldiers; the dead body of Pacorus borne before him.

VENTIDIUS.
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus’ death
Make me revenger. Bear the king’s son’s body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.

SILIUS.
Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly. So thy grand captain Antony
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots, and
Put garlands on thy head.

VENTIDIUS.
O Silius, Silius,
I have done enough. A lower place, note well,
May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius:
Better to leave undone than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve’s away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer, than person. Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by th’ minute, lost his favour.
Who does i’ th’ wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captain’s captain; and ambition,
The soldier’s virtue, rather makes choice of loss
Than gain which darkens him.
I could do more to do Antonius good,
But ’twould offend him, and in his offence
Should my performance perish.

SILIUS.
Thou hast, Ventidius, that
Without the which a soldier and his sword
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony?

VENTIDIUS.
I’ll humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of war, we have effected;
How, with his banners, and his well-paid ranks,
The ne’er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o’ th’ field.

SILIUS.
Where is he now?

VENTIDIUS.
He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey with ’s will permit,
We shall appear before him.—On there, pass along!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rome. An Ante-chamber in Caesar’s house.

 Enter Agrippa at one door, Enobarbus at another.

AGRIPPA.
What, are the brothers parted?

ENOBARBUS.
They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone.
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus,
Since Pompey’s feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the greensickness.

AGRIPPA.
’Tis a noble Lepidus.

ENOBARBUS.
A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!

AGRIPPA.
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!

ENOBARBUS.
Caesar? Why he’s the Jupiter of men.

AGRIPPA.
What’s Antony? The god of Jupiter.

ENOBARBUS.
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!

AGRIPPA.
O, Antony! O thou Arabian bird!

ENOBARBUS.
Would you praise Caesar, say “Caesar”. Go no further.

AGRIPPA.
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.

ENOBARBUS.
But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony.
Hoo! Hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number—hoo!—
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

AGRIPPA.
Both he loves.

ENOBARBUS.
They are his shards, and he their beetle.

 [_Trumpets within._]

So,
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.

AGRIPPA.
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.

 Enter Caesar, Antony, Lepidus and Octavia.

ANTONY.
No further, sir.

CAESAR.
You take from me a great part of myself.
Use me well in’t. Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond
Shall pass on thy approof. Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue which is set
Betwixt us, as the cement of our love
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it. For better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherished.

ANTONY.
Make me not offended
In your distrust.

CAESAR.
I have said.

ANTONY.
You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends.
We will here part.

CAESAR.
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort! Fare thee well.

OCTAVIA.
My noble brother!

ANTONY.
The April’s in her eyes. It is love’s spring,
And these the showers to bring it on.—Be cheerful.

OCTAVIA.
Sir, look well to my husband’s house, and—

CAESAR.
What, Octavia?

OCTAVIA.
I’ll tell you in your ear.

ANTONY.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue—the swan’s-down feather,
That stands upon the swell at the full of tide,
And neither way inclines.

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside to Agrippa_.] Will Caesar weep?

AGRIPPA.
[_Aside to Enobarbus_.] He has a cloud in ’s face.

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside to Agrippa_.] He were the worse for that were he a horse;
So is he, being a man.

AGRIPPA.
[_Aside to Enobarbus_.] Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring, and he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside to Agrippa_.] That year, indeed, he was troubled with a rheum;
What willingly he did confound he wailed,
Believe ’t, till I weep too.

CAESAR.
No, sweet Octavia,
You shall hear from me still. The time shall not
Outgo my thinking on you.

ANTONY.
Come, sir, come,
I’ll wrestle with you in my strength of love.
Look, here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the gods.

CAESAR.
Adieu, be happy!

LEPIDUS.
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way!

CAESAR.
Farewell, farewell!

 [_Kisses Octavia._]

ANTONY.
Farewell!

 [_Trumpets sound. Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras and Alexas.

CLEOPATRA.
Where is the fellow?

ALEXAS.
Half afeared to come.

CLEOPATRA.
Go to, go to.

 Enter a Messenger as before.

Come hither, sir.

ALEXAS.
Good majesty,
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.

CLEOPATRA.
That Herod’s head
I’ll have! But how, when Antony is gone,
Through whom I might command it?—Come thou near.

MESSENGER.
Most gracious majesty!

CLEOPATRA.
Didst thou behold Octavia?

MESSENGER.
Ay, dread queen.

CLEOPATRA.
Where?

MESSENGER.
Madam, in Rome
I looked her in the face, and saw her led
Between her brother and Mark Antony.

CLEOPATRA.
Is she as tall as me?

MESSENGER.
She is not, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?

MESSENGER.
Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.

CLEOPATRA.
That’s not so good. He cannot like her long.

CHARMIAN.
Like her? O Isis! ’Tis impossible.

CLEOPATRA.
I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e’er thou look’dst on majesty.

MESSENGER.
She creeps.
Her motion and her station are as one.
She shows a body rather than a life,
A statue than a breather.

CLEOPATRA.
Is this certain?

MESSENGER.
Or I have no observance.

CHARMIAN.
Three in Egypt
Cannot make better note.

CLEOPATRA.
He’s very knowing;
I do perceive’t. There’s nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.

CHARMIAN.
Excellent.

CLEOPATRA.
Guess at her years, I prithee.

MESSENGER.
Madam,
She was a widow.

CLEOPATRA.
Widow! Charmian, hark!

MESSENGER.
And I do think she’s thirty.

CLEOPATRA.
Bear’st thou her face in mind? Is’t long or round?

MESSENGER.
Round even to faultiness.

CLEOPATRA.
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair, what colour?

MESSENGER.
Brown, madam, and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.

CLEOPATRA.
There’s gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again; I find thee
Most fit for business. Go make thee ready;
Our letters are prepared.

 [_Exit Messenger._]

CHARMIAN.
A proper man.

CLEOPATRA.
Indeed, he is so. I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature’s no such thing.

CHARMIAN.
Nothing, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.

CHARMIAN.
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!

CLEOPATRA.
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian.
But ’tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.

CHARMIAN.
I warrant you, madam.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Athens. A Room in Antony’s House.

 Enter Antony and Octavia.

ANTONY.
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that—
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import—but he hath waged
New wars ’gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it
To public ear;
Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honour, cold and sickly
He vented them; most narrow measure lent me;
When the best hint was given him, he not took ’t,
Or did it from his teeth.

OCTAVIA.
O, my good lord,
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, ne’er stood between,
Praying for both parts.
The good gods will mock me presently
When I shall pray “O, bless my lord and husband!”
Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
“O, bless my brother!” Husband win, win brother,
Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway
’Twixt these extremes at all.

ANTONY.
Gentle Octavia,
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honour,
I lose myself; better I were not yours
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between’s. The meantime, lady,
I’ll raise the preparation of a war
Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste,
So your desires are yours.

OCTAVIA.
Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler! Wars ’twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.

ANTONY.
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Athens. Another Room in Antony’s House.

 Enter Enobarbus and Eros meeting.

ENOBARBUS.
How now, friend Eros?

EROS.
There’s strange news come, sir.

ENOBARBUS.
What, man?

EROS.
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.

ENOBARBUS.
This is old. What is the success?

EROS.
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars ’gainst Pompey, presently
denied him rivality; would not let him partake in the glory of the
action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly
wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal, seizes him. So the poor third is
up, till death enlarge his confine.

ENOBARBUS.
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They’ll grind the one the other. Where’s Antony?

EROS.
He’s walking in the garden, thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him; cries “Fool Lepidus!”
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murdered Pompey.

ENOBARBUS.
Our great navy’s rigged.

EROS.
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:
My lord desires you presently. My news
I might have told hereafter.

ENOBARBUS.
’Twill be naught,
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.

EROS.
Come, sir.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Rome. A Room in Caesar’s House.

 Enter Agrippa, Maecenas and Caesar.

CAESAR.
Contemning Rome, he has done all this, and more
In Alexandria. Here’s the manner of ’t:
I’ th’ market-place, on a tribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my father’s son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.

MAECENAS.
This in the public eye?

CAESAR.
I’ th’ common showplace where they exercise.
His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings:
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She
In th’ habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,
As ’tis reported, so.

MAECENAS.
Let Rome be thus informed.

AGRIPPA.
Who, queasy with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him.

CAESAR.
The people knows it and have now received
His accusations.

AGRIPPA.
Who does he accuse?

CAESAR.
Caesar, and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part o’ th’ isle. Then does he say he lent me
Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed and, being, that we detain
All his revenue.

AGRIPPA.
Sir, this should be answered.

CAESAR.
’Tis done already, and messenger gone.
I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
That he his high authority abused,
And did deserve his change. For what I have conquered
I grant him part; but then in his Armenia
And other of his conquered kingdoms, I
Demand the like.

MAECENAS.
He’ll never yield to that.

CAESAR.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.

 Enter Octavia with her train.

OCTAVIA.
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar!

CAESAR.
That ever I should call thee castaway!

OCTAVIA.
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.

CAESAR.
Why have you stolen upon us thus? You come not
Like Caesar’s sister. The wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher, and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear. The trees by th’ way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops. But you are come
A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved. We should have met you
By sea and land, supplying every stage
With an augmented greeting.

OCTAVIA.
Good my lord,
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal, whereon I begged
His pardon for return.

CAESAR.
Which soon he granted,
Being an abstract ’tween his lust and him.

OCTAVIA.
Do not say so, my lord.

CAESAR.
I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?

OCTAVIA.
My lord, in Athens.

CAESAR.
No, my most wronged sister. Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore, who now are levying
The kings o’ th’ earth for war. He hath assembled
Bocchus, the king of Libya; Archelaus
Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, king
Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, king
Of Comagene; Polemon and Amyntas,
The kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of sceptres.

OCTAVIA.
Ay me, most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That does afflict each other!

CAESAR.
Welcome hither.
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
O’er your content these strong necessities,
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
To do you justice, make their ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to us.

AGRIPPA.
Welcome, lady.

MAECENAS.
Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you.
Only th’ adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off
And gives his potent regiment to a trull
That noises it against us.

OCTAVIA.
Is it so, sir?

CAESAR.
Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you
Be ever known to patience. My dear’st sister!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Antony’s Camp near the Promontory of Actium.

 Enter Cleopatra and Enobarbus.

CLEOPATRA.
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

ENOBARBUS.
But why, why, why?

CLEOPATRA.
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars
And say’st it is not fit.

ENOBARBUS.
Well, is it, is it?

CLEOPATRA.
Is ’t not denounced against us? Why should not we
Be there in person?

ENOBARBUS.
Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear
A soldier and his horse.

CLEOPATRA.
What is’t you say?

ENOBARBUS.
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,
Take from his heart, take from his brain, from ’s time,
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity, and ’tis said in Rome
That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids
Manage this war.

CLEOPATRA.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i’ th’ war,
And, as the president of my kingdom, will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it.
I will not stay behind.

 Enter Antony and Canidius.

ENOBARBUS.
Nay, I have done.
Here comes the Emperor.

ANTONY.
Is it not strange, Canidius,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea
And take in Toryne?—You have heard on ’t, sweet?

CLEOPATRA.
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.

ANTONY.
A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men
To taunt at slackness.—Canidius, we
Will fight with him by sea.

CLEOPATRA.
By sea, what else?

CANIDIUS.
Why will my lord do so?

ANTONY.
For that he dares us to ’t.

ENOBARBUS.
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.

CANIDIUS.
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.

ENOBARBUS.
Your ships are not well manned,
Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar’s fleet
Are those that often have ’gainst Pompey fought.
Their ships are yare, yours heavy. No disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.

ANTONY.
By sea, by sea.

ENOBARBUS.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land;
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-marked footmen; leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge; quite forgo
The way which promises assurance; and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
From firm security.

ANTONY.
I’ll fight at sea.

CLEOPATRA.
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.

ANTONY.
Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full-manned, from th’ head of Actium
Beat th’ approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do ’t at land.

 Enter a Messenger.

Thy business?

MESSENGER.
The news is true, my lord; he is descried.
Caesar has taken Toryne.

ANTONY.
Can he be there in person? ’Tis impossible;
Strange that his power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. We’ll to our ship.
Away, my Thetis!

 Enter a Soldier.

How now, worthy soldier?

SOLDIER.
O noble emperor, do not fight by sea.
Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let th’ Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We
Have used to conquer standing on the earth
And fighting foot to foot.

ANTONY.
Well, well, away.

 [_Exeunt Antony, Cleopatra and Enobarbus._]

SOLDIER.
By Hercules, I think I am i’ th’ right.

CANIDIUS.
Soldier, thou art. But his whole action grows
Not in the power on ’t. So our leader’s led,
And we are women’s men.

SOLDIER.
You keep by land
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?

CANIDIUS.
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius are for sea,
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar’s
Carries beyond belief.

SOLDIER.
While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.

CANIDIUS.
Who’s his lieutenant, hear you?

SOLDIER.
They say one Taurus.

CANIDIUS.
Well I know the man.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The Emperor calls Canidius.

CANIDIUS.
With news the time’s with labour, and throes forth
Each minute some.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. A plain near Actium.

 Enter Caesar with his army and Taurus marching.

CAESAR.
Taurus!

TAURUS.
My lord?

CAESAR.
Strike not by land; keep whole; provoke not battle
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll. Our fortune lies
Upon this jump.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IX. Another part of the Plain.

 Enter Antony and Enobarbus.

ANTONY.
Set we our squadrons on yon side o’ th’ hill
In eye of Caesar’s battle, from which place
We may the number of the ships behold
And so proceed accordingly.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE X. Another part of the Plain.

Canidius marching with his land army one way over the stage, and
Taurus, the Lieutenant of Caesar, with his Army, the other way. After
their going in, is heard the noise of a sea fight.

 Alarum. Enter Enobarbus.

ENOBARBUS.
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
Th’ Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
To see ’t mine eyes are blasted.

 Enter Scarus.

SCARUS.
Gods and goddesses,
All the whole synod of them!

ENOBARBUS.
What’s thy passion?

SCARUS.
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance. We have kissed away
Kingdoms and provinces.

ENOBARBUS.
How appears the fight?

SCARUS.
On our side, like the tokened pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,
Whom leprosy o’ertake, i’ th’ midst o’ th’ fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appeared,
Both as the same—or, rather, ours the elder—
The breeze upon her, like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.

ENOBARBUS.
That I beheld.
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
Endure a further view.

SCARUS.
She once being loofed,
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
I never saw an action of such shame.
Experience, manhood, honour, ne’er before
Did violate so itself.

ENOBARBUS.
Alack, alack!

 Enter Canidius.

CANIDIUS.
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well.
O, he has given example for our flight
Most grossly by his own!

ENOBARBUS.
Ay, are you thereabouts?
Why, then, good night indeed.

CANIDIUS.
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.

SCARUS.
’Tis easy to’t, and there I will attend
What further comes.

CANIDIUS.
To Caesar will I render
My legions and my horse. Six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.

ENOBARBUS.
I’ll yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XI. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Antony with attendants.

ANTONY.
Hark, the land bids me tread no more upon’t.
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither.
I am so lated in the world that I
Have lost my way for ever. I have a ship
Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.

ALL.
Fly? Not we.

ANTONY.
I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone.
I have myself resolved upon a course
Which has no need of you. Be gone.
My treasure’s in the harbour. Take it. O,
I followed that I blush to look upon.
My very hairs do mutiny, for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, be gone. You shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left
Which leaves itself. To the sea-side straightway.
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
Leave me, I pray, a little—pray you, now,
Nay, do so; for indeed I have lost command.
Therefore I pray you. I’ll see you by and by.

 [_Sits down._]

 Enter Cleopatra led by Charmian, Iras and Eros.

EROS.
Nay, gentle madam, to him! Comfort him.

IRAS.
Do, most dear queen.

CHARMIAN.
Do! Why, what else?

CLEOPATRA.
Let me sit down. O Juno!

ANTONY.
No, no, no, no, no.

EROS.
See you here, sir?

ANTONY.
O, fie, fie, fie!

CHARMIAN.
Madam.

IRAS.
Madam, O good empress!

EROS.
Sir, sir!

ANTONY.
Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept
His sword e’en like a dancer, while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and ’twas I
That the mad Brutus ended. He alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave squares of war. Yet now—no matter.

CLEOPATRA.
Ah, stand by.

EROS.
The Queen, my lord, the Queen!

IRAS.
Go to him, madam; speak to him.
He is unqualitied with very shame.

CLEOPATRA.
Well then, sustain me. O!

EROS.
Most noble sir, arise. The Queen approaches.
Her head’s declined, and death will seize her but
Your comfort makes the rescue.

ANTONY.
I have offended reputation,
A most unnoble swerving.

EROS.
Sir, the Queen.

ANTONY.
O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes
By looking back what I have left behind
’Stroyed in dishonour.

CLEOPATRA.
O my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followed.

ANTONY.
Egypt, thou knew’st too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by th’ strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after. O’er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knew’st, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.

CLEOPATRA.
O, my pardon!

ANTONY.
Now I must
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
With half the bulk o’ th’ world played as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror, and that
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.

CLEOPATRA.
Pardon, pardon!

ANTONY.
Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.
Even this repays me.
We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?
Love, I am full of lead. Some wine
Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XII. Caesar’s camp in Egypt.

 Enter Caesar, Agrippa, Dolabella with others.

CAESAR.
Let him appear that’s come from Antony.
Know you him?

DOLABELLA.
Caesar, ’tis his schoolmaster—
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.

 Enter Ambassador from Anthony.

CAESAR.
Approach, and speak.

AMBASSADOR.
Such as I am, I come from Antony.
I was of late as petty to his ends
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
To his grand sea.

CAESAR.
Be’t so. Declare thine office.

AMBASSADOR.
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted,
He lessens his requests, and to thee sues
To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
A private man in Athens. This for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.

CAESAR.
For Antony,
I have no ears to his request. The queen
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.

AMBASSADOR.
Fortune pursue thee!

CAESAR.
Bring him through the bands.

 [_Exit Ambassador, attended._]

[_To Thidias_.] To try thy eloquence now ’tis time. Dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,
And in our name, what she requires; add more,
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure
The ne’er-touch’d vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias;
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.

THIDIAS.
Caesar, I go.

CAESAR.
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think’st his very action speaks
In every power that moves.

THIDIAS.
Caesar, I shall.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XIII. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian and Iras.

CLEOPATRA.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?

ENOBARBUS.
Think, and die.

CLEOPATRA.
Is Antony or we in fault for this?

ENOBARBUS.
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nicked his captainship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The mered question. ’Twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
And leave his navy gazing.

CLEOPATRA.
Prithee, peace.

 Enter the Ambassador with Antony.

ANTONY.
Is that his answer?

AMBASSADOR.
Ay, my lord.

ANTONY.
The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up.

AMBASSADOR.
He says so.

ANTONY.
Let her know’t.—
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.

CLEOPATRA.
That head, my lord?

ANTONY.
To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him, from which the world should note
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions,
May be a coward’s; whose ministers would prevail
Under the service of a child as soon
As i’ th’ command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay comparisons apart,
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. I’ll write it. Follow me.

 [_Exeunt Antony and Ambassador._]

ENOBARBUS.
Yes, like enough high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness, and be staged to th’ show
Against a sworder! I see men’s judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
A messenger from Caesar.

CLEOPATRA.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women,
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneeled unto the buds. Admit him, sir.

 [_Exit Servant._]

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside_.] Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fallen lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
And earns a place i’ th’ story.

 Enter Thidias.

CLEOPATRA.
Caesar’s will?

THIDIAS.
Hear it apart.

CLEOPATRA.
None but friends. Say boldly.

THIDIAS.
So haply are they friends to Antony.

ENOBARBUS.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar’s.

THIDIAS.
So.—
Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats
Not to consider in what case thou stand’st
Further than he is Caesar.

CLEOPATRA.
Go on; right royal.

THIDIAS.
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you feared him.

CLEOPATRA.
O!

THIDIAS.
The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
Does pity as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.

CLEOPATRA.
He is a god and knows
What is most right. Mine honour was not yielded,
But conquered merely.

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside_.] To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.

 [_Exit Enobarbus._]

THIDIAS.
Shall I say to Caesar
What you require of him? For he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Antony,
And put yourself under his shroud,
The universal landlord.

CLEOPATRA.
What’s your name?

THIDIAS.
My name is Thidias.

CLEOPATRA.
Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in deputation:
I kiss his conqu’ring hand. Tell him I am prompt
To lay my crown at’s feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.

THIDIAS.
’Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.

CLEOPATRA.
Your Caesar’s father oft,
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place
As it rained kisses.

 Enter Antony and Enobarbus.

ANTONY.
Favours, by Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?

THIDIAS.
One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man and worthiest
To have command obeyed.

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside_.] You will be whipped.

ANTONY.
Approach there.—Ah, you kite!—Now, gods and devils,
Authority melts from me. Of late when I cried “Ho!”
Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth
And cry “Your will?” Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.

 Enter Servants.

Take hence this jack and whip him.

ENOBARBUS.
’Tis better playing with a lion’s whelp
Than with an old one dying.

ANTONY.
Moon and stars!
Whip him. Were’t twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here—what’s her name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till like a boy you see him cringe his face
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.

THIDIAS.
Mark Antony—

ANTONY.
Tug him away. Being whipp’d,
Bring him again. This jack of Caesar’s shall
Bear us an errand to him.

 [_Exeunt Servants with Thidias._]

You were half blasted ere I knew you. Ha!
Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?

CLEOPATRA.
Good my lord—

ANTONY.
You have been a boggler ever.
But when we in our viciousness grow hard—
O misery on’t!—the wise gods seal our eyes,
In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us
Adore our errors, laugh at’s while we strut
To our confusion.

CLEOPATRA.
O, is’t come to this?

ANTONY.
I found you as a morsel cold upon
Dead Caesar’s trencher; nay, you were a fragment
Of Gneius Pompey’s, besides what hotter hours,
Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously pick’d out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.

CLEOPATRA.
Wherefore is this?

ANTONY.
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say “God quit you!” be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal
And plighter of high hearts! O that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! For I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it civilly were like
A haltered neck which does the hangman thank
For being yare about him.

 Enter a Servant with Thidias.

Is he whipped?

SERVANT.
Soundly, my lord.

ANTONY.
Cried he? And begged he pardon?

SERVANT.
He did ask favour.

ANTONY.
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whipped for following him. Henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee;
Shake thou to look on’t. Get thee back to Caesar;
Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say
He makes me angry with him; for he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy ’tis to do’t,
When my good stars that were my former guides
Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
Into th’ abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like, to quit me. Urge it thou.
Hence with thy stripes, be gone.

 [_Exit Thidias._]

CLEOPATRA.
Have you done yet?

ANTONY.
Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed,
And it portends alone the fall of Antony.

CLEOPATRA.
I must stay his time.

ANTONY.
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?

CLEOPATRA.
Not know me yet?

ANTONY.
Cold-hearted toward me?

CLEOPATRA.
Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite,
Till, by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!

ANTONY.
I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Hath nobly held; our severed navy too
Have knit again, and fleet, threat’ning most sea-like.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady?
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
I and my sword will earn our chronicle.
There’s hope in’t yet.

CLEOPATRA.
That’s my brave lord!

ANTONY.
I will be treble-sinewed, hearted, breathed,
And fight maliciously. For when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests. But now I’ll set my teeth
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let’s have one other gaudy night. Call to me
All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more
Let’s mock the midnight bell.

CLEOPATRA.
It is my birthday.
I had thought t’have held it poor, but since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.

ANTONY.
We will yet do well.

CLEOPATRA.
Call all his noble captains to my lord.

ANTONY.
Do so; we’ll speak to them; and tonight I’ll force
The wine peep through their scars. Come on, my queen,
There’s sap in’t yet. The next time I do fight
I’ll make Death love me, for I will contend
Even with his pestilent scythe.

 [_Exeunt all but Enobarbus._]

ENOBARBUS.
Now he’ll outstare the lightning. To be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our captain’s brain
Restores his heart. When valour preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.

 [_Exit._]




ACT IV


SCENE I. Caesar’s Camp at Alexandria.

 Enter Caesar, Agrippa, and Maecenas, with his army.
Caesar reading a letter.

CAESAR.
He calls me boy, and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
He hath whipped with rods; dares me to personal combat,
Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die; meantime
Laugh at his challenge.

MAECENAS.
Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, he’s hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction. Never anger
Made good guard for itself.

CAESAR.
Let our best heads
Know that tomorrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight. Within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And feast the army; we have store to do’t,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Antony, Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, Iras, Alexas with
 others.

ANTONY.
He will not fight with me, Domitius?

ENOBARBUS.
No.

ANTONY.
Why should he not?

ENOBARBUS.
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.

ANTONY.
Tomorrow, soldier,
By sea and land I’ll fight. Or I will live,
Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo’t thou fight well?

ENOBARBUS.
I’ll strike, and cry “Take all.”

ANTONY.
Well said. Come on.
Call forth my household servants. Let’s tonight
Be bounteous at our meal.—

 Enter Servants.

Give me thy hand.
Thou has been rightly honest; so hast thou,
Thou, and thou, and thou. You have served me well,
And kings have been your fellows.

CLEOPATRA.
[_Aside to Enobarbus_.] What means this?

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside to Cleopatra_.] ’Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow
shoots
Out of the mind.

ANTONY.
And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapped up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.

ALL THE SERVANTS.
The gods forbid!

ANTONY.
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight.
Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
As when mine empire was your fellow too
And suffered my command.

CLEOPATRA.
[_Aside to Enobarbus_.] What does he mean?

ENOBARBUS.
[_Aside to Cleopatra_.] To make his followers weep.

ANTONY.
Tend me tonight;
May be it is the period of your duty.
Haply you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance tomorrow
You’ll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
I turn you not away, but, like a master
Married to your good service, stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours, I ask no more,
And the gods yield you for’t!

ENOBARBUS.
What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep,
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame,
Transform us not to women.

ANTONY.
Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty friends,
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts,
I hope well of tomorrow, and will lead you
Where rather I’ll expect victorious life
Than death and honour. Let’s to supper, come,
And drown consideration.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Alexandria. Before the Palace.

 Enter a Company of Soldiers.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Brother, good night. Tomorrow is the day.

SECOND SOLDIER.
It will determine one way. Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?

FIRST SOLDIER.
Nothing. What news?

SECOND SOLDIER.
Belike ’tis but a rumour. Good night to you.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, sir, good night.

 Enter two other Soldiers.

SECOND SOLDIER.
Soldiers, have careful watch.

THIRD SOLDIER.
And you. Good night, good night.

 [_They place themselves in every corner of the stage._]

SECOND SOLDIER.
Here we. And if tomorrow
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.

FIRST SOLDIER.
’Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.

 [_Music of the hautboys under the stage._]

SECOND SOLDIER.
Peace, what noise?

FIRST SOLDIER.
List, list!

SECOND SOLDIER.
Hark!

FIRST SOLDIER.
Music i’ th’ air.

THIRD SOLDIER.
Under the earth.

FOURTH SOLDIER.
It signs well, does it not?

THIRD SOLDIER.
No.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Peace, I say! What should this mean?

SECOND SOLDIER.
’Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,
Now leaves him.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Walk. Let’s see if other watchmen
Do hear what we do.

 [_They advance to another post._]

SECOND SOLDIER.
How now, masters!

ALL.
How now! How now! Do you hear this?

FIRST SOLDIER.
Ay. Is’t not strange?

THIRD SOLDIER.
Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?

FIRST SOLDIER.
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let’s see how it will give off.

ALL.
Content. ’Tis strange.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Antony and Cleopatra with others.

ANTONY.
Eros! Mine armour, Eros!

CLEOPATRA.
Sleep a little.

ANTONY.
No, my chuck.—Eros! Come, mine armour, Eros!

 Enter Eros with armour.

Come, good fellow, put thine iron on.
If fortune be not ours today, it is
Because we brave her. Come.

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, I’ll help too.
What’s this for?

ANTONY.
Ah, let be, let be! Thou art
The armourer of my heart. False, false. This, this!

CLEOPATRA.
Sooth, la, I’ll help. Thus it must be.

ANTONY.
Well, well,
We shall thrive now. Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go put on thy defences.

EROS.
Briefly, sir.

CLEOPATRA.
Is not this buckled well?

ANTONY.
Rarely, rarely.
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To daff’t for our repose, shall hear a storm.
Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen’s a squire
More tight at this than thou. Dispatch. O love,
That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew’st
The royal occupation, thou shouldst see
A workman in’t.

 Enter an Officer, armed.

Good morrow to thee. Welcome.
Thou look’st like him that knows a warlike charge.
To business that we love we rise betime
And go to’t with delight.

OFFICER.
A thousand, sir,
Early though’t be, have on their riveted trim
And at the port expect you.

 [_Shout. Trumpets flourish._]

 Enter other Captains and Soldiers.

CAPTAIN.
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.

ALL.
Good morrow, general.

ANTONY.
’Tis well blown, lads.
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so. Come, give me that. This way. Well said.
Fare thee well, dame.
Whate’er becomes of me,
This is a soldier’s kiss. [_Kisses her._] Rebukeable
And worthy shameful check it were, to stand
On more mechanic compliment. I’ll leave thee
Now like a man of steel.—You that will fight,
Follow me close, I’ll bring you to’t. Adieu.

 [_Exeunt Antony, Eros, Captains and Soldiers._]

CHARMIAN.
Please you, retire to your chamber.

CLEOPATRA.
Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight!
Then Antony—but now—. Well, on.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Antony’s camp near Alexandria.

 Trumpets sound. Enter Antony and Eros, a Soldier meeting them.

SOLDIER.
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!

ANTONY.
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed
To make me fight at land!

SOLDIER.
Hadst thou done so,
The kings that have revolted and the soldier
That has this morning left thee would have still
Followed thy heels.

ANTONY.
Who’s gone this morning?

SOLDIER.
Who?
One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar’s camp
Say “I am none of thine.”

ANTONY.
What sayest thou?

SOLDIER.
Sir,
He is with Caesar.

EROS.
Sir, his chests and treasure
He has not with him.

ANTONY.
Is he gone?

SOLDIER.
Most certain.

ANTONY.
Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him—
I will subscribe—gentle adieus and greetings.
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.—Enobarbus!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Alexandria. Caesar’s camp.

 Flourish. Enter Agrippa, Caesar with Enobarbus and Dolabella.

CAESAR.
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
Our will is Antony be took alive;
Make it so known.

AGRIPPA.
Caesar, I shall.

 [_Exit._]

CAESAR.
The time of universal peace is near.
Prove this a prosp’rous day, the three-nooked world
Shall bear the olive freely.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Antony
Is come into the field.

CAESAR.
Go charge Agrippa
Plant those that have revolted in the van
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.

 [_Exeunt Caesar and his Train._]

ENOBARBUS.
Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony; there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
And leave his master Antony. For this pains
Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment but
No honourable trust. I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
That I will joy no more.

 Enter a Soldier of Caesar’s.

SOLDIER.
Enobarbus, Antony
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus. The messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
Unloading of his mules.

ENOBARBUS.
I give it you.

SOLDIER.
Mock not, Enobarbus.
I tell you true. Best you safed the bringer
Out of the host. I must attend mine office,
Or would have done’t myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.

 [_Exit._]

ENOBARBUS.
I am alone the villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart.
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do’t, I feel.
I fight against thee! No, I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die; the foul’st best fits
My latter part of life.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VII. Field of battle between the Camps.

 Alarum. Drums and Trumpets. Enter Agrippa and others.

AGRIPPA.
Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Alarums. Enter Antony and Scarus wounded.

SCARUS.
O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed!
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.

ANTONY.
Thou bleed’st apace.

SCARUS.
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now ’tis made an H.

 _Sounds retreat far off._
ANTONY.
They do retire.

SCARUS.
We’ll beat ’em into bench-holes. I have yet
Room for six scotches more.

 Enter Eros.

EROS.
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.

SCARUS.
Let us score their backs
And snatch ’em up as we take hares, behind.
’Tis sport to maul a runner.

ANTONY.
I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort, and tenfold
For thy good valour. Come thee on.

SCARUS.
I’ll halt after.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Under the Walls of Alexandria.

 Alarum. Enter Antony again in a march; Scarus with others.

ANTONY.
We have beat him to his camp. Run one before
And let the Queen know of our gests.
Tomorrow,
Before the sun shall see’s, we’ll spill the blood
That has today escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as’t had been
Each man’s like mine. You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
Tell them your feats; whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
The honoured gashes whole.

 Enter Cleopatra.

[_To Scarus_.] Give me thy hand.
To this great fairy I’ll commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o’ th’ world,
Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.

CLEOPATRA.
Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, com’st thou smiling from
The world’s great snare uncaught?

ANTONY.
Mine nightingale,
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl! Though grey
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha’ we
A brain that nourishes our nerves and can
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand.—
Kiss it, my warrior. He hath fought today
As if a god, in hate of mankind, had
Destroyed in such a shape.

CLEOPATRA.
I’ll give thee, friend,
An armour all of gold. It was a king’s.

ANTONY.
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phœbus’ car. Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jolly march;
Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them.
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together
And drink carouses to the next day’s fate,
Which promises royal peril.—Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the city’s ear;
Make mingle with our rattling tabourines,
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IX. Caesar’s camp.

 Enter a Sentry and his company. Enobarbus follows.

SENTRY.
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to th’ court of guard. The night
Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
By th’ second hour i’ th’ morn.

FIRST WATCH.
This last day was a shrewd one to’s.

ENOBARBUS.
O, bear me witness, night.—

SECOND WATCH.
What man is this?

FIRST WATCH.
Stand close and list him.

ENOBARBUS.
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.

SENTRY.
Enobarbus?

SECOND WATCH.
Peace! Hark further.

ENOBARBUS.
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive.
O Antony! O Antony!

 [_Dies._]

FIRST WATCH.
Let’s speak to him.

SENTRY.
Let’s hear him, for the things he speaks may concern Caesar.

SECOND WATCH.
Let’s do so. But he sleeps.

SENTRY.
Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.

FIRST WATCH.
Go we to him.

SECOND WATCH.
Awake, sir, awake! Speak to us.

FIRST WATCH.
Hear you, sir?

SENTRY.
The hand of death hath raught him.

 [_Drums afar off._]

Hark! The drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To th’ court of guard; he is of note. Our hour
Is fully out.

SECOND WATCH.
Come on, then. He may recover yet.

 [_Exeunt with the body._]

SCENE X. Ground between the two Camps.

 Enter Antony and Scarus with their army.

ANTONY.
Their preparation is today by sea;
We please them not by land.

SCARUS.
For both, my lord.

ANTONY.
I would they’d fight i’ th’ fire or i’ th’ air;
We’d fight there too. But this it is: our foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us—order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven—
Where their appointment we may best discover
And look on their endeavour.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XI. Another part of the Ground.

 Enter Caesar and his army.

CAESAR.
But being charged, we will be still by land,
Which, as I take’t, we shall, for his best force
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XII. Another part of the Ground.

 Alarum afar off, as at a sea fight. Enter Antony and Scarus.

ANTONY.
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand
I shall discover all. I’ll bring thee word
Straight how ’tis like to go.

 [_Exit._]

SCARUS.
Swallows have built
In Cleopatra’s sails their nests. The augurs
Say they know not, they cannot tell; look grimly,
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant and dejected, and by starts
His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has and has not.

 Enter Antony.

ANTONY.
All is lost!
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! ’Tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly;
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly! Be gone!

 [_Exit Scarus._]

O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more.
Fortune and Antony part here; even here
Do we shake hands. All come to this! The hearts
That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked
That overtopped them all. Betray’d I am:
O this false soul of Egypt! This grave charm,
Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them home,
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,
Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
What, Eros, Eros!

 Enter Cleopatra.

Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!

CLEOPATRA.
Why is my lord enraged against his love?

ANTONY.
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
And blemish Caesar’s triumph. Let him take thee
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians!
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex; most monster-like be shown
For poor’st diminutives, for dolts, and let
Patient Octavia plough thy visage up
With her prepared nails.

 [_Exit Cleopatra._]

’Tis well thou’rt gone,
If it be well to live; but better ’twere
Thou fell’st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many.—Eros, ho!—
The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o’ th’ moon,
And with those hands that grasped the heaviest club
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die.
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Under this plot. She dies for’t.—Eros, ho!

 [_Exit._]

SCENE XIII. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras and Mardian.

CLEOPATRA.
Help me, my women! O, he is more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossed.

CHARMIAN.
To th’ monument!
There lock yourself and send him word you are dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.

CLEOPATRA.
To th’ monument!
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was “Antony”,
And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.—To th’ monument!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE XIV. Alexandria. Another Room.

 Enter Antony and Eros.

ANTONY.
Eros, thou yet behold’st me?

EROS.
Ay, noble lord.

ANTONY.
Sometime we see a cloud that’s dragonish,
A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
A towered citadel, a pendant rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon’t, that nod unto the world
And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs.
They are black vesper’s pageants.

EROS.
Ay, my lord.

ANTONY.
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct
As water is in water.

EROS.
It does, my lord.

ANTONY.
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body. Here I am Antony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine,
Which, whilst it was mine, had annexed unto’t
A million more, now lost—she, Eros, has
Packed cards with Caesar, and false-played my glory
Unto an enemy’s triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us
Ourselves to end ourselves.

 Enter Mardian.

O, thy vile lady!
She has robbed me of my sword.

MARDIAN.
No, Antony,
My mistress loved thee and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.

ANTONY.
Hence, saucy eunuch! Peace!
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.

MARDIAN.
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake
Was “Antony! Most noble Antony!”
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips. She rendered life,
Thy name so buried in her.

ANTONY.
Dead, then?

MARDIAN.
Dead.

ANTONY.
Unarm, Eros. The long day’s task is done,
And we must sleep.—That thou depart’st hence safe
Does pay thy labour richly. Go.

 [_Exit Mardian._]

Off, pluck off!
The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent;
Crack thy frail case! Apace, Eros, apace!
No more a soldier. Bruised pieces, go;
You have been nobly borne. From me awhile.

 [_Exit Eros._]

I will o’ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
Lie down, and stray no farther. Now all labour
Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
Itself with strength. Seal then, and all is done.
Eros!—I come, my queen.—Eros!—Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers, we’ll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours.—Come, Eros, Eros!

 Enter Eros.

EROS.
What would my lord?

ANTONY.
Since Cleopatra died,
I have lived in such dishonour that the gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quartered the world, and o’er green Neptune’s back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman; less noble mind
Than she which, by her death, our Caesar tells
“I am conqueror of myself.” Thou art sworn, Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
Th’ inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that on my command
Thou then wouldst kill me. Do’t. The time is come.
Thou strik’st not me; ’tis Caesar thou defeat’st.
Put colour in thy cheek.

EROS.
The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim and could not?

ANTONY.
Eros,
Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?

EROS.
I would not see’t.

ANTONY.
Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.

EROS.
O, sir, pardon me!

ANTONY.
When I did make thee free, swor’st thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.

EROS.
Turn from me then that noble countenance
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.

ANTONY.
Lo thee!

 [_Turning from him._]

EROS.
My sword is drawn.

ANTONY.
Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.

EROS.
My dear master,
My captain and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.

ANTONY.
’Tis said, man, and farewell.

EROS.
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?

ANTONY.
Now, Eros.

EROS.
Why, there then! [_kills himself_]
Thus do I escape the sorrow
Of Antony’s death.

 [_Dies._]

ANTONY.
Thrice nobler than myself!
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
I should and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A nobleness in record. But I will be
A bridegroom in my death and run into’t
As to a lover’s bed. Come then, and, Eros,
Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus

 [_Falling on his sword._]

I learned of thee. How? Not dead? Not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!

 Enter a company of the Guard, one of them Dercetus.

FIRST GUARD.
What’s the noise?

ANTONY.
I have done my work ill, friends. O, make an end
Of what I have begun.

SECOND GUARD.
The star is fallen.

FIRST GUARD.
And time is at his period.

ALL.
Alas, and woe!

ANTONY.
Let him that loves me strike me dead.

FIRST GUARD.
Not I.

SECOND GUARD.
Nor I.

THIRD GUARD.
Nor anyone.

 [_Exeunt guard._]

DERCETUS.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings,
Shall enter me with him.

 Enter Diomedes.

DIOMEDES.
Where’s Antony?

DERCETUS.
There, Diomed, there.

DIOMEDES.
Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man?

 [_Exit Dercetus._]

ANTONY.
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.

DIOMEDES.
Most absolute lord,
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.

ANTONY.
When did she send thee?

DIOMEDES.
Now, my lord.

ANTONY.
Where is she?

DIOMEDES.
Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying fear
Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw—
Which never shall be found—you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead;
But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,
I dread, too late.

ANTONY.
Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.

DIOMEDES.
What, ho! The emperor’s guard! The guard, what ho!
Come, your lord calls!

 Enter four or five of the Guard of Antony.

ANTONY.
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.
’Tis the last service that I shall command you.

FIRST GUARD.
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.

ALL.
Most heavy day!

ANTONY.
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up.
I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends,
And have my thanks for all.

 [_Exeunt, bearing Antony._]

SCENE XV. Alexandria. A monument.

 Enter Cleopatra and her maids aloft, with Charmian and Iras.

CLEOPATRA.
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.

CHARMIAN.
Be comforted, dear madam.

CLEOPATRA.
No, I will not.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow,
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.

 Enter, below Diomedes.

How now! Is he dead?

DIOMEDES.
His death’s upon him, but not dead.
Look out o’ th’ other side your monument;
His guard have brought him thither.

 Enter, below Antony borne by the Guard.

CLEOPATRA.
O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou mov’st in! Darkling stand
The varying shore o’ th’ world. O Antony,
Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian! Help, Iras, help!
Help, friends below! Let’s draw him hither.

ANTONY.
Peace!
Not Caesar’s valour hath o’erthrown Antony,
But Antony’s hath triumphed on itself.

CLEOPATRA.
So it should be, that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony, but woe ’tis so!

ANTONY.
I am dying, Egypt, dying. Only
I here importune death awhile until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay upon thy lips.

CLEOPATRA.
I dare not, dear
Dear my lord, pardon. I dare not,
Lest I be taken. Not th’ imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be brooched with me; if knife, drugs, serpents, have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honour
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony—
Help me, my women—we must draw thee up.
Assist, good friends.

ANTONY.
O, quick, or I am gone.

CLEOPATRA.
Here’s sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno’s power,
The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up
And set thee by Jove’s side. Yet come a little;
Wishers were ever fools. O come, come come,

 [_They heave Antony aloft to Cleopatra._]

And welcome, welcome! Die where thou hast lived;
Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.

ALL.
A heavy sight!

ANTONY.
I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.

CLEOPATRA.
No, let me speak, and let me rail so high
That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offence.

ANTONY.
One word, sweet queen:
Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety. O!

CLEOPATRA.
They do not go together.

ANTONY.
Gentle, hear me.
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA.
My resolution and my hands I’ll trust;
None about Caesar.

ANTONY.
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived the greatest prince o’ th’ world,
The noblest; and do now not basely die,
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman; a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going;
I can no more.

CLEOPATRA.
Noblest of men, woo’t die?
Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O, see, my women,

 [_ Antony dies._]

The crown o’ th’ earth doth melt.—My lord!
O, withered is the garland of the war,
The soldier’s pole is fallen; young boys and girls
Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.

 [_Faints._]

CHARMIAN.
O, quietness, lady!

IRAS.
She is dead too, our sovereign.

CHARMIAN.
Lady!

IRAS.
Madam!

CHARMIAN.
O madam, madam, madam!

IRAS.
Royal Egypt, Empress!

CHARMIAN.
Peace, peace, Iras!

CLEOPATRA.
No more but e’en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods,
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stolen our jewel. All’s but naught;
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that’s mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian?
My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look,
Our lamp is spent, it’s out! Good sirs, take heart.
We’ll bury him; and then, what’s brave, what’s noble,
Let’s do it after the high Roman fashion
And make death proud to take us. Come, away.
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah, women, women! Come, we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.

 [_Exeunt, bearing off Antony’s body._]




ACT V


SCENE I. Caesar’s Camp before Alexandria.

 Enter Caesar, Agrippa, Dolabella, Maecenas, Gallus, Proculeius with
 his council of war.

CAESAR.
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.
Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks
The pauses that he makes.

DOLABELLA.
Caesar, I shall.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Dercetus with the sword of Antony.

CAESAR.
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar’st
Appear thus to us?

DERCETUS.
I am called Dercetus.
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
I’ll be to Caesar; if thou pleasest not,
I yield thee up my life.

CAESAR.
What is’t thou say’st?

DERCETUS.
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.

CAESAR.
The breaking of so great a thing should make
A greater crack. The round world
Should have shook lions into civil streets,
And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
Is not a single doom; in the name lay
A moiety of the world.

DERCETUS.
He is dead, Caesar,
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife, but that self hand
Which writ his honour in the acts it did
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword.
I robbed his wound of it. Behold it stained
With his most noble blood.

CAESAR.
Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.

AGRIPPA.
And strange it is
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.

MAECENAS.
His taints and honours
Waged equal with him.

AGRIPPA.
A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity, but you gods will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.

MAECENAS.
When such a spacious mirror’s set before him,
He needs must see himself.

CAESAR.
O Antony,
I have followed thee to this, but we do lance
Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day
Or look on thine. We could not stall together
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
That thou, my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle, that our stars,
Unreconciliable, should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends—

 Enter an Egyptian.

But I will tell you at some meeter season.
The business of this man looks out of him;
We’ll hear him what he says. Whence are you?

EGYPTIAN.
A poor Egyptian yet. The queen, my mistress,
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To the way she’s forced to.

CAESAR.
Bid her have good heart.
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honourable and how kindly we
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot lean
To be ungentle.

EGYPTIAN.
So the gods preserve thee!

 [_Exit._]

CAESAR.
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us, for her life in Rome
Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says
And how you find of her.

PROCULEIUS.
Caesar, I shall.

 [_Exit Proculeius._]

CAESAR.
Gallus, go you along.

 [_Exit Gallus._]

Where’s Dolabella, to second Proculeius?

ALL.
Dolabella!

CAESAR.
Let him alone, for I remember now
How he’s employed. He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this war,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings. Go with me and see
What I can show in this.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Alexandria. A Room in the Monument.

 Enter Cleopatra, Charmian and Iras.

CLEOPATRA.
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. ’Tis paltry to be Caesar;
Not being Fortune, he’s but Fortune’s knave,
A minister of her will. And it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
Which sleeps and never palates more the dung,
The beggar’s nurse and Caesar’s.

 Enter Proculeius.

PROCULEIUS.
Caesar sends greetings to the queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean’st to have him grant thee.

CLEOPATRA.
What’s thy name?

PROCULEIUS.
My name is Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA.
Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceived
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.

PROCULEIUS.
Be of good cheer.
You are fallen into a princely hand; fear nothing.
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness
Where he for grace is kneeled to.

CLEOPATRA.
Pray you tell him
I am his fortune’s vassal and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
Look him i’ th’ face.

PROCULEIUS.
This I’ll report, dear lady.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.

 Enter Gallus and Roman Soldiers.

You see how easily she may be surprised.
Guard her till Caesar come.

IRAS.
Royal queen!

CHARMIAN.
O Cleopatra, thou art taken, queen!

CLEOPATRA.
Quick, quick, good hands.

 [_Drawing a dagger._]

PROCULEIUS.
Hold, worthy lady, hold!

 [_Seizes and disarms her._]

Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayed.

CLEOPATRA.
What, of death too,
That rids our dogs of languish?

PROCULEIUS.
Cleopatra,
Do not abuse my master’s bounty by
Th’ undoing of yourself. Let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.

CLEOPATRA.
Where art thou, Death?
Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
Worth many babes and beggars!

PROCULEIUS.
O, temperance, lady!

CLEOPATRA.
Sir, I will eat no meat; I’ll not drink, sir;
If idle talk will once be necessary,
I’ll not sleep neither. This mortal house I’ll ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinioned at your master’s court,
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me! Rather on Nilus’ mud
Lay me stark-naked, and let the water-flies
Blow me into abhorring! Rather make
My country’s high pyramides my gibbet
And hang me up in chains!

PROCULEIUS.
You do extend
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.

 Enter Dolabella.

DOLABELLA.
Proculeius,
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee. For the queen,
I’ll take her to my guard.

PROCULEIUS.
So, Dolabella,
It shall content me best. Be gentle to her.
[_To Cleopatra._] To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
If you’ll employ me to him.

CLEOPATRA.
Say I would die.

 [_Exeunt Proculeius and Soldiers._]

DOLABELLA.
Most noble empress, you have heard of me?

CLEOPATRA.
I cannot tell.

DOLABELLA.
Assuredly you know me.

CLEOPATRA.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Is’t not your trick?

DOLABELLA.
I understand not, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony.
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man!

DOLABELLA.
If it might please you—

CLEOPATRA.
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck
A sun and moon, which kept their course, and lighted
The little O, the earth.

DOLABELLA.
Most sovereign creature—

CLEOPATRA.
His legs bestrid the ocean; his reared arm
Crested the world; his voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in’t; an autumn ’twas
That grew the more by reaping. His delights
Were dolphin-like; they showed his back above
The element they lived in. In his livery
Walked crowns and crownets; realms and islands were
As plates dropped from his pocket.

DOLABELLA.
Cleopatra—

CLEOPATRA.
Think you there was or might be such a man
As this I dreamt of?

DOLABELLA.
Gentle madam, no.

CLEOPATRA.
You lie up to the hearing of the gods!
But if there be nor ever were one such,
It’s past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy; yet t’ imagine
An Antony were nature’s piece ’gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.

DOLABELLA.
Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is, as yourself, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight. Would I might never
O’ertake pursued success, but I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.

CLEOPATRA.
I thank you, sir.
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?

DOLABELLA.
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, pray you, sir.

DOLABELLA.
Though he be honourable—

CLEOPATRA.
He’ll lead me, then, in triumph.

DOLABELLA.
Madam, he will. I know it.

 Flourish. Enter Caesar, Proculeius, Gallus, Maecenas and others of his
 train.

ALL.
Make way there! Caesar!

CAESAR.
Which is the Queen of Egypt?

DOLABELLA.
It is the Emperor, madam.

 [_Cleopatra kneels._]

CAESAR.
Arise, you shall not kneel.
I pray you, rise. Rise, Egypt.

CLEOPATRA.
Sir, the gods
Will have it thus. My master and my lord
I must obey.

CAESAR.
Take to you no hard thoughts.
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.

CLEOPATRA.
Sole sir o’ th’ world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.

CAESAR.
Cleopatra, know
We will extenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change; but if you seek
To lay on me a cruelty by taking
Antony’s course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I’ll guard them from
If thereon you rely. I’ll take my leave.

CLEOPATRA.
And may, through all the world. ’Tis yours, and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.

CAESAR.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

CLEOPATRA.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels
I am possessed of. ’Tis exactly valued,
Not petty things admitted. Where’s Seleucus?

 Enter Seleucus.

SELEUCUS.
Here, madam.

CLEOPATRA.
This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.

SELEUCUS.
Madam, I had rather seal my lips
Than to my peril speak that which is not.

CLEOPATRA.
What have I kept back?

SELEUCUS.
Enough to purchase what you have made known.

CAESAR.
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve
Your wisdom in the deed.

CLEOPATRA.
See, Caesar! O, behold,
How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild. O slave, of no more trust
Than love that’s hired! What, goest thou back? Thou shalt
Go back, I warrant thee! But I’ll catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!

CAESAR.
Good queen, let us entreat you.

CLEOPATRA.
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honour of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal; and say
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
Beneath the fall I have.
[_To Seleucus_.] Prithee go hence,
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through th’ ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.

CAESAR.
Forbear, Seleucus.

 [_Exit Seleucus._]

CLEOPATRA.
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and when we fall,
We answer others’ merits in our name,
Are therefore to be pitied.

CAESAR.
Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged
Put we i’ th’ roll of conquest. Still be’t yours;
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesar’s no merchant to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheered;
Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear queen;
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so much upon you
That we remain your friend; and so, adieu.

CLEOPATRA.
My master and my lord!

CAESAR.
Not so. Adieu.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt Caesar and his train._]

CLEOPATRA.
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian!

 [_Whispers to Charmian._]

IRAS.
Finish, good lady. The bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.

CLEOPATRA.
Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it is provided.
Go put it to the haste.

CHARMIAN.
Madam, I will.

 Enter Dolabella.

DOLABELLA.
Where’s the Queen?

CHARMIAN.
Behold, sir.

 [_Exit._]

CLEOPATRA.
Dolabella!

DOLABELLA.
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey, and within three days
You with your children will he send before.
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure and my promise.

CLEOPATRA.
Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.

DOLABELLA.
I your servant.
Adieu, good queen. I must attend on Caesar.

CLEOPATRA.
Farewell, and thanks.

 [_Exit Dolabella._]

Now, Iras, what think’st thou?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall
Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded,
And forced to drink their vapour.

IRAS.
The gods forbid!

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, ’tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o’ tune. The quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us and present
Our Alexandrian revels; Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I’ th’ posture of a whore.

IRAS.
O the good gods!

CLEOPATRA.
Nay, that’s certain.

IRAS.
I’ll never see’t, for I am sure mine nails
Are stronger than mine eyes.

CLEOPATRA.
Why, that’s the way
To fool their preparation and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.

 Enter Charmian.

Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus
To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah, Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, we’ll dispatch indeed,
And when thou hast done this chare, I’ll give thee leave
To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.

 [_Exit Iras. A noise within._]

Wherefore’s this noise?

 Enter a Guardsman.

GUARDSMAN.
Here is a rural fellow
That will not be denied your highness’ presence.
He brings you figs.

CLEOPATRA.
Let him come in.

 [_Exit Guardsman._]

What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
My resolution’s placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
I am marble-constant. Now the fleeting moon
No planet is of mine.

 Enter Guardsman and Clown with a basket.

GUARDSMAN.
This is the man.

CLEOPATRA.
Avoid, and leave him.

 [_Exit Guardsman._]

Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
That kills and pains not?

CLOWN.
Truly, I have him, but I would not be the party that should desire you
to touch him, for his biting is immortal. Those that do die of it do
seldom or never recover.

CLEOPATRA.
Remember’st thou any that have died on’t?

CLOWN.
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no longer than
yesterday—a very honest woman, but something given to lie; as a woman
should not do but in the way of honesty—how she died of the biting of
it, what pain she felt. Truly she makes a very good report o’ th’ worm;
but he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half
that they do. But this is most falliable, the worm’s an odd worm.

CLEOPATRA.
Get thee hence. Farewell.

CLOWN.
I wish you all joy of the worm.

 [_Sets down the basket._]

CLEOPATRA.
Farewell.

CLOWN.
You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.

CLEOPATRA.
Ay, ay, farewell.

CLOWN.
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise
people; for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.

CLEOPATRA.
Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.

CLOWN.
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is not worth the
feeding.

CLEOPATRA.
Will it eat me?

CLOWN.
You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil himself will not
eat a woman. I know that a woman is a dish for the gods if the devil
dress her not. But truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great
harm in their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar
five.

CLEOPATRA.
Well, get thee gone. Farewell.

CLOWN.
Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o’ th’ worm.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Iras with a robe, crown, &c.

CLEOPATRA.
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt’s grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call. I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come!
Now to that name my courage prove my title!
I am fire and air; my other elements
I give to baser life.—So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian. Iras, long farewell.

 [_Kisses them. Iras falls and dies._]

Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch,
Which hurts and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell’st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.

CHARMIAN.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
The gods themselves do weep!

CLEOPATRA.
This proves me base.
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He’ll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have.—Come, thou mortal wretch,

 [_To an asp, which she applies to her breast._]

With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
Be angry and dispatch. O couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!

CHARMIAN.
O eastern star!

CLEOPATRA.
Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast
That sucks the nurse asleep?

CHARMIAN.
O, break! O, break!

CLEOPATRA.
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle—
O Antony!—Nay, I will take thee too.

 [_Applying another asp to her arm._]

What should I stay—

 [_Dies._]

CHARMIAN.
In this vile world? So, fare thee well.
Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession lies
A lass unparalleled. Downy windows, close,
And golden Phœbus never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal! Your crown’s awry;
I’ll mend it and then play.

 Enter the Guard rustling in.

FIRST GUARD.
Where’s the queen?

CHARMIAN.
Speak softly. Wake her not.

FIRST GUARD.
Caesar hath sent—

CHARMIAN.
Too slow a messenger.

 [_Applies an asp._]

O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.

FIRST GUARD.
Approach, ho! All’s not well. Caesar’s beguiled.

SECOND GUARD.
There’s Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.

FIRST GUARD.
What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?

CHARMIAN.
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!

 [_Charmian dies._]

 Enter Dolabella.

DOLABELLA.
How goes it here?

SECOND GUARD.
All dead.

DOLABELLA.
Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
To see performed the dreaded act which thou
So sought’st to hinder.

 Enter Caesar and all his train, marching.

ALL.
A way there, a way for Caesar!

DOLABELLA.
O sir, you are too sure an augurer:
That you did fear is done.

CAESAR.
Bravest at the last,
She levelled at our purposes and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.

DOLABELLA.
Who was last with them?

FIRST GUARD.
A simple countryman that brought her figs.
This was his basket.

CAESAR.
Poisoned then.

FIRST GUARD.
O Caesar,
This Charmian lived but now; she stood and spake.
I found her trimming up the diadem
On her dead mistress; tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.

CAESAR.
O noble weakness!
If they had swallowed poison ’twould appear
By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.

DOLABELLA.
Here on her breast
There is a vent of blood, and something blown.
The like is on her arm.

FIRST GUARD.
This is an aspic’s trail, and these fig leaves
Have slime upon them, such as th’ aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.

CAESAR.
Most probable
That so she died, for her physician tells me
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
And bear her women from the monument.
She shall be buried by her Antony.
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous. High events as these
Strike those that make them; and their story is
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral,
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.

 [_Exeunt omnes._]




AS YOU LIKE IT




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. An Orchard near Oliver’s house
 Scene II. A Lawn before the Duke’s Palace
 Scene III. A Room in the Palace

 ACT II
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. A Room in the Palace
 Scene III. Before Oliver’s House
 Scene IV. The Forest of Arden
 Scene V. Another part of the Forest
 Scene VI. Another part of the Forest
 Scene VII. Another part of the Forest

 ACT III
 Scene I. A Room in the Palace
 Scene II. The Forest of Arden
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest
 Scene IV. Another part of the Forest. Before a Cottage
 Scene V. Another part of the Forest

 ACT IV
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. Another part of the Forest
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest

 ACT V
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. Another part of the Forest
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest
 Scene IV. Another part of the Forest
 Epilogue


Dramatis Personæ

ORLANDO, youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
OLIVER, eldest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
JAQUES DE BOYS, second son of Sir Rowland de Boys
ADAM, Servant to Oliver
DENNIS, Servant to Oliver

ROSALIND, Daughter of Duke Senior
CELIA, Daughter of Duke Frederick
TOUCHSTONE, a Clown

DUKE SENIOR (Ferdinand), living in exile

JAQUES, Lord attending on the Duke Senior
AMIENS, Lord attending on the Duke Senior

DUKE FREDERICK, Brother to the Duke, and Usurper of his Dominions
CHARLES, his Wrestler
LE BEAU, a Courtier attending upon Frederick

CORIN, Shepherd
SILVIUS, Shepherd
PHOEBE, a Shepherdess
AUDREY, a Country Wench
WILLIAM, a Country Fellow, in love with Audrey
SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a Vicar

A person representing HYMEN

Lords belonging to the two Dukes; Pages, Foresters, and other
Attendants.

The scene lies first near Oliver’s house; afterwards partly in the
Usurper’s court and partly in the Forest of Arden.




ACT I

SCENE I. An Orchard near Oliver’s house


Enter Orlando and Adam.

ORLANDO.
As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but
poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother, on his
blessing, to breed me well; and there begins my sadness. My brother
Jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit.
For my part, he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that keeping, for
a gentleman of my birth, that differs not from the stalling of an ox?
His horses are bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their
feeding, they are taught their manage and to that end riders dearly
hired; but I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the
which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I.
Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something
that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from me. He lets me
feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in
him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that
grieves me, and the spirit of my father, which I think is within me,
begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longer endure it,
though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it.

Enter Oliver.

ADAM.
Yonder comes my master, your brother.

ORLANDO.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.

[_Adam retires._]

OLIVER.
Now, sir, what make you here?

ORLANDO.
Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

OLIVER.
What mar you then, sir?

ORLANDO.
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor
unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.

OLIVER.
Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.

ORLANDO.
Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? What prodigal portion
have I spent that I should come to such penury?

OLIVER.
Know you where you are, sir?

ORLANDO.
O, sir, very well: here in your orchard.

OLIVER.
Know you before whom, sir?

ORLANDO.
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you are my eldest
brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me.
The courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you are the
first-born, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there
twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as much of my father in me as you,
albeit I confess your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.

OLIVER.
What, boy!

ORLANDO.
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

OLIVER.
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?

ORLANDO.
I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys; he was
my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot
villains. Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy
throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so. Thou
has railed on thyself.

ADAM.
[_Coming forward_.] Sweet masters, be patient. For your father’s
remembrance, be at accord.

OLIVER.
Let me go, I say.

ORLANDO.
I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My father charged you in
his will to give me good education. You have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities. The spirit
of my father grows strong in me, and I will no longer endure it.
Therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me
the poor allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go
buy my fortunes.

OLIVER.
And what wilt thou do? Beg when that is spent? Well, sir, get you in. I
will not long be troubled with you. You shall have some part of your
will. I pray you leave me.

ORLANDO.
I no further offend you than becomes me for my good.

OLIVER.
Get you with him, you old dog.

ADAM.
Is “old dog” my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in your
service. God be with my old master. He would not have spoke such a
word.

[_Exeunt Orlando and Adam._]

OLIVER.
Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your rankness,
and yet give no thousand crowns neither. Holla, Dennis!

Enter Dennis.

DENNIS
Calls your worship?

OLIVER.
Was not Charles, the Duke’s wrestler, here to speak with me?

DENNIS
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.

OLIVER.
Call him in.

[_Exit Dennis._]

’Twill be a good way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.

Enter Charles.

CHARLES.
Good morrow to your worship.

OLIVER.
Good Monsieur Charles. What’s the new news at the new court?

CHARLES.
There’s no news at the court, sir, but the old news. That is, the old
Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke, and three or four
loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose
lands and revenues enrich the new Duke; therefore he gives them good
leave to wander.

OLIVER.
Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke’s daughter, be banished with her
father?

CHARLES.
O, no; for the Duke’s daughter, her cousin, so loves her, being ever
from their cradles bred together, that she would have followed her
exile or have died to stay behind her. She is at the court and no less
beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved
as they do.

OLIVER.
Where will the old Duke live?

CHARLES.
They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men
with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England. They
say many young gentlemen flock to him every day and fleet the time
carelessly, as they did in the golden world.

OLIVER.
What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new Duke?

CHARLES.
Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a matter. I am given,
sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a
disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall. Tomorrow,
sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some
broken limb shall acquit him well. Your brother is but young and
tender, and for your love I would be loath to foil him, as I must for
my own honour if he come in. Therefore, out of my love to you, I came
hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his
intendment, or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that
it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will.

OLIVER.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will
most kindly requite. I had myself notice of my brother’s purpose
herein, and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it;
but he is resolute. I’ll tell thee, Charles, it is the stubbornest
young fellow of France, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every
man’s good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his
natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I had as lief thou didst
break his neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to’t; for if thou
dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace himself on
thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap thee by some
treacherous device, and never leave thee till he hath ta’en thy life by
some indirect means or other. For I assure thee (and almost with tears
I speak it) there is not one so young and so villainous this day
living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must look pale and
wonder.

CHARLES.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come tomorrow I’ll give
him his payment. If ever he go alone again I’ll never wrestle for prize
more. And so, God keep your worship.

[_Exit._]

OLIVER.
Farewell, good Charles. Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall
see an end of him; for my soul—yet I know not why—hates nothing more
than he. Yet he’s gentle, never schooled and yet learned, full of noble
device, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the
heart of the world, and especially of my own people, who best know him,
that I am altogether misprized. But it shall not be so long; this
wrestler shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the boy
thither, which now I’ll go about.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A Lawn before the Duke’s Palace

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

CELIA.
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.

ROSALIND.
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of, and would you yet
I were merrier? Unless you could teach me to forget a banished father,
you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.

CELIA.
Herein I see thou lov’st me not with the full weight that I love thee.
If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy uncle, the Duke my
father, so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught my love
to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love
to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee.

ROSALIND.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours.

CELIA.
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to have; and
truly, when he dies thou shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away
from thy father perforce, I will render thee again in affection. By
mine honour I will! And when I break that oath, let me turn monster.
Therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.

ROSALIND.
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let me see—what think
you of falling in love?

CELIA.
Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal; but love no man in good
earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure
blush thou mayst in honour come off again.

ROSALIND.
What shall be our sport, then?

CELIA.
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel, that her
gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.

ROSALIND.
I would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and
the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

CELIA.
’Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and
those that she makes honest she makes very ill-favouredly.

ROSALIND.
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune’s office to Nature’s. Fortune reigns
in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.

Enter Touchstone.

CELIA.
No? When Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall
into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?

ROSALIND.
Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when Fortune makes
Nature’s natural the cutter-off of Nature’s wit.

CELIA.
Peradventure this is not Fortune’s work neither, but Nature’s, who
perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, and
hath sent this natural for our whetstone; for always the dullness of
the fool is the whetstone of the wits.—How now, wit, whither wander
you?

TOUCHSTONE.
Mistress, you must come away to your father.

CELIA.
Were you made the messenger?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.

ROSALIND.
Where learned you that oath, fool?

TOUCHSTONE.
Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were good pancakes,
and swore by his honour the mustard was naught. Now, I’ll stand to it,
the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet was not the
knight forsworn.

CELIA.
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?

ROSALIND.
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.

TOUCHSTONE.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear by your beards
that I am a knave.

CELIA.
By our beards, if we had them, thou art.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my knavery, if I had it, then I were. But if you swear by that that
is not, you are not forsworn. No more was this knight swearing by his
honour, for he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away before
ever he saw those pancackes or that mustard.

CELIA.
Prithee, who is’t that thou mean’st?

TOUCHSTONE.
One that old Frederick, your father, loves.

CELIA.
My father’s love is enough to honour him. Enough! Speak no more of him.
You’ll be whipped for taxation one of these days.

TOUCHSTONE.
The more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do
foolishly.

CELIA.
By my troth, thou sayest true. For since the little wit that fools have
was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show.
Here comes Monsieur Le Beau.

Enter Le Beau.

ROSALIND.
With his mouth full of news.

CELIA.
Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.

ROSALIND.
Then shall we be news-crammed.

CELIA.
All the better; we shall be the more marketable.
_Bonjour_, Monsieur Le Beau. What’s the news?

LE BEAU.
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.

CELIA.
Sport! Of what colour?

LE BEAU.
What colour, madam? How shall I answer you?

ROSALIND.
As wit and fortune will.

TOUCHSTONE.
Or as the destinies decrees.

CELIA.
Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.

TOUCHSTONE.
Nay, if I keep not my rank—

ROSALIND.
Thou losest thy old smell.

LE BEAU.
You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of good wrestling, which
you have lost the sight of.

ROSALIND.
Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.

LE BEAU.
I will tell you the beginning and, if it please your ladyships, you may
see the end, for the best is yet to do; and here, where you are, they
are coming to perform it.

CELIA.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.

LE BEAU.
There comes an old man and his three sons—

CELIA.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.

LE BEAU.
Three proper young men of excellent growth and presence.

ROSALIND.
With bills on their necks: “Be it known unto all men by these
presents.”

LE BEAU.
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the Duke’s wrestler,
which Charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs, that
there is little hope of life in him. So he served the second, and so
the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man their father making such
pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with
weeping.

ROSALIND.
Alas!

TOUCHSTONE.
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?

LE BEAU.
Why, this that I speak of.

TOUCHSTONE.
Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time that ever I
heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.

CELIA.
Or I, I promise thee.

ROSALIND.
But is there any else longs to see this broken music in his sides? Is
there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling,
cousin?

LE BEAU.
You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the
wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.

CELIA.
Yonder, sure, they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.

Flourish. Enter Duke Frederick, Lords, Orlando, Charles and Attendants.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Come on. Since the youth will not be entreated, his own peril on his
forwardness.

ROSALIND.
Is yonder the man?

LE BEAU.
Even he, madam.

CELIA.
Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.

DUKE FREDERICK.
How now, daughter and cousin? Are you crept hither to see the
wrestling?

ROSALIND.
Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you, there is such odds
in the man. In pity of the challenger’s youth I would fain dissuade
him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if you can
move him.

CELIA.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Do so; I’ll not be by.

[_Duke Frederick steps aside._]

LE BEAU.
Monsieur the challenger, the Princess calls for you.

ORLANDO.
I attend them with all respect and duty.

ROSALIND.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?

ORLANDO.
No, fair princess. He is the general challenger. I come but in as
others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.

CELIA.
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years. You have
seen cruel proof of this man’s strength. If you saw yourself with your
eyes or knew yourself with your judgement, the fear of your adventure
would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own
sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.

ROSALIND.
Do, young sir. Your reputation shall not therefore be misprized. We
will make it our suit to the Duke that the wrestling might not go
forward.

ORLANDO.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess
me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let
your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial, wherein if I
be foiled there is but one shamed that was never gracious; if killed,
but one dead that is willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong,
for I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have
nothing. Only in the world I fill up a place, which may be better
supplied when I have made it empty.

ROSALIND.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.

CELIA.
And mine to eke out hers.

ROSALIND.
Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceived in you.

CELIA.
Your heart’s desires be with you.

CHARLES.
Come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his
mother earth?

ORLANDO.
Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You shall try but one fall.

CHARLES.
No, I warrant your grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that
have so mightily persuaded him from a first.

ORLANDO.
You mean to mock me after; you should not have mocked me before. But
come your ways.

ROSALIND.
Now, Hercules be thy speed, young man!

CELIA.
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.

[_Orlando and Charles wrestle._]

ROSALIND.
O excellent young man!

CELIA.
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.

[_Charles is thrown. Shout._]

DUKE FREDERICK.
No more, no more.

ORLANDO.
Yes, I beseech your grace. I am not yet well breathed.

DUKE FREDERICK.
How dost thou, Charles?

LE BEAU.
He cannot speak, my lord.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Bear him away.

[_Charles is carried off by Attendants._]

What is thy name, young man?

ORLANDO.
Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.

DUKE FREDERICK.
I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteemed thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.

[_Exeunt Duke Frederick, Le Beau and Lords._]

CELIA.
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?

ORLANDO.
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland’s son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.

ROSALIND.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father’s mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties
Ere he should thus have ventured.

CELIA.
Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father’s rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.—Sir, you have well deserved.
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.

ROSALIND.
Gentleman,

[_Giving him a chain from her neck_.]

Wear this for me—one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks means.—
Shall we go, coz?

CELIA.
Ay.—Fare you well, fair gentleman.

ORLANDO.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

ROSALIND.
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
I’ll ask him what he would.—Did you call, sir?—
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.

CELIA.
Will you go, coz?

ROSALIND.
Have with you.—Fare you well.

[_Exeunt Rosalind and Celia._]

ORLANDO.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown.
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

Enter Le Beau.

LE BEAU.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke’s condition
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous; what he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

ORLANDO.
I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
That here was at the wrestling?

LE BEAU.
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished Duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this Duke
Hath ta’en displeasure ’gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father’s sake;
And, on my life, his malice ’gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

ORLANDO.
I rest much bounden to you; fare you well!

[_Exit Le Beau._]

Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in the Palace

Enter Celia and Rosalind.

CELIA.
Why, cousin, why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! Not a word?

ROSALIND.
Not one to throw at a dog.

CELIA.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs. Throw some of
them at me. Come, lame me with reasons.

ROSALIND.
Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with
reasons and the other mad without any.

CELIA.
But is all this for your father?

ROSALIND.
No, some of it is for my child’s father. O, how full of briers is this
working-day world!

CELIA.
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery. If we
walk not in the trodden paths, our very petticoats will catch them.

ROSALIND.
I could shake them off my coat; these burs are in my heart.

CELIA.
Hem them away.

ROSALIND.
I would try, if I could cry “hem” and have him.

CELIA.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

ROSALIND.
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.

CELIA.
O, a good wish upon you! You will try in time, in despite of a fall.
But turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest. Is
it possible on such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland’s youngest son?

ROSALIND.
The Duke my father loved his father dearly.

CELIA.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? By this
kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly;
yet I hate not Orlando.

ROSALIND.
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.

CELIA.
Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.

ROSALIND.
Let me love him for that, and do you love him because I do.—Look, here
comes the Duke.

CELIA.
With his eyes full of anger.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.

ROSALIND.
Me, uncle?

DUKE FREDERICK.
You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou be’st found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.

ROSALIND.
I do beseech your Grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic—
As I do trust I am not—then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

ROSALIND.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Thou art thy father’s daughter, there’s enough.

ROSALIND.
So was I when your highness took his dukedom;
So was I when your highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
What’s that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.

CELIA.
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake,
Else had she with her father ranged along.

CELIA.
I did not then entreat to have her stay;
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, ate together,
And wheresoe’er we went, like Juno’s swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.

DUKE FREDERICK.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.

CELIA.
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of her company.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour
And in the greatness of my word, you die.

[_Exeunt Duke Frederick and Lords._]

CELIA.
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND.
I have more cause.

CELIA.
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee be cheerful. Know’st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?

ROSALIND.
That he hath not.

CELIA.
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I’ll go along with thee.

ROSALIND.
Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA.
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.

ROSALIND.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA.
I’ll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you; so shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND.
Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtal-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman’s fear there will,
We’ll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND.
I’ll have no worse a name than Jove’s own page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be called?

CELIA.
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND.
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father’s court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA.
He’ll go along o’er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let’s away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Duke Senior, Amiens and two or three Lords, dressed as foresters.

DUKE SENIOR.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons’ difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter’s wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say:
“This is no flattery. These are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am.”
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.

AMIENS.
I would not change it. Happy is your grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

DUKE SENIOR.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.

FIRST LORD.
Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
Today my lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag,
That from the hunter’s aim had ta’en a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th’ extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

DUKE SENIOR.
But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?

FIRST LORD.
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
“Poor deer,” quoth he “thou mak’st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much.” Then, being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
“’Tis right”; quoth he, “thus misery doth part
The flux of company.” Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. “Ay,” quoth Jaques,
“Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens!
’Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?”
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of the country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what’s worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling-place.

DUKE SENIOR.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?

SECOND LORD.
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.

DUKE SENIOR.
Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he’s full of matter.

FIRST LORD.
I’ll bring you to him straight.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Room in the Palace

Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be! Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.

FIRST LORD.
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

SECOND LORD.
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
Hesperia, the princess’ gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o’erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
I’ll make him find him. Do this suddenly!
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before Oliver’s House

Enter Orlando and Adam, meeting.

ORLANDO.
Who’s there?

ADAM.
What, my young master? O my gentle master,
O my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny prizer of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!

ORLANDO.
Why, what’s the matter?

ADAM.
O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors! Within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives.
Your brother—no, no brother, yet the son—
Yet not the son; I will not call him son—
Of him I was about to call his father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off;
I overheard him and his practices.
This is no place; this house is but a butchery.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

ORLANDO.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?

ADAM.
No matter whither, so you come not here.

ORLANDO.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do.
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.

ADAM.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold.
All this I give you. Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you.
I’ll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.

ORLANDO.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed.
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having. It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun’st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways, we’ll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent
We’ll light upon some settled low content.

ADAM.
Master, go on and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore it is too late a week.
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well and not my master’s debtor.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden

Enter Rosalind as Ganymede, Celia as Aliena, and Touchstone.

ROSALIND.
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!

TOUCHSTONE.
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.

ROSALIND.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man’s apparel, and to cry like
a woman, but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose
ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. Therefore, courage, good
Aliena.

CELIA.
I pray you bear with me, I cannot go no further.

TOUCHSTONE.
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you. Yet I should
bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your
purse.

ROSALIND.
Well, this is the forest of Arden.

TOUCHSTONE.
Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I! When I was at home I was in a
better place, but travellers must be content.

Enter Corin and Silvius.

ROSALIND.
Ay, be so, good Touchstone. Look you, who comes here? A young man and
an old in solemn talk.

CORIN.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.

SILVIUS.
O Corin, that thou knew’st how I do love her!

CORIN.
I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.

SILVIUS.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine—
As sure I think did never man love so—
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?

CORIN.
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.

SILVIUS.
O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
If thou rememb’rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress’ praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!

[_Exit Silvius._]

ROSALIND.
Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.

TOUCHSTONE.
And I mine. I remember when I was in love I broke my sword upon a stone
and bid him take that for coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember
the kissing of her batlet, and the cow’s dugs that her pretty chopped
hands had milked; and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of
her, from whom I took two cods, and, giving her them again, said with
weeping tears, “Wear these for my sake.” We that are true lovers run
into strange capers. But as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature
in love mortal in folly.

ROSALIND.
Thou speak’st wiser than thou art ware of.

TOUCHSTONE.
Nay, I shall ne’er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins
against it.

ROSALIND.
Jove, Jove, this shepherd’s passion
Is much upon my fashion.

TOUCHSTONE.
And mine, but it grows something stale with me.

CELIA.
I pray you, one of you question yond man
If he for gold will give us any food.
I faint almost to death.

TOUCHSTONE.
Holla, you clown!

ROSALIND.
Peace, fool, he’s not thy kinsman.

CORIN.
Who calls?

TOUCHSTONE.
Your betters, sir.

CORIN.
Else are they very wretched.

ROSALIND.
Peace, I say.—Good even to you, friend.

CORIN.
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.

ROSALIND.
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here’s a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succour.

CORIN.
Fair sir, I pity her
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her.
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on. But what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.

ROSALIND.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?

CORIN.
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying anything.

ROSALIND.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.

CELIA.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.

CORIN.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me. If you like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be,
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Forest

Enter Amiens, Jaques and others.

AMIENS.
[_Sings_.]

        Under the greenwood tree,
        Who loves to lie with me
        And turn his merry note
        Unto the sweet bird’s throat,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither!
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES.
More, more, I prithee, more.

AMIENS.
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES.
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy out of a song
as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.

AMIENS.
My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you.

JAQUES.
I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to sing. Come, more,
another _stanzo_. Call you ’em _stanzos?_

AMIENS.
What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES.
Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me nothing. Will you sing?

AMIENS.
More at your request than to please myself.

JAQUES.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, I’ll thank you; but that they call
compliment is like th’ encounter of two dog-apes. And when a man thanks
me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me the
beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you that will not, hold your tongues.

AMIENS.
Well, I’ll end the song.—Sirs, cover the while. The Duke will drink
under this tree; he hath been all this day to look you.

JAQUES.
And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is too disputable for my
company. I think of as many matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and
make no boast of them. Come, warble, come.

AMIENS.
[_Sings_.]

        Who doth ambition shun
        And loves to live i’ th’ sun,
        Seeking the food he eats
        And pleased with what he gets,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither.
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES.
I’ll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of
my invention.

AMIENS.
And I’ll sing it.

JAQUES.
Thus it goes:

        If it do come to pass
        That any man turn ass,
        Leaving his wealth and ease
        A stubborn will to please,
    Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame;
        Here shall he see
        Gross fools as he,
    An if he will come to me.

AMIENS.
What’s that “ducdame?”

JAQUES.
’Tis a Greek invocation to call fools into a circle. I’ll go sleep if I
can; if I cannot, I’ll rail against all the first-born of Egypt.

AMIENS.
And I’ll go seek the Duke; his banquet is prepared.

[_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE VI. Another part of the Forest

Enter Orlando and Adam.

ADAM.
Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food! Here lie I down
and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.

ORLANDO.
Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in thee? Live a little, comfort a
little, cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth forest yield anything
savage, I will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee. Thy
conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my sake, be comfortable.
Hold death awhile at the arm’s end. I will here be with thee presently,
and if I bring thee not something to eat, I’ll give thee leave to die.
But if thou diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well
said, thou look’st cheerly, and I’ll be with thee quickly. Yet thou
liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter and thou
shalt not die for lack of a dinner if there live anything in this
desert. Cheerly, good Adam!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another part of the Forest

Enter Duke Senior, Amiens and Lords as outlaws.

DUKE SENIOR.
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can nowhere find him like a man.

FIRST LORD.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence;
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.

DUKE SENIOR.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.

Enter Jaques.

FIRST LORD.
He saves my labour by his own approach.

DUKE SENIOR.
Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this
That your poor friends must woo your company?
What, you look merrily.

JAQUES.
A fool, a fool! I met a fool i’ th’ forest,
A motley fool. A miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and basked him in the sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
“Good morrow, fool,” quoth I. “No, sir,” quoth he,
“Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune.”
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, “It is ten o’clock.
Thus we may see,” quoth he, “how the world wags.
’Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more ’twill be eleven.
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale.” When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley’s the only wear.

DUKE SENIOR.
What fool is this?

JAQUES.
O worthy fool!—One that hath been a courtier,
And says if ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it. And in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.

DUKE SENIOR.
Thou shalt have one.

JAQUES.
It is my only suit,
Provided that you weed your better judgements
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have.
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The “why” is plain as way to parish church.
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The wise man’s folly is anatomized
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley. Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th’ infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.

DUKE SENIOR.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.

JAQUES.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?

DUKE SENIOR.
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin;
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th’ embossed sores and headed evils
That thou with license of free foot hast caught
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

JAQUES.
Why, who cries out on pride
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then. How then, what then? Let me see wherein
My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies
Unclaimed of any man. But who comes here?

Enter Orlando with sword drawn.

ORLANDO.
Forbear, and eat no more.

JAQUES.
Why, I have eat none yet.

ORLANDO.
Nor shalt not till necessity be served.

JAQUES.
Of what kind should this cock come of?

DUKE SENIOR.
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem’st so empty?

ORLANDO.
You touched my vein at first. The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta’en from me the show
Of smooth civility; yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say!
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

DUKE SENIOR.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all things had been savage here
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate’er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,
If ever you have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sat at any good man’s feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear,
And know what ’tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men’s feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered.
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.

ORLANDO.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR.
Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO.
I thank ye, and be blest for your good comfort.

[_Exit._]

DUKE SENIOR.
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy.
This wide and universal theatre
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.

JAQUES.
All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms;
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

Enter Orlando bearing Adam.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burden,
And let him feed.

ORLANDO.
I thank you most for him.

ADAM.
So had you need;
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome, fall to. I will not trouble you
As yet to question you about your fortunes.
Give us some music, and good cousin, sing.

SONG.


AMIENS. (_Sings_.)
        Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
        Thou art not so unkind
            As man’s ingratitude.
        Thy tooth is not so keen,
        Because thou art not seen,
            Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
        Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly.

         Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
        That dost not bite so nigh
            As benefits forgot.
        Though thou the waters warp,
        Thy sting is not so sharp
            As friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
        Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly.

DUKE SENIOR.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland’s son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither. I am the Duke
That loved your father. The residue of your fortune
Go to my cave and tell me.—Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Support him by the arm. [_To Orlando_.] Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A Room in the Palace


Enter Duke Frederick, Lords and Oliver.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe’er he is.
Seek him with candle. Bring him dead or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands, and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother’s mouth
Of what we think against thee.

OLIVER.
O that your highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.

DUKE FREDERICK.
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Forest of Arden

Enter Orlando with a paper.

ORLANDO.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.
     And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
     Thy huntress’ name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,
     And in their barks my thoughts I’ll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
     Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.

[_Exit._]

Enter Corin and Touchstone.

CORIN.
And how like you this shepherd’s life, Master Touchstone?

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in
respect that it is a shepherd’s life, it is naught. In respect that it
is solitary, I like it very well; but in respect that it is private, it
is a very vile life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me
well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As it is a
spare life, look you, it fits my humour well; but as there is no more
plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in
thee, shepherd?

CORIN.
No more but that I know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is;
and that he that wants money, means, and content is without three good
friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that
good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a great cause of the night is
lack of the sun; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.

TOUCHSTONE.
Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in court, shepherd?

CORIN.
No, truly.

TOUCHSTONE.
Then thou art damned.

CORIN.
Nay, I hope.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side.

CORIN.
For not being at court? Your reason.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never saw’st good manners; if
thou never saw’st good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and
wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous state,
shepherd.

CORIN.
Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners at the court are as
ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the country is most
mockable at the court. You told me you salute not at the court but you
kiss your hands. That courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were
shepherds.

TOUCHSTONE.
Instance, briefly. Come, instance.

CORIN.
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are
greasy.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, do not your courtier’s hands sweat? And is not the grease of a
mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow. A better
instance, I say. Come.

CORIN.
Besides, our hands are hard.

TOUCHSTONE.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again. A more sounder
instance, come.

CORIN.
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep; and would
you have us kiss tar? The courtier’s hands are perfumed with civet.

TOUCHSTONE.
Most shallow man! Thou worm’s meat in respect of a good piece of flesh
indeed! Learn of the wise and perpend. Civet is of a baser birth than
tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.

CORIN.
You have too courtly a wit for me. I’ll rest.

TOUCHSTONE.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man! God make incision in
thee, thou art raw.

CORIN.
Sir, I am a true labourer. I earn that I eat, get that I wear, owe no
man hate, envy no man’s happiness, glad of other men’s good, content
with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and
my lambs suck.

TOUCHSTONE.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes and the rams
together and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle;
to be bawd to a bell-wether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth
to crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram, out of all reasonable match. If
thou be’st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no
shepherds. I cannot see else how thou shouldst ’scape.

Enter Rosalind as Ganymede.

CORIN.
Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress’s brother.

ROSALIND.
[_Reads_.]
         _From the east to western Inde
         No jewel is like Rosalind.
         Her worth being mounted on the wind,
         Through all the world bears Rosalind.
         All the pictures fairest lined
         Are but black to Rosalind.
         Let no face be kept in mind
         But the fair of Rosalind._

TOUCHSTONE.
I’ll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and
sleeping hours excepted. It is the right butter-women’s rank to market.

ROSALIND.
Out, fool!

TOUCHSTONE.
         For a taste:
         If a hart do lack a hind,
         Let him seek out Rosalind.
         If the cat will after kind,
         So be sure will Rosalind.
         Winter garments must be lined,
         So must slender Rosalind.
         They that reap must sheaf and bind,
         Then to cart with Rosalind.
         Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
         Such a nut is Rosalind.
         He that sweetest rose will find
         Must find love’s prick, and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you infect yourself
with them?

ROSALIND.
Peace, you dull fool, I found them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND.
I’ll graft it with you, and then I shall graft it with a medlar. Then
it will be the earliest fruit i’ th’ country, for you’ll be rotten ere
you be half ripe, and that’s the right virtue of the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE.
You have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.

Enter Celia as Aliena, reading a paper.

ROSALIND.
Peace, here comes my sister, reading. Stand aside.

CELIA.
[_Reads_.]
            _Why should this a desert be?
                For it is unpeopled? No!
            Tongues I’ll hang on every tree
                That shall civil sayings show.
            Some, how brief the life of man
                Runs his erring pilgrimage,
            That the streching of a span
                Buckles in his sum of age;
            Some, of violated vows
                ’Twixt the souls of friend and friend.
            But upon the fairest boughs,
                Or at every sentence’ end,
            Will I “Rosalinda” write,
                Teaching all that read to know
            The quintessence of every sprite
                Heaven would in little show.
            Therefore heaven nature charged
                That one body should be filled
            With all graces wide-enlarged.
                Nature presently distilled
            Helen’s cheek, but not her heart,
                Cleopatra’s majesty;
            Atalanta’s better part,
                Sad Lucretia’s modesty.
            Thus Rosalind of many parts
                By heavenly synod was devised,
            Of many faces, eyes, and hearts
                To have the touches dearest prized.
            Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
                And I to live and die her slave._

ROSALIND.
O most gentle Jupiter, what tedious homily of love have you wearied
your parishioners withal, and never cried “Have patience, good people!”

CELIA.
How now! Back, friends. Shepherd, go off a little. Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat, though not with bag
and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

[_Exeunt Corin and Touchstone._]

CELIA.
Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND.
O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them
more feet than the verses would bear.

CELIA.
That’s no matter. The feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND.
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the
verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.

CELIA.
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and
carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND.
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came; for
look here what I found on a palm-tree. I was never so berhymed since
Pythagoras’ time that I was an Irish rat, which I can hardly remember.

CELIA.
Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND.
Is it a man?

CELIA.
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. Change you colour?

ROSALIND.
I prithee, who?

CELIA.
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but mountains
may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.

ROSALIND.
Nay, but who is it?

CELIA.
Is it possible?

ROSALIND.
Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.

CELIA.
O wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yet again
wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!

ROSALIND.
Good my complexion! Dost thou think, though I am caparisoned like a
man, I have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay
more is a South Sea of discovery. I prithee tell me who is it quickly,
and speak apace. I would thou couldst stammer, that thou mightst pour
this concealed man out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of
narrow-mouthed bottle—either too much at once or none at all. I prithee
take the cork out of thy mouth that I may drink thy tidings.

CELIA.
So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND.
Is he of God’s making? What manner of man? Is his head worth a hat, or
his chin worth a beard?

CELIA.
Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND.
Why, God will send more if the man will be thankful. Let me stay the
growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler’s heels and your
heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND.
Nay, but the devil take mocking! Speak sad brow and true maid.

CELIA.
I’ faith, coz, ’tis he.

ROSALIND.
Orlando?

CELIA.
Orlando.

ROSALIND.
Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet and hose? What did he
when thou saw’st him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he?
What makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he
with thee? And when shalt thou see him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA.
You must borrow me Gargantua’s mouth first. ’Tis a word too great for
any mouth of this age’s size. To say ay and no to these particulars is
more than to answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND.
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in man’s apparel? Looks
he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?

CELIA.
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a
lover. But take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good
observance. I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND.
It may well be called Jove’s tree when it drops forth such fruit.

CELIA.
Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND.
Proceed.

CELIA.
There lay he, stretched along like a wounded knight.

ROSALIND.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.

CELIA.
Cry “holla!” to thy tongue, I prithee. It curvets unseasonably. He was
furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND.
O, ominous! He comes to kill my heart.

CELIA.
I would sing my song without a burden. Thou bring’st me out of tune.

ROSALIND.
Do you not know I am a woman? When I think, I must speak. Sweet, say
on.

Enter Orlando and Jaques.

CELIA.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?

ROSALIND.
’Tis he! Slink by, and note him.

[_Rosalind and Celia step aside._]

JAQUES.
I thank you for your company but, good faith, I had as lief have been
myself alone.

ORLANDO.
And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for your
society.

JAQUES.
God be wi’ you, let’s meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO.
I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES.
I pray you, mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks.

ORLANDO.
I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.

JAQUES.
Rosalind is your love’s name?

ORLANDO.
Yes, just.

JAQUES.
I do not like her name.

ORLANDO.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.

JAQUES.
What stature is she of?

ORLANDO.
Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES.
You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been acquainted with
goldsmiths’ wives, and conned them out of rings?

ORLANDO.
Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have
studied your questions.

JAQUES.
You have a nimble wit. I think ’twas made of Atalanta’s heels. Will you
sit down with me? And we two will rail against our mistress the world
and all our misery.

ORLANDO.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom I know
most faults.

JAQUES.
The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO.
’Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue. I am weary of you.

JAQUES.
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found you.

ORLANDO.
He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and you shall see him.

JAQUES.
There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES.
I’ll tarry no longer with you. Farewell, good Signior Love.

ORLANDO.
I am glad of your departure. Adieu, good Monsieur Melancholy.

[_Exit Jaques.—Celia and Rosalind come forward._]

ROSALIND.
I will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the
knave with him.
Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO.
Very well. What would you?

ROSALIND.
I pray you, what is’t o’clock?

ORLANDO.
You should ask me what time o’ day. There’s no clock in the forest.

ROSALIND.
Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute
and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a
clock.

ORLANDO.
And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that been as proper?

ROSALIND.
By no means, sir. Time travels in divers paces with divers persons.
I’ll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time
gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.

ORLANDO.
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND.
Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her
marriage and the day it is solemnized. If the interim be but a
se’nnight, time’s pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven
year.

ORLANDO.
Who ambles time withal?

ROSALIND.
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that hath not the gout;
for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other lives
merrily because he feels no pain; the one lacking the burden of lean
and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious
penury. These time ambles withal.

ORLANDO.
Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND.
With a thief to the gallows; for though he go as softly as foot can
fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

ORLANDO.
Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND.
With lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep between term and term, and
then they perceive not how time moves.

ORLANDO.
Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND.
With this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest,
like fringe upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO.
Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND.
As the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO.
Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a
dwelling.

ROSALIND.
I have been told so of many. But indeed an old religious uncle of mine
taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew
courtship too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard him read
many lectures against it, and I thank God I am not a woman, to be
touched with so many giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
whole sex withal.

ORLANDO.
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge
of women?

ROSALIND.
There were none principal. They were all like one another as halfpence
are, every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to
match it.

ORLANDO.
I prithee recount some of them.

ROSALIND.
No. I will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick. There is
a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving
“Rosalind” on their barks; hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on
brambles; all, forsooth, deifying the name of Rosalind. If I could meet
that fancy-monger, I would give him some good counsel, for he seems to
have the quotidian of love upon him.

ORLANDO.
I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you tell me your remedy.

ROSALIND.
There is none of my uncle’s marks upon you. He taught me how to know a
man in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

ORLANDO.
What were his marks?

ROSALIND.
A lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have
not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected,
which you have not—but I pardon you for that, for simply your having in
beard is a younger brother’s revenue. Then your hose should be
ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation.
But you are no such man. You are rather point-device in your
accoutrements, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.

ORLANDO.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

ROSALIND.
Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you love believe it, which
I warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does. That is one of
the points in the which women still give the lie to their consciences.
But, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees,
wherein Rosalind is so admired?

ORLANDO.
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he,
that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO.
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

ROSALIND.
Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves as well a dark
house and a whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are not so
punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO.
Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND.
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me his love, his
mistress, and I set him every day to woo me; at which time would I,
being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of
tears, full of smiles; for every passion something and for no passion
truly anything, as boys and women are for the most part cattle of this
colour; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then
forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him; that I drave my
suitor from his mad humour of love to a living humour of madness, which
was to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook
merely monastic. And thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me
to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep’s heart, that there shall
not be one spot of love in ’t.

ORLANDO.
I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind and come every day
to my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is.

ROSALIND.
Go with me to it, and I’ll show it you; and by the way you shall tell
me where in the forest you live. Will you go?

ORLANDO.
With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Touchstone and Audrey; Jaques at a distance observing them.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up your goats, Audrey. And how,
Audrey? Am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY.
Your features, Lord warrant us! What features?

TOUCHSTONE.
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest
Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in a thatched
house!

TOUCHSTONE.
When a man’s verses cannot be understood, nor a man’s good wit seconded
with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than
a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would the gods had made
thee poetical.

AUDREY.
I do not know what “poetical” is. Is it honest in deed and word? Is it
a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and lovers are
given to poetry, and what they swear in poetry may be said, as lovers,
they do feign.

AUDREY.
Do you wish, then, that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE.
I do, truly, for thou swear’st to me thou art honest. Now if thou wert
a poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY.
Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured; for honesty coupled to
beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] A material fool!

AUDREY.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the gods make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat
into an unclean dish.

AUDREY.
I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE.
Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness; sluttishness may come
hereafter. But be it as it may be, I will marry thee. And to that end I
have been with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next village, who
hath promised to meet me in this place of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY.
Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE.
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this
attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but
horn-beasts. But what though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
necessary. It is said, “Many a man knows no end of his goods.” Right.
Many a man has good horns and knows no end of them. Well, that is the
dowry of his wife; ’tis none of his own getting. Horns? Even so. Poor
men alone? No, no, the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is
the single man therefore blessed? No. As a walled town is more worthier
than a village, so is the forehead of a married man more honourable
than the bare brow of a bachelor. And by how much defence is better
than no skill, by so much is horn more precious than to want.

Enter Sir Oliver Martext.

Here comes Sir Oliver. Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met. Will you
dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your
chapel?

MARTEXT.
Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE.
I will not take her on gift of any man.

MARTEXT.
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES.
[_Coming forward_.] Proceed, proceed. I’ll give her.

TOUCHSTONE.
Good even, good Master What-ye-call’t, how do you, sir? You are very
well met. God ’ild you for your last company. I am very glad to see
you. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES.
Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE.
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her
bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would
be nibbling.

JAQUES.
And will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush
like a beggar? Get you to church, and have a good priest that can tell
you what marriage is. This fellow will but join you together as they
join wainscot; then one of you will prove a shrunk panel, and like
green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE.
[_Aside_.] I am not in the mind but I were better to be married of him
than of another, for he is not like to marry me well, and not being
well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my
wife.

JAQUES.
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come, sweet Audrey. We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
Farewell, good Master Oliver. Not
             _O sweet Oliver,
             O brave Oliver,
         Leave me not behind thee._
But
             _Wind away,—
             Begone, I say,
         I will not to wedding with thee._

[_Exeunt Touchstone, Audrey and Jaques._]

MARTEXT.
’Tis no matter. Ne’er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me
out of my calling.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the Forest. Before a Cottage

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

ROSALIND.
Never talk to me, I will weep.

CELIA.
Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not
become a man.

ROSALIND.
But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA.
As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.

ROSALIND.
His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA.
Something browner than Judas’s. Marry, his kisses are Judas’s own
children.

ROSALIND.
I’ faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA.
An excellent colour. Your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND.
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.

CELIA.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun of winter’s
sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of chastity is in
them.

ROSALIND.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?

CELIA.
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND.
Do you think so?

CELIA.
Yes. I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his
verity in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
worm-eaten nut.

ROSALIND.
Not true in love?

CELIA.
Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND.
You have heard him swear downright he was.

CELIA.
“Was” is not “is”. Besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the
word of a tapster. They are both the confirmer of false reckonings. He
attends here in the forest on the Duke your father.

ROSALIND.
I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him. He asked me
of what parentage I was. I told him, of as good as he, so he laughed
and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as
Orlando?

CELIA.
O, that’s a brave man! He writes brave verses, speaks brave words,
swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, athwart
the heart of his lover, as a puny tilter, that spurs his horse but on
one side, breaks his staff like a noble goose. But all’s brave that
youth mounts and folly guides. Who comes here?

Enter Corin.

CORIN.
Mistress and master, you have oft enquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.

CELIA.
Well, and what of him?

CORIN.
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you,
If you will mark it.

ROSALIND.
O, come, let us remove.
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I’ll prove a busy actor in their play.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Forest

Enter Silvius and Phoebe.

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me, do not, Phoebe.
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th’ accustomed sight of death makes hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

Enter Rosalind, Celia and Corin, at a distance.

PHOEBE.
I would not be thy executioner;
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell’st me there is murder in mine eye.
’Tis pretty, sure, and very probable
That eyes, that are the frail’st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it; lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
Nor I am sure there is not force in eyes
That can do hurt.

SILVIUS.
O dear Phoebe,
If ever—as that ever may be near—
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love’s keen arrows make.

PHOEBE.
But till that time
Come not thou near me. And when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND.
[_Advancing_.] And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty—
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed—
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature’s sale-work. ’Od’s my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
’Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. ’Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favoured children.
’Tis not her glass but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
But, mistress, know yourself; down on your knees,
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man’s love.
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.

PHOEBE.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together!
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND.
He’s fall’n in love with your foulness, and she’ll fall in love with my
anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks,
I’ll sauce her with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?

PHOEBE.
For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND.
I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine.
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
’Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud. Though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Come, to our flock.

[_Exeunt Rosalind, Celia and Corin._]

PHOEBE.
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
“Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?”

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe—

PHOEBE.
Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe, pity me.

PHOEBE.
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.

PHOEBE.
Thou hast my love. Is not that neighbourly?

SILVIUS.
I would have you.

PHOEBE.
Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I’ll employ thee too.
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.

SILVIUS.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then
A scattered smile, and that I’ll live upon.

PHOEBE.
Know’st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS.
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.

PHOEBE.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him.
’Tis but a peevish boy—yet he talks well.
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth—not very pretty—
But sure he’s proud, and yet his pride becomes him.
He’ll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offence, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall, yet for his years he’s tall;
His leg is but so-so, and yet ’tis well.
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mixed in his cheek. ’Twas just the difference
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but for my part
I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
I have more cause to hate him than to love him.
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me.
I marvel why I answered not again.
But that’s all one: omittance is no quittance.
I’ll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS.
Phoebe, with all my heart.

PHOEBE.
I’ll write it straight,
The matter’s in my head and in my heart.
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
Go with me, Silvius.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Rosalind, Celia and Jaques.

JAQUES.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.

ROSALIND.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.

JAQUES.
I am so; I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND.
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows, and
betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES.
Why, ’tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND.
Why then, ’tis good to be a post.

JAQUES.
I have neither the scholar’s melancholy, which is emulation; nor the
musician’s, which is fantastical; nor the courtier’s, which is proud;
nor the soldier’s, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer’s, which is
politic; nor the lady’s, which is nice; nor the lover’s, which is all
these; but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my
travels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous
sadness.

ROSALIND.
A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be sad. I fear you
have sold your own lands to see other men’s. Then to have seen much and
to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES.
Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND.
And your experience makes you sad. I had rather have a fool to make me
merry than experience to make me sad—and to travel for it too.

Enter Orlando.

ORLANDO.
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES.
Nay, then, God be wi’ you, an you talk in blank verse.

ROSALIND.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller. Look you lisp and wear strange suits;
disable all the benefits of your own country; be out of love with your
nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are,
or I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.

[_Exit Jaques._]

Why, how now, Orlando, where have you been all this while? You a lover!
An you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO.
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND.
Break an hour’s promise in love? He that will divide a minute into a
thousand parts, and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute
in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid hath clapped
him o’ the shoulder, but I’ll warrant him heart-whole.

ORLANDO.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. I had as lief be
wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO.
Of a snail?

ROSALIND.
Ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his
head—a better jointure, I think, than you make a woman. Besides, he
brings his destiny with him.

ORLANDO.
What’s that?

ROSALIND.
Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives
for. But he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his
wife.

ORLANDO.
Virtue is no horn-maker and my Rosalind is virtuous.

ROSALIND.
And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA.
It pleases him to call you so, but he hath a Rosalind of a better leer
than you.

ROSALIND.
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday humour, and like enough
to consent. What would you say to me now, an I were your very, very
Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were gravelled for lack
of matter, you might take occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when
they are out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking—God warn
us—matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO.
How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND.
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO.
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?

ROSALIND.
Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or I should think my
honesty ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO.
What, of my suit?

ROSALIND.
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. Am not I your
Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I take some joy to say you are because I would be talking of her.

ROSALIND.
Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.

ORLANDO.
Then, in mine own person, I die.

ROSALIND.
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is almost six thousand years
old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person,
_videlicet_, in a love-cause. Troilus had his brains dashed out with a
Grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of
the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair year
though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer
night; for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont
and, being taken with the cramp, was drowned; and the foolish
chroniclers of that age found it was Hero of Sestos. But these are all
lies. Men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them, but
not for love.

ORLANDO.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her
frown might kill me.

ROSALIND.
By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now I will be your
Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, I
will grant it.

ORLANDO.
Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO.
And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND.
Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO.
What sayest thou?

ROSALIND.
Are you not good?

ORLANDO.
I hope so.

ROSALIND.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?—Come, sister, you
shall be the priest and marry us.—Give me your hand, Orlando.—What do
you say, sister?

ORLANDO.
Pray thee, marry us.

CELIA.
I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND.
You must begin “Will you, Orlando—”


CELIA.
Go to.—Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I will.

ROSALIND.
Ay, but when?

ORLANDO.
Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND.
Then you must say “I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.”

ORLANDO.
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND.
I might ask you for your commission. But I do take thee, Orlando, for
my husband. There’s a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a
woman’s thought runs before her actions.

ORLANDO.
So do all thoughts. They are winged.

ROSALIND.
Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.

ORLANDO.
For ever and a day.

ROSALIND.
Say “a day” without the “ever.” No, no, Orlando, men are April when
they woo, December when they wed. Maids are May when they are maids,
but the sky changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous of thee
than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than a parrot
against rain, more new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
than a monkey. I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the fountain, and
I will do that when you are disposed to be merry. I will laugh like a
hyena, and that when thou are inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO.
But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND.
By my life, she will do as I do.

ORLANDO.
O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this. The wiser, the
waywarder. Make the doors upon a woman’s wit, and it will out at the
casement. Shut that, and ’twill out at the keyhole. Stop that, ’twill
fly with the smoke out at the chimney.

ORLANDO.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say, “Wit, whither
wilt?”

ROSALIND.
Nay, you might keep that check for it till you met your wife’s wit
going to your neighbour’s bed.

ORLANDO.
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND.
Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall never take her
without her answer unless you take her without her tongue. O, that
woman that cannot make her fault her husband’s occasion, let her never
nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.

ORLANDO.
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

ROSALIND.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.

ORLANDO.
I must attend the Duke at dinner. By two o’clock I will be with thee
again.

ROSALIND.
Ay, go your ways, go your ways. I knew what you would prove. My friends
told me as much, and I thought no less. That flattering tongue of yours
won me. ’Tis but one cast away, and so, come death! Two o’clock is your
hour?

ORLANDO.
Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty
oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your promise or
come one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most pathetical
break-promise, and the most hollow lover, and the most unworthy of her
you call Rosalind that may be chosen out of the gross band of the
unfaithful. Therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.

ORLANDO.
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind. So, adieu.

ROSALIND.
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let
time try. Adieu.

[_Exit Orlando._]

CELIA.
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate! We must have your
doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the
bird hath done to her own nest.

ROSALIND.
O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many
fathom deep I am in love! But it cannot be sounded; my affection hath
an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.

CELIA.
Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs
out.

ROSALIND.
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus, that was begot of thought,
conceived of spleen, and born of madness, that blind rascally boy that
abuses everyone’s eyes because his own are out, let him be judge how
deep I am in love. I’ll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight
of Orlando. I’ll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.

CELIA.
And I’ll sleep.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the Forest

Enter Jaques and Lords, like foresters.

JAQUES.
Which is he that killed the deer?

FIRST LORD.
Sir, it was I.

JAQUES.
Let’s present him to the Duke, like a Roman conqueror, and it would do
well to set the deer’s horns upon his head for a branch of victory.
Have you no song, forester, for this purpose?

SECOND LORD.
Yes, sir.

JAQUES.
Sing it. ’Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.

SONG

SECOND LORD.
[_Sings_.]
  What shall he have that killed the deer?
        His leather skin and horns to wear.
                  Then sing him home:
  [_The rest shall bear this burden_.]
            Take thou no scorn to wear the horn.
            It was a crest ere thou wast born.
                  Thy father’s father wore it
                  And thy father bore it.
            The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
            Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

ROSALIND.
How say you now? Is it not past two o’clock? And here much Orlando.

CELIA.
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain he hath ta’en his bow
and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.

Enter Silvius.

Look who comes here.

SILVIUS.
My errand is to you, fair youth.
My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this.

[_Giving a letter._]

I know not the contents, but, as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND.
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all!
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
Were man as rare as phoenix. ’Od’s my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS.
No, I protest, I know not the contents.
Phoebe did write it.

ROSALIND.
Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand. She has a leathern hand,
A freestone-coloured hand. I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but ’twas her hands.
She has a huswife’s hand—but that’s no matter.
I say she never did invent this letter;
This is a man’s invention, and his hand.

SILVIUS.
Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND.
Why, ’tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers. Why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian. Women’s gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS.
So please you, for I never heard it yet,
Yet heard too much of Phoebe’s cruelty.

ROSALIND.
She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.

[_Reads._]

            _Art thou god to shepherd turned,
            That a maiden’s heart hath burned?_
Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS.
Call you this railing?

ROSALIND.
            _Why, thy godhead laid apart,
            Warr’st thou with a woman’s heart?_
Did you ever hear such railing?
            _Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
            That could do no vengeance to me._
Meaning me a beast.
            _If the scorn of your bright eyne
            Have power to raise such love in mine,
            Alack, in me what strange effect
            Would they work in mild aspect?
            Whiles you chid me, I did love,
            How then might your prayers move?
            He that brings this love to thee
            Little knows this love in me;
            And by him seal up thy mind,
            Whether that thy youth and kind
            Will the faithful offer take
            Of me, and all that I can make,
            Or else by him my love deny,
            And then I’ll study how to die._

SILVIUS.
Call you this chiding?

CELIA.
Alas, poor shepherd.

ROSALIND.
Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity.—Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee? Not
to be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see love hath made thee
a tame snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, I charge her to
love thee; if she will not, I will never have her unless thou entreat
for her. If you be a true lover, hence, and not a word, for here comes
more company.

[_Exit Silvius._]

Enter Oliver.

OLIVER.
Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA.
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom;
The rank of osiers, by the murmuring stream,
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself.
There’s none within.

OLIVER.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description,
Such garments, and such years. “The boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister; the woman low,
And browner than her brother.” Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA.
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.

OLIVER.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND.
I am. What must we understand by this?

OLIVER.
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkerchief was stained.

CELIA.
I pray you tell it.

OLIVER.
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself.
Under an oak, whose boughs were mossed with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched ragged man, o’ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached
The opening of his mouth. But suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush; under which bush’s shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir. For ’tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.

OLIVER.
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND.
But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?

OLIVER.
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA.
Are you his brother?

ROSALIND.
Was it you he rescued?

CELIA.
Was’t you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER.
’Twas I; but ’tis not I. I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND.
But, for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER.
By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed—
As how I came into that desert place—
In brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother’s love,
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin,
Dyed in his blood, unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

[_Rosalind faints._]

CELIA.
Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede!

OLIVER.
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA.
There is more in it. Cousin—Ganymede!

OLIVER.
Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND.
I would I were at home.

CELIA.
We’ll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER.
Be of good cheer, youth. You a man? You lack a man’s heart.

ROSALIND.
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well
counterfeited. I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited.
Heigh-ho.

OLIVER.
This was not counterfeit. There is too great testimony in your
complexion that it was a passion of earnest.

ROSALIND.
Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER.
Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.

ROSALIND.
So I do. But, i’ faith, I should have been a woman by right.

CELIA.
Come, you look paler and paler. Pray you draw homewards. Good sir, go
with us.

OLIVER.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
I shall devise something. But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to
him. Will you go?

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

TOUCHSTONE.
We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.

AUDREY.
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman’s saying.

TOUCHSTONE.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext. But Audrey,
there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY.
Ay, I know who ’tis. He hath no interest in me in the world.

Enter William.

Here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE.
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown. By my troth, we that have
good wits have much to answer for. We shall be flouting; we cannot
hold.

WILLIAM.
Good ev’n, Audrey.

AUDREY.
God ye good ev’n, William.

WILLIAM.
And good ev’n to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Good ev’n, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head. Nay, prithee,
be covered. How old are you, friend?

WILLIAM.
Five-and-twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM.
William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
A fair name. Wast born i’ th’ forest here?

WILLIAM.
Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE.
“Thank God.” A good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM.
Faith, sir, so-so.

TOUCHSTONE.
“So-so” is good, very good, very excellent good. And yet it is not, it
is but so-so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM.
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember a saying: “The fool doth think
he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.” The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips
when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes were made to
eat and lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM.
I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM.
No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Then learn this of me: to have is to have. For it is a figure in
rhetoric that drink, being poured out of cup into a glass, by filling
the one doth empty the other. For all your writers do consent that
_ipse_ is “he.” Now, you are not _ipse_, for I am he.

WILLIAM.
Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE.
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you clown,
abandon—which is in the vulgar, “leave”—the society—which in the
boorish is “company”—of this female—which in the common is “woman”;
which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou
perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, I kill
thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into
bondage. I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel.
I will bandy with thee in faction; will o’errun thee with policy. I
will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways! Therefore tremble and depart.

AUDREY.
Do, good William.

WILLIAM.
God rest you merry, sir.

[_Exit._]

Enter Corin.

CORIN.
Our master and mistress seek you. Come away, away.

TOUCHSTONE.
Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the Forest

Enter Orlando and Oliver.

ORLANDO.
Is’t possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? That
but seeing, you should love her? And loving woo? And wooing, she should
grant? And will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER.
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the
small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting. But
say with me, I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me; consent
with both that we may enjoy each other. It shall be to your good, for
my father’s house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland’s will I
estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

Enter Rosalind.

ORLANDO.
You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow. Thither will I
invite the Duke and all’s contented followers. Go you and prepare
Aliena; for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
God save you, brother.

OLIVER.
And you, fair sister.

[_Exit._]

ROSALIND.
O my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a
scarf!

ORLANDO.
It is my arm.

ROSALIND.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.

ORLANDO.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed
me your handkercher?

ORLANDO.
Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND.
O, I know where you are. Nay, ’tis true. There was never anything so
sudden but the fight of two rams, and Caesar’s thrasonical brag of “I
came, saw and overcame.” For your brother and my sister no sooner met
but they looked; no sooner looked but they loved; no sooner loved but
they sighed; no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason; no
sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees
have they made pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb
incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. They are in the
very wrath of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.

ORLANDO.
They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the Duke to the nuptial.
But O, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another
man’s eyes! By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at the height of
heart-heaviness, by how much I shall think my brother happy in having
what he wishes for.

ROSALIND.
Why, then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then—for
now I speak to some purpose—that I know you are a gentleman of good
conceit. I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my
knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are. Neither do I labour for a
greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you,
to do yourself good, and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please,
that I can do strange things. I have, since I was three year old,
conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not
damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture
cries it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her. I
know into what straits of fortune she is driven and it is not
impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her
before your eyes tomorrow, human as she is, and without any danger.

ORLANDO.
Speak’st thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND.
By my life, I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a magician.
Therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends; for if you will
be married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

Enter Silvius and Phoebe.

Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

PHOEBE.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND.
I care not if I have; it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.

PHOEBE.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what ’tis to love.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And I for no woman.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And I for no woman.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion, and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And so am I for no woman.

PHOEBE.
[_To Rosalind_.] If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS.
[_To Phoebe_.] If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND.
Why do you speak too, “Why blame you me to love you?”

ORLANDO.
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND.
Pray you, no more of this, ’tis like the howling of Irish wolves
against the moon.
[_to Silvius_.] I will help you if I can.
[_to Phoebe_.] I would love you if I could.—Tomorrow meet me all
together.
[_to Phoebe_.] I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I’ll be
married tomorrow.
[_to Orlando_.] I will satisfy you if ever I satisfied man, and you
shall be married tomorrow.
[_to Silvius_.] I will content you, if what pleases you contents you,
and you shall be married tomorrow.
[_to Orlando_.] As you love Rosalind, meet.
[_to Silvius_.] As you love Phoebe, meet.—And as I love no woman, I’ll
meet. So fare you well. I have left you commands.

SILVIUS.
I’ll not fail, if I live.

PHOEBE.
Nor I.

ORLANDO.
Nor I.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

TOUCHSTONE.
Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey, tomorrow will we be married.

AUDREY.
I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is no dishonest desire
to desire to be a woman of the world.

Enter two Pages.

Here come two of the banished Duke’s pages.

FIRST PAGE.
Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my troth, well met. Come sit, sit, and a song.

SECOND PAGE.
We are for you, sit i’ th’ middle.

FIRST PAGE.
Shall we clap into’t roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we
are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?

SECOND PAGE.
I’faith, i’faith, and both in a tune like two gipsies on a horse.

                        SONG

PAGES.
[_Sing_.]
    It was a lover and his lass,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    That o’er the green cornfield did pass
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    Between the acres of the rye,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    These pretty country folks would lie,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    This carol they began that hour,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    How that a life was but a flower,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    And therefore take the present time,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    For love is crowned with the prime,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

TOUCHSTONE
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty,
yet the note was very untuneable.

FIRST PAGE.
You are deceived, sir, we kept time, we lost not our time.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my troth, yes. I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song.
God be wi’ you, and God mend your voices. Come, Audrey.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the Forest

Enter Duke Senior, Amiens, Jaques, Orlando, Oliver and Celia.

DUKE SENIOR.
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO.
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

Enter Rosalind, Silvius and Phoebe.

ROSALIND.
Patience once more whiles our compact is urged.
[_To the Duke._] You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR.
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND.
[_To Orlando_.] And you say you will have her when I bring her?

ORLANDO.
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND.
[_To Phoebe_.] You say you’ll marry me if I be willing?

PHOEBE.
That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You’ll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHOEBE.
So is the bargain.

ROSALIND.
[_To Silvius_.] You say that you’ll have Phoebe if she will?

SILVIUS.
Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter,
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter.
Keep your word, Phoebe, that you’ll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.
Keep your word, Silvius, that you’ll marry her
If she refuse me. And from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.

[_Exeunt Rosalind and Celia._]

DUKE SENIOR.
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter’s favour.

ORLANDO.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.

Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

JAQUES.
There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the
ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are
called fools.

TOUCHSTONE.
Salutation and greeting to you all.

JAQUES.
Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is the motley-minded gentleman that
I have so often met in the forest. He hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. I have trod a
measure; I have flattered a lady; I have been politic with my friend,
smooth with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have had four
quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES.
And how was that ta’en up?

TOUCHSTONE.
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.

JAQUES.
How seventh cause?—Good my lord, like this fellow?

DUKE SENIOR.
I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE.
God ’ild you, sir, I desire you of the like. I press in here, sir,
amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear
according as marriage binds and blood breaks. A poor virgin, sir, an
ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor humour of mine, sir, to
take that that no man else will. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir,
in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR.
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE.
According to the fool’s bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES.
But, for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrel on the seventh
cause?

TOUCHSTONE.
Upon a lie seven times removed—bear your body more seeming, Audrey—as
thus, sir. I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier’s beard. He sent
me word if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it
was. This is called the “retort courteous”. If I sent him word again it
was not well cut, he would send me word he cut it to please himself.
This is called the “quip modest”. If again it was not well cut, he
disabled my judgement. This is called the “reply churlish”. If again it
was not well cut, he would answer I spake not true. This is called the
“reproof valiant”. If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie.
This is called the “countercheck quarrelsome”, and so, to the “lie
circumstantial”, and the “lie direct”.

JAQUES.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE.
I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not
give me the lie direct; and so we measured swords and parted.

JAQUES.
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE.
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good
manners. I will name you the degrees: the first, the retort courteous;
the second, the quip modest; the third, the reply churlish; the fourth,
the reproof valiant; the fifth, the countercheck quarrelsome; the
sixth, the lie with circumstance; the seventh, the lie direct. All
these you may avoid but the lie direct and you may avoid that too with
an “if”. I knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but
when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an
“if”, as, “if you said so, then I said so;” and they shook hands, and
swore brothers. Your “if” is the only peacemaker; much virtue in “if.”

JAQUES.
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? He’s as good at anything, and yet a
fool.

DUKE SENIOR.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of
that he shoots his wit.

Enter Hymen, Rosalind in woman’s clothes, and Celia. Still music.

HYMEN.
    Then is there mirth in heaven
    When earthly things made even
        Atone together.
    Good Duke, receive thy daughter.
    Hymen from heaven brought her,
        Yea, brought her hither,
    That thou mightst join her hand with his,
    Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND.
[_To Duke Senior_.] To you I give myself, for I am yours.
[_To Orlando_.] To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHOEBE.
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu.

ROSALIND.
[_To Duke Senior_.] I’ll have no father, if you be not he.
[_To Orlando_.] I’ll have no husband, if you be not he.
[_To Phoebe_.] Nor ne’er wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN.
    Peace, ho! I bar confusion.
    ’Tis I must make conclusion
        Of these most strange events.
    Here’s eight that must take hands
    To join in Hymen’s bands,
        If truth holds true contents.
[_To Orlando and Rosalind_.] You and you no cross shall part.
[_To Celia and Oliver_.] You and you are heart in heart.
[_To Phoebe_.] You to his love must accord
Or have a woman to your lord.
[_To Audrey and Touchstone_.] You and you are sure together
As the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
Feed yourselves with questioning,
That reason wonder may diminish
How thus we met, and these things finish.

                         SONG
      Wedding is great Juno’s crown,
            O blessed bond of board and bed.
      ’Tis Hymen peoples every town,
            High wedlock then be honoured.
      Honour, high honour, and renown
      To Hymen, god of every town.

DUKE SENIOR.
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.

PHOEBE.
[_To Silvius_.] I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

Enter Jaques de Boys.

JAQUES DE BOYS.
Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword;
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true
I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome, young man.
Thou offer’st fairly to thy brother’s wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot;
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall’n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music! And you brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy to th’ measures fall.

JAQUES.
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.

JAQUES DE BOYS.
He hath.

JAQUES.
To him will I. Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
[_To Duke Senior_.] You to your former honour I bequeath;
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
[_To Orlando_.] You to a love that your true faith doth merit.
[_To Oliver_.] You to your land, and love, and great allies.
[_To Silvius_.] You to a long and well-deserved bed.
[_To Touchstone_.] And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled.—So to your pleasures,
I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR.
Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES.
To see no pastime, I. What you would have
I’ll stay to know at your abandoned cave.

[_Exit._]

DUKE SENIOR.
Proceed, proceed! We will begin these rites,
As we do trust they’ll end, in true delights.

[_Dance. Exeunt all but Rosalind._]

EPILOGUE

ROSALIND.
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, but it is no more
unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. If it be true that good
wine needs no bush, ’tis true that a good play needs no epilogue. Yet
to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better
by the help of good epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of
a good play! I am not furnished like a beggar; therefore to beg will
not become me. My way is to conjure you, and I’ll begin with the women.
I charge you, O women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of
this play as please you. And I charge you, O men, for the love you bear
to women—as I perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them—that
between you and the women the play may please. If I were a woman, I
would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions
that liked me, and breaths that I defied not. And I am sure as many as
have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will for my kind
offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

[_Exit._]




THE COMEDY OF ERRORS




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. A hall in the Duke’s palace
Scene II. A public place

ACT II
Scene I. A public place
Scene II. The same

ACT III
Scene I. The same
Scene II. The same

ACT IV
Scene I. The same
Scene II. The same
Scene III. The same
Scene IV. The same

ACT V
Scene I. The same




Dramatis Personæ

SOLINUS, Duke of Ephesus.
EGEON, a Merchant of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS, Twin brothers and sons to Egeon and
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE, Emilia, but unknown to each other.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS, Twin brothers, and attendants on
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, the two Antipholuses.

BALTHASAR, a Merchant.
ANGELO, a Goldsmith.
A MERCHANT, friend to Antipholus of Syracuse.
PINCH, a Schoolmaster and a Conjurer.
EMILIA, Wife to Egeon, an Abbess at Ephesus.
ADRIANA, Wife to Antipholus of Ephesus.
LUCIANA, her Sister.
LUCE, her Servant.
A COURTESAN
Messenger, Jailer, Officers, Attendants

SCENE: Ephesus


ACT I

SCENE I. A hall in the Duke’s palace

 Enter Duke, Egeon, Jailer, Officers and other Attendants.

EGEON.
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all.

DUKE.
Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more.
I am not partial to infringe our laws.
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your Duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
Have seal’d his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threat’ning looks.
For since the mortal and intestine jars
’Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed,
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns;
Nay more, if any born at Ephesus
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs;
Again, if any Syracusian born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate to the Duke’s dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
Therefore by law thou art condemn’d to die.

EGEON.
Yet this my comfort; when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.

DUKE.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Why thou departedst from thy native home,
And for what cause thou cam’st to Ephesus.

EGEON.
A heavier task could not have been impos’d
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable;
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
I’ll utter what my sorrow gives me leave.
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I liv’d in joy; our wealth increas’d
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamnum, till my factor’s death,
And the great care of goods at random left,
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse;
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself (almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear)
Had made provision for her following me,
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons,
And, which was strange, the one so like the other
As could not be distinguish’d but by names.
That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
A mean woman was delivered
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike.
Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return.
Unwilling I agreed; alas, too soon
We came aboard.
A league from Epidamnum had we sail’d
Before the always-wind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instance of our harm;
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death,
Which though myself would gladly have embrac’d,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
That mourn’d for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forc’d me to seek delays for them and me.
And this it was (for other means was none).
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us.
My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
Had fast’ned him unto a small spare mast,
Such as sea-faring men provide for storms.
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
The children thus dispos’d, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix’d,
Fast’ned ourselves at either end the mast,
And, floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
Dispers’d those vapours that offended us,
And by the benefit of his wished light
The seas wax’d calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far, making amain to us,
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this.
But ere they came—O, let me say no more!
Gather the sequel by that went before.

DUKE.
Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so,
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

EGEON.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily term’d them merciless to us.
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encountered by a mighty rock,
Which being violently borne upon,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length another ship had seiz’d on us;
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrack’d guests,
And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me sever’d from my bliss,
That by misfortunes was my life prolong’d
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.

DUKE.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favour to dilate at full
What have befall’n of them and thee till now.

EGEON.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother, and importun’d me
That his attendant, so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retain’d his name,
Might bear him company in the quest of him;
Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I lov’d.
Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that or any place that harbours men.
But here must end the story of my life;
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.

DUKE.
Hapless Egeon, whom the fates have mark’d
To bear the extremity of dire mishap;
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee.
But though thou art adjudged to the death,
And passed sentence may not be recall’d
But to our honour’s great disparagement,
Yet will I favour thee in what I can.
Therefore, merchant, I’ll limit thee this day
To seek thy health by beneficial help.
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live; if no, then thou art doom’d to die.
Jailer, take him to thy custody.

JAILER.
I will, my lord.

EGEON.
Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A public place

 Enter Antipholus and Dromio of Syracuse and a Merchant.

MERCHANT.
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
Is apprehended for arrival here,
And, not being able to buy out his life,
According to the statute of the town
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
There is your money that I had to keep.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
Within this hour it will be dinnertime;
Till that, I’ll view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests.
What, will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my inn and dine with me?

MERCHANT.
I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit.
I crave your pardon. Soon, at five o’clock,
Please you, I’ll meet with you upon the mart,
And afterward consort you till bedtime.
My present business calls me from you now.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Farewell till then: I will go lose myself,
And wander up and down to view the city.

MERCHANT.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.

 [_Exit Merchant._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
I to the world am like a drop of water
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, failing there to find his fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself.
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus.

Here comes the almanac of my true date.
What now? How chance thou art return’d so soon?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Return’d so soon? rather approach’d too late.
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek.
She is so hot because the meat is cold;
The meat is cold because you come not home;
You come not home because you have no stomach;
You have no stomach, having broke your fast;
But we that know what ’tis to fast and pray,
Are penitent for your default today.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Stop in your wind, sir, tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left the money that I gave you?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O, sixpence that I had o’ Wednesday last
To pay the saddler for my mistress’ crupper:
The saddler had it, sir, I kept it not.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I am not in a sportive humour now.
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how dar’st thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I pray you jest, sir, as you sit at dinner:
I from my mistress come to you in post;
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
And strike you home without a messenger.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season,
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me!

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast dispos’d thy charge.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.
My mistress and her sister stay for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Now, as I am a Christian, answer me
In what safe place you have bestow’d my money,
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks when I am undispos’d;
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
Some of my mistress’ marks upon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thy mistress’ marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Your worship’s wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
What mean you, sir? for God’s sake hold your hands.
Nay, an you will not, sir, I’ll take my heels.

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Upon my life, by some device or other
The villain is o’er-raught of all my money.
They say this town is full of cozenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many such-like liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
I’ll to the Centaur to go seek this slave.
I greatly fear my money is not safe.

 [_Exit._]



ACT II

SCENE I. A public place

 Enter Adriana, wife to Antipholus (of Ephesus) with Luciana her
 sister.

ADRIANA.
Neither my husband nor the slave return’d
That in such haste I sent to seek his master?
Sure, Luciana, it is two o’clock.

LUCIANA.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart he’s somewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dine, and never fret;
A man is master of his liberty;
Time is their master, and when they see time,
They’ll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.

ADRIANA.
Why should their liberty than ours be more?

LUCIANA.
Because their business still lies out o’ door.

ADRIANA.
Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.

LUCIANA.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.

ADRIANA.
There’s none but asses will be bridled so.

LUCIANA.
Why, headstrong liberty is lash’d with woe.
There’s nothing situate under heaven’s eye
But hath his bound in earth, in sea, in sky.
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls
Are their males’ subjects, and at their controls.
Man, more divine, the masters of all these,
Lord of the wide world and wild wat’ry seas,
Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.

ADRIANA.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.

LUCIANA.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.

ADRIANA.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.

LUCIANA.
Ere I learn love, I’ll practise to obey.

ADRIANA.
How if your husband start some other where?

LUCIANA.
Till he come home again, I would forbear.

ADRIANA.
Patience unmov’d! No marvel though she pause;
They can be meek that have no other cause.
A wretched soul bruis’d with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
But were we burd’ned with like weight of pain,
As much, or more, we should ourselves complain:
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience would relieve me:
But if thou live to see like right bereft,
This fool-begg’d patience in thee will be left.

LUCIANA.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus.

ADRIANA.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, he’s at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.

ADRIANA.
Say, didst thou speak with him? know’st thou his mind?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.

LUCIANA.
Spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, he struck so plainly I could too well feel his blows; and withal
so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.

ADRIANA.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.

ADRIANA.
Horn-mad, thou villain?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I mean not cuckold-mad,
But sure he’s stark mad.
When I desir’d him to come home to dinner,
He ask’d me for a thousand marks in gold.
“’Tis dinner time,” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.
“Your meat doth burn” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.
“Will you come home?” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.
“Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?”
“The pig” quoth I “is burn’d”. “My gold,” quoth he.
“My mistress, sir,” quoth I. “Hang up thy mistress;
I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress!”

LUCIANA.
Quoth who?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Quoth my master.
“I know,” quoth he, “no house, no wife, no mistress.”
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.

ADRIANA.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
For God’s sake, send some other messenger.

ADRIANA.
Back slave, or I will break thy pate across.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And he will bless that cross with other beating.
Between you I shall have a holy head.

ADRIANA.
Hence, prating peasant. Fetch thy master home.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Am I so round with you, as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither.
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.

 [_Exit._]

LUCIANA.
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.

ADRIANA.
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age th’ alluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it.
Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marr’d,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
That’s not my fault; he’s master of my state.
What ruins are in me that can be found
By him not ruin’d? Then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
A sunny look of his would soon repair;
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.

LUCIANA.
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence.

ADRIANA.
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,
Or else what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promis’d me a chain;
Would that alone, a love he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed.
I see the jewel best enamelled
Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still
That others touch, yet often touching will
Wear gold; and no man that hath a name
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
I’ll weep what’s left away, and weeping die.

LUCIANA.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
Is wander’d forth in care to seek me out.
By computation and mine host’s report.
I could not speak with Dromio since at first
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

How now, sir! is your merry humour alter’d?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
You know no Centaur? you receiv’d no gold?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Villain, thou didst deny the gold’s receipt,
And told’st me of a mistress and a dinner,
For which I hope thou felt’st I was displeas’d.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein.
What means this jest, I pray you, master, tell me?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
Think’st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.

 [_Beats Dromio._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Hold, sir, for God’s sake, now your jest is earnest.
Upon what bargain do you give it me?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Do use you for my fool, and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love,
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanour to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Sconce, call you it? so you would leave battering, I had rather have it
a head. And you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head,
and ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I
pray, sir, why am I beaten?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Dost thou not know?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Shall I tell you why?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say, every why hath a wherefore.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, first, for flouting me; and then wherefore,
For urging it the second time to me.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?
Well, sir, I thank you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thank me, sir, for what?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I’ll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something.
But say, sir, is it dinner-time?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
In good time, sir, what’s that?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Basting.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, then ’twill be dry.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Your reason?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Lest it make you choleric, and purchase me another dry basting.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time.
There’s a time for all things.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
By what rule, sir?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time
himself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Let’s hear it.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
There’s no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by
nature.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
May he not do it by fine and recovery?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another
man.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an
excrement?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath
scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, but there’s many a man hath more hair than wit.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of
jollity.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
For what reason?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
For two, and sound ones too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, not sound, I pray you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Sure ones, then.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Certain ones, then.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Name them.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at
dinner they should not drop in his porridge.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, and did, sir; namely, e’en no time to recover hair lost by
nature.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
But your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, and therefore, to the world’s end
will have bald followers.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I knew ’twould be a bald conclusion.
But soft! who wafts us yonder?

 Enter Adriana and Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown,
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects.
I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.
The time was once when thou unurg’d wouldst vow
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-savour’d in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or look’d, or touch’d, or carv’d to thee.
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
That thou art then estranged from thyself?
Thyself I call it, being strange to me,
That, undividable, incorporate,
Am better than thy dear self’s better part.
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me;
For know, my love, as easy mayst thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take unmingled thence that drop again
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thyself, and not me too.
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
Should’st thou but hear I were licentious?
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate?
Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,
And hurl the name of husband in my face,
And tear the stain’d skin off my harlot brow,
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring,
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
I know thou canst; and therefore, see thou do it.
I am possess’d with an adulterate blot;
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust;
For if we two be one, and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,
I live distain’d, thou undishonoured.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not.
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town as to your talk,
Who, every word by all my wit being scann’d,
Wants wit in all one word to understand.

LUCIANA.
Fie, brother, how the world is chang’d with you.
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
By Dromio?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By me?

ADRIANA.
By thee; and this thou didst return from him,
That he did buffet thee, and in his blows
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
What is the course and drift of your compact?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I, sir? I never saw her till this time.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Villain, thou liest, for even her very words
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I never spake with her in all my life.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
How can she thus, then, call us by our names?
Unless it be by inspiration.

ADRIANA.
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood;
Be it my wrong, you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine.
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss,
Who all, for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap, and live on thy confusion.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty
I’ll entertain the offer’d fallacy.

LUCIANA.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
This is the fairy land; O spite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites;
If we obey them not, this will ensue:
They’ll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

LUCIANA.
Why prat’st thou to thyself, and answer’st not?
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am transformed, master, am I not?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou hast thine own form.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, I am an ape.

LUCIANA.
If thou art chang’d to aught, ’tis to an ass.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
’Tis true; she rides me, and I long for grass.
’Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be
But I should know her as well as she knows me.

ADRIANA.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep
Whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner; Dromio, keep the gate.
Husband, I’ll dine above with you today,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
Come, sister; Dromio, play the porter well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking, mad, or well-advis’d?
Known unto these, and to myself disguis’d!
I’ll say as they say, and persever so,
And in this mist at all adventures go.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?

ADRIANA.
Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.

LUCIANA.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT III

SCENE I. The same

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus, his man Dromio of Ephesus, Angelo the
 goldsmith and Balthasar the merchant.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all,
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.
Say that I linger’d with you at your shop
To see the making of her carcanet,
And that tomorrow you will bring it home.
But here’s a villain that would face me down.
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
And charg’d him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know.
That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I think thou art an ass.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Marry, so it doth appear
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
I should kick, being kick’d; and being at that pass,
You would keep from my heels, and beware of an ass.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You’re sad, Signior Balthasar; pray God our cheer
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.

BALTHASAR.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
O, Signior Balthasar, either at flesh or fish
A table full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish.

BALTHASAR.
Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And welcome more common, for that’s nothing but words.

BALTHASAR
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
But soft; my door is lock’d. Go bid them let us in.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicely, Gillian, Ginn!

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
[_Within._] Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch:
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call’st for such store
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in the street.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on’s feet.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Who talks within there? Ho, open the door.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Right, sir, I’ll tell you when an you’ll tell me wherefore.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Wherefore? For my dinner. I have not dined today.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nor today here you must not; come again when you may.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
What art thou that keep’st me out from the house I owe?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The porter for this time, sir, and my name is Dromio.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name;
The one ne’er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
If thou hadst been Dromio today in my place,
Thou wouldst have chang’d thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.

 Enter Luce concealed from Antipholus of Ephesus and his companions.

LUCE.
[_Within._] What a coil is there, Dromio, who are those at the gate?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Let my master in, Luce.

LUCE.
Faith, no, he comes too late,
And so tell your master.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O Lord, I must laugh;
Have at you with a proverb:—Shall I set in my staff?

LUCE.
Have at you with another: that’s—When? can you tell?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
If thy name be called Luce,—Luce, thou hast answer’d him well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Do you hear, you minion? you’ll let us in, I hope?

LUCE.
I thought to have ask’d you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
And you said no.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
So, come, help. Well struck, there was blow for blow.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou baggage, let me in.

LUCE.
Can you tell for whose sake?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Master, knock the door hard.

LUCE.
Let him knock till it ache.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You’ll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.

LUCE.
What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?

 Enter Adriana concealed from Antipholus of Ephesus and his companions.

ADRIANA.
[_Within._] Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Are you there, wife? you might have come before.

ADRIANA.
Your wife, sir knave? go, get you from the door.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
If you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.

ANGELO.
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome. We would fain have either.

BALTHASAR.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake here is warm within; you stand here in the cold.
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Go, fetch me something, I’ll break ope the gate.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Break any breaking here, and I’ll break your knave’s pate.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind;
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
It seems thou want’st breaking; out upon thee, hind!

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Here’s too much “out upon thee”; I pray thee, let me in.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Well, I’ll break in; go, borrow me a crow.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
A crow without feather; master, mean you so?
For a fish without a fin, there’s a fowl without a feather.
If a crow help us in, sirrah, we’ll pluck a crow together.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Go, get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.

BALTHASAR.
Have patience, sir. O, let it not be so:
Herein you war against your reputation,
And draw within the compass of suspect
The unviolated honour of your wife.
Once this,—your long experience of her wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown;
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be rul’d by me; depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening, come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it;
And that supposed by the common rout
Against your yet ungalled estimation
That may with foul intrusion enter in,
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession,
For ever hous’d where it gets possession.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You have prevail’d. I will depart in quiet,
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle;
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
My wife (but, I protest, without desert)
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal;
To her will we to dinner.—Get you home
And fetch the chain, by this I know ’tis made.
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine,
For there’s the house. That chain will I bestow
(Be it for nothing but to spite my wife)
Upon mine hostess there. Good sir, make haste.
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
I’ll knock elsewhere, to see if they’ll disdain me.

ANGELO.
I’ll meet you at that place some hour hence.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Do so; this jest shall cost me some expense.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same

 Enter Luciana with Antipholus of Syracuse.

LUCIANA.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husband’s office? Shall, Antipholus,
Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealth’s sake use her with more kindness;
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth,
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness.
Let not my sister read it in your eye;
Be not thy tongue thy own shame’s orator;
Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty;
Apparel vice like virtue’s harbinger;
Bear a fair presence though your heart be tainted;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint,
Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
’Tis double wrong to truant with your bed
And let her read it in thy looks at board.
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word.
Alas, poor women, make us but believe,
Being compact of credit, that you love us.
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
We in your motion turn, and you may move us.
Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife.
’Tis holy sport to be a little vain
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Sweet mistress, what your name is else, I know not,
Nor by what wonder you do hit on mine;
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Than our earth’s wonder, more than earth divine.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak;
Lay open to my earthy gross conceit,
Smother’d in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words’ deceit.
Against my soul’s pure truth why labour you
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me, then, and to your power I’ll yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe.
Far more, far more, to you do I decline.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note
To drown me in thy sister’s flood of tears.
Sing, siren, for thyself, and I will dote;
Spread o’er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
And as a bed I’ll take thee, and there lie,
And, in that glorious supposition think
He gains by death that hath such means to die.
Let love, being light, be drowned if she sink!

LUCIANA.
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.

LUCIANA.
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.

LUCIANA.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.

LUCIANA.
Why call you me love? Call my sister so.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thy sister’s sister.

LUCIANA.
That’s my sister.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
No,
It is thyself, mine own self’s better part,
Mine eye’s clear eye, my dear heart’s dearer heart,
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope’s aim,
My sole earth’s heaven, and my heaven’s claim.

LUCIANA.
All this my sister is, or else should be.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Call thyself sister, sweet, for I aim thee;
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife.
Give me thy hand.

LUCIANA.
O, soft, sir, hold you still;
I’ll fetch my sister to get her goodwill.

 [_Exit Luciana._]

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, how now, Dromio? where runn’st thou so fast?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? Am I myself?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am an ass, I am a woman’s man, and besides myself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What woman’s man? and how besides thyself?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman, one that claims me,
one that haunts me, one that will have me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What claim lays she to thee?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse, and she would
have me as a beast; not that I being a beast she would have me, but
that she being a very beastly creature lays claim to me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What is she?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without
he say “sir-reverence”. I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is
she a wondrous fat marriage.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
How dost thou mean a “fat marriage”?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, she’s the kitchen wench, and all grease, and I know not
what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by
her own light. I warrant her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
Poland winter. If she lives till doomsday, she’ll burn a week longer
than the whole world.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What complexion is she of?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. For why?
she sweats, a man may go overshoes in the grime of it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
That’s a fault that water will mend.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir, ’tis in grain; Noah’s flood could not do it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What’s her name?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, that’s an ell and three
quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Then she bears some breadth?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. She is spherical,
like a globe. I could find out countries in her.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
In what part of her body stands Ireland?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, in her buttocks; I found it out by the bogs.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where Scotland?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where France?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war against her hair.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where England?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them.
But I guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between
France and it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where Spain?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Faith, I saw it not; but I felt it hot in her breath.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where America, the Indies?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, sir, upon her nose, all o’er-embellished with rubies, carbuncles,
sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who
sent whole armadoes of carracks to be ballast at her nose.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude: this drudge or diviner laid
claim to me, called me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what
privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my
neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I, amazed, ran from her as a
witch. And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my
heart of steel, she had transformed me to a curtal dog, and made me
turn i’ the wheel.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Go, hie thee presently, post to the road;
And if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbour in this town tonight.
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If everyone knows us, and we know none,
’Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
There’s none but witches do inhabit here,
And therefore ’tis high time that I were hence.
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Possess’d with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself.
But lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
I’ll stop mine ears against the mermaid’s song.

 Enter Angelo with the chain.

ANGELO.
Master Antipholus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, that’s my name.

ANGELO.
I know it well, sir. Lo, here is the chain;
I thought to have ta’en you at the Porpentine,
The chain unfinish’d made me stay thus long.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What is your will that I shall do with this?

ANGELO.
What please yourself, sir; I have made it for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.

ANGELO.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Go home with it, and please your wife withal,
And soon at supper-time I’ll visit you,
And then receive my money for the chain.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
For fear you ne’er see chain nor money more.

ANGELO.
You are a merry man, sir; fare you well.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What I should think of this I cannot tell,
But this I think, there’s no man is so vain
That would refuse so fair an offer’d chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
I’ll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay;
If any ship put out, then straight away.

 [_Exit._]



ACT IV

SCENE I. The same

 Enter Merchant, Angelo and an Officer.

MERCHANT.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importun’d you,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage;
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or I’ll attach you by this officer.

ANGELO.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you
He had of me a chain; at five o’clock
I shall receive the money for the same.
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio of Ephesus from the
 Courtesan’s.

OFFICER.
That labour may you save. See where he comes.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
While I go to the goldsmith’s house, go thou
And buy a rope’s end; that will I bestow
Among my wife and her confederates
For locking me out of my doors by day.
But soft, I see the goldsmith; get thee gone;
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy a rope!

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
A man is well holp up that trusts to you,
I promised your presence and the chain,
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Belike you thought our love would last too long
If it were chain’d together, and therefore came not.

ANGELO.
Saving your merry humour, here’s the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
Than I stand debted to this gentleman.
I pray you, see him presently discharg’d,
For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I am not furnished with the present money;
Besides, I have some business in the town.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house,
And with you take the chain, and bid my wife
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof;
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

ANGELO.
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
No, bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.

ANGELO.
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And if I have not, sir, I hope you have,
Or else you may return without your money.

ANGELO.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Good Lord, you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.

MERCHANT.
The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.

ANGELO.
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.

ANGELO.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain or send by me some token.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath.
Come, where’s the chain? I pray you, let me see it.

MERCHANT.
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Good sir, say whe’er you’ll answer me or no;
If not, I’ll leave him to the officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I answer you? What should I answer you?

ANGELO.
The money that you owe me for the chain.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I owe you none till I receive the chain.

ANGELO.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.

ANGELO.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.

MERCHANT.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.

OFFICER.
I do, and charge you in the duke’s name to obey me.

ANGELO.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me,
Or I attach you by this officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Consent to pay thee that I never had?
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar’st.

ANGELO.
Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer.
I would not spare my brother in this case
If he should scorn me so apparently.

OFFICER.
I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
As all the metal in your shop will answer.

ANGELO.
Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse from the bay.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, there’s a bark of Epidamnum
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And then, sir, bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
I have convey’d aboard, and I have bought
The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at all
But for their owner, master, and yourself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
How now? a madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope,
And told thee to what purpose and what end.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
You sent me for a rope’s end as soon.
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I will debate this matter at more leisure,
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her in the desk
That’s cover’d o’er with Turkish tapestry
There is a purse of ducats; let her send it.
Tell her I am arrested in the street,
And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave; be gone.
On, officer, to prison till it come.

 [_Exeunt Merchant, Angelo, Officer and Antipholus of Ephesus._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
To Adriana, that is where we din’d,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
Thither I must, although against my will,
For servants must their masters’ minds fulfil.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same

 Enter Adriana and Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Might’st thou perceive austerely in his eye
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no?
Look’d he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation mad’st thou in this case
Of his heart’s meteors tilting in his face?

LUCIANA.
First he denied you had in him no right.

ADRIANA.
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.

LUCIANA.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.

ADRIANA.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.

LUCIANA.
Then pleaded I for you.

ADRIANA.
And what said he?

LUCIANA.
That love I begg’d for you he begg’d of me.

ADRIANA.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?

LUCIANA.
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.

ADRIANA.
Did’st speak him fair?

LUCIANA.
Have patience, I beseech.

ADRIANA.
I cannot, nor I will not hold me still.
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
Ill-fac’d, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.

LUCIANA.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is wail’d when it is gone.

ADRIANA.
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
And yet would herein others’ eyes were worse:
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away;
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Here, go; the desk, the purse, sweet now, make haste.

LUCIANA.
How hast thou lost thy breath?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By running fast.

ADRIANA.
Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him,
One whose hard heart is button’d up with steel;
A fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough;
A wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff;
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands
The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;
A hound that runs counter, and yet draws dryfoot well,
One that, before the judgement, carries poor souls to hell.

ADRIANA.
Why, man, what is the matter?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I do not know the matter. He is ’rested on the case.

ADRIANA.
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested, well;
But he’s in a suit of buff which ’rested him, that can I tell.
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?

ADRIANA.
Go fetch it, sister. This I wonder at,

 [_Exit Luciana._]

Thus he unknown to me should be in debt.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;
A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?

ADRIANA.
What, the chain?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, no, the bell, ’tis time that I were gone.
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.

ADRIANA.
The hours come back! That did I never hear.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, ’a turns back for very fear.

ADRIANA.
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou reason!

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he’s worth to season.
Nay, he’s a thief too. Have you not heard men say
That time comes stealing on by night and day?
If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

 Enter Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Go, Dromio, there’s the money, bear it straight,
And bring thy master home immediately.
Come, sister, I am press’d down with conceit;
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
There’s not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well-acquainted friend,
And everyone doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me, some invite me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me commodities to buy.
Even now a tailor call’d me in his shop,
And show’d me silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, here’s the gold you sent me for.
What, have you got the picture of old Adam new apparelled?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not that Adam that kept the paradise, but that Adam that keeps the
prison; he that goes in the calf’s skin that was killed for the
Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
forsake your liberty.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I understand thee not.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No? Why, ’tis a plain case: he that went like a bass-viol in a case of
leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a
sob, and ’rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives
them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits
with his mace than a morris-pike.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What! thou mean’st an officer?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it
that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed, and
says, “God give you good rest.”

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any ship puts forth
tonight? may we be gone?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark _Expedition_
put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry
for the hoy _Delay_. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver
you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
The fellow is distract, and so am I,
And here we wander in illusions.
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!

 Enter a Courtesan.

COURTESAN.
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.
Is that the chain you promis’d me today?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
It is the devil.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil’s dam; and here she comes in the
habit of a light wench, and thereof comes that the wenches say “God
damn me”, that’s as much to say, “God make me a light wench.” It is
written they appear to men like angels of light. Light is an effect of
fire, and fire will burn; ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near
her.

COURTESAN.
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
Will you go with me? We’ll mend our dinner here.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat, or bespeak a long spoon.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, Dromio?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Avoid then, fiend! What tell’st thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress.
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.

COURTESAN.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promis’d,
And I’ll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Some devils ask but the paring of one’s nail,
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
A nut, a cherry-stone; but she, more covetous,
Would have a chain.
Master, be wise; and if you give it her,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.

COURTESAN.
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain;
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Fly pride, says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse._]

COURTESAN.
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself.
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
And for the same he promis’d me a chain;
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told today at dinner
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
He rush’d into my house and took perforce
My ring away. This course I fittest choose,
For forty ducats is too much to lose.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The same

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus with an Officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Fear me not, man, I will not break away:
I’ll give thee ere I leave thee so much money,
To warrant thee, as I am ’rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood today,
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attach’d in Ephesus;
I tell you ’twill sound harshly in her ears.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus with a rope’s end.

Here comes my man. I think he brings the money.
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Here’s that, I warrant you, will pay them all.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
But where’s the money?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I’ll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
To a rope’s end, sir; and to that end am I return’d.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.

 [_Beating him._]

OFFICER.
Good sir, be patient.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, ’tis for me to be patient. I am in adversity.

OFFICER.
Good now, hold thy tongue.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou whoreson, senseless villain.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I am an ass indeed; you may prove it by my long ears. I have served him
from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with
beating; when I am warm he cools me with beating. I am waked with it
when I sleep, raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with it
when I go from home, welcomed home with it when I return. Nay, I bear
it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat; and I think when he hath
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.

 Enter Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan and a Schoolmaster called Pinch.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Come, go along, my wife is coming yonder.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Mistress, _respice finem_, respect your end, or rather, the prophesy
like the parrot, “Beware the rope’s end.”

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Wilt thou still talk?

 [_Beats him._]

COURTESAN.
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?

ADRIANA.
His incivility confirms no less.
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.

LUCIANA.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!

COURTESAN.
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.

PINCH.
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.

PINCH.
I charge thee, Satan, hous’d within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Peace, doting wizard, peace; I am not mad.

ADRIANA.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house today,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
And I denied to enter in my house?

ADRIANA.
O husband, God doth know you din’d at home,
Where would you had remain’d until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Din’d at home? Thou villain, what sayest thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Were not my doors lock’d up and I shut out?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Perdy, your doors were lock’d, and you shut out.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And did not she herself revile me there?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sans fable, she herself revil’d you there.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Certes, she did, the kitchen-vestal scorn’d you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
In verity, you did; my bones bear witness,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.

ADRIANA.
Is’t good to soothe him in these contraries?

PINCH.
It is no shame; the fellow finds his vein,
And yielding to him, humours well his frenzy.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou hast suborn’d the goldsmith to arrest me.

ADRIANA.
Alas! I sent you money to redeem you
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Money by me? Heart and goodwill you might,
But surely, master, not a rag of money.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Went’st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?

ADRIANA.
He came to me, and I deliver’d it.

LUCIANA.
And I am witness with her that she did.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.

PINCH.
Mistress, both man and master is possess’d,
I know it by their pale and deadly looks.
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth today,
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?

ADRIANA.
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And gentle master, I receiv’d no gold;
But I confess, sir, that we were lock’d out.

ADRIANA.
Dissembling villain, thou speak’st false in both.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me.
But with these nails I’ll pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.

 [_Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives. _]

ADRIANA.
O, bind him, bind him; let him not come near me.

PINCH.
More company; the fiend is strong within him.

LUCIANA.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
What, will you murder me? Thou jailer, thou,
I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them
To make a rescue?

OFFICER.
Masters, let him go.
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.

PINCH.
Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.

ADRIANA.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?

OFFICER.
He is my prisoner. If I let him go,
The debt he owes will be requir’d of me.

ADRIANA.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee;
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Good master doctor, see him safe convey’d
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
O most unhappy strumpet!

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Master, I am here enter’d in bond for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Will you be bound for nothing? Be mad, good master; cry, “the devil”.

LUCIANA.
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!

ADRIANA.
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.

 [_Exeunt Pinch and Assistants, with Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio
 of Ephesus._]

Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?

OFFICER.
One Angelo, a goldsmith; do you know him?

ADRIANA.
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?

OFFICER.
Two hundred ducats.

ADRIANA.
Say, how grows it due?

OFFICER.
Due for a chain your husband had of him.

ADRIANA.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.

COURTESAN.
When as your husband, all in rage, today
Came to my house and took away my ring,
The ring I saw upon his finger now,
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.

ADRIANA.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is,
I long to know the truth hereof at large.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse with his rapier drawn, and Dromio of
 Syracuse.

LUCIANA.
God, for thy mercy, they are loose again!

ADRIANA.
And come with naked swords. Let’s call more help
To have them bound again.

OFFICER.
Away, they’ll kill us.

 [_Exeunt, as fast as may be, frighted._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I see these witches are afraid of swords.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence.
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Faith, stay here this night, they will surely do us no harm; you saw
they speak us fair, give us gold. Methinks they are such a gentle
nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and turn witch.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I will not stay tonight for all the town;
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT V

SCENE I. The same

 Enter Merchant and Angelo.

ANGELO.
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder’d you,
But I protest he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.

MERCHANT.
How is the man esteem’d here in the city?

ANGELO.
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly belov’d,
Second to none that lives here in the city.
His word might bear my wealth at any time.

MERCHANT.
Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse.

ANGELO.
’Tis so; and that self chain about his neck
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir, draw near to me, I’ll speak to him.
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
And not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
This chain, which now you wear so openly.
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea today.
This chain you had of me, can you deny it?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think I had: I never did deny it.

MERCHANT.
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?

MERCHANT.
These ears of mine, thou know’st, did hear thee.
Fie on thee, wretch. ’Tis pity that thou liv’st
To walk where any honest men resort.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus;
I’ll prove mine honour and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou dar’st stand.

MERCHANT.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.

 [_They draw._]

 Enter Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan and others.

ADRIANA.
Hold, hurt him not, for God’s sake, he is mad.
Some get within him, take his sword away.
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Run, master, run, for God’s sake, take a house.
This is some priory; in, or we are spoil’d.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse to the
 priory._]

 Enter Lady Abbess.

ABBESS.
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?

ADRIANA.
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.

ANGELO.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.

MERCHANT.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.

ABBESS.
How long hath this possession held the man?

ADRIANA.
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was.
But till this afternoon his passion
Ne’er brake into extremity of rage.

ABBESS.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Stray’d his affection in unlawful love?
A sin prevailing much in youthful men
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing?
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?

ADRIANA.
To none of these, except it be the last,
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.

ABBESS.
You should for that have reprehended him.

ADRIANA.
Why, so I did.

ABBESS.
Ay, but not rough enough.

ADRIANA.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.

ABBESS.
Haply in private.

ADRIANA.
And in assemblies too.

ABBESS.
Ay, but not enough.

ADRIANA.
It was the copy of our conference.
In bed he slept not for my urging it;
At board he fed not for my urging it;
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
In company I often glanced it;
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.

ABBESS.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
The venom clamours of a jealous woman
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,
And thereof comes it that his head is light.
Thou say’st his meat was sauc’d with thy upbraidings.
Unquiet meals make ill digestions;
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
And what’s a fever but a fit of madness?
Thou say’st his sports were hinder’d by thy brawls.
Sweet recreation barr’d, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest
To be disturb’d would mad or man or beast.
The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits
Hath scar’d thy husband from the use of’s wits.

LUCIANA.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
When he demean’d himself rough, rude, and wildly.
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?

ADRIANA.
She did betray me to my own reproof.
Good people, enter and lay hold on him.

ABBESS.
No, not a creature enters in my house.

ADRIANA.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.

ABBESS.
Neither. He took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or lose my labour in assaying it.

ADRIANA.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
And will have no attorney but myself;
And therefore let me have him home with me.

ABBESS.
Be patient, for I will not let him stir
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again.
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order;
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.

ADRIANA.
I will not hence and leave my husband here;
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.

ABBESS.
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.

 [_Exit Abbess._]

LUCIANA.
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.

ADRIANA.
Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feet,
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.

MERCHANT.
By this, I think, the dial points at five.
Anon, I’m sure, the Duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.

ANGELO.
Upon what cause?

MERCHANT.
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Who put unluckily into this bay
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.

ANGELO.
See where they come. We will behold his death.

LUCIANA.
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.

 Enter the Duke, attended; Egeon, bareheaded; with the Headsman and
 other Officers.

DUKE.
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die; so much we tender him.

ADRIANA.
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!

DUKE.
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady,
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.

ADRIANA.
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
Who I made lord of me and all I had
At your important letters, this ill day
A most outrageous fit of madness took him;
That desp’rately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondman all as mad as he,
Doing displeasure to the citizens
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
Rings, jewels, anything his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed.
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
Met us again, and, madly bent on us,
Chased us away; till raising of more aid,
We came again to bind them. Then they fled
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them.
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us,
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.

DUKE.
Long since thy husband serv’d me in my wars,
And I to thee engag’d a prince’s word,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,
And bid the lady abbess come to me.
I will determine this before I stir.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself.
My master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor,
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire,
And ever as it blazed they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
My master preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool;
And sure (unless you send some present help)
Between them they will kill the conjurer.

ADRIANA.
Peace, fool, thy master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to us.

MESSENGER.
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true.
I have not breath’d almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.

 [_Cry within._]

Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, be gone!

DUKE.
Come, stand by me, fear nothing. Guard with halberds.

ADRIANA.
Ay me, it is my husband. Witness you
That he is borne about invisible.
Even now we hous’d him in the abbey here,
And now he’s there, past thought of human reason.

 Enter Antipholus and Dromio of Ephesus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Justice, most gracious duke; O, grant me justice!
Even for the service that long since I did thee
When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.

EGEON.
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there.
She whom thou gav’st to me to be my wife;
That hath abused and dishonour’d me
Even in the strength and height of injury.
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.

DUKE.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me
While she with harlots feasted in my house.

DUKE.
A grievous fault. Say, woman, didst thou so?

ADRIANA.
No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sister
Today did dine together. So befall my soul
As this is false he burdens me withal.

LUCIANA.
Ne’er may I look on day nor sleep on night
But she tells to your highness simple truth.

ANGELO.
O perjur’d woman! They are both forsworn.
In this the madman justly chargeth them.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturb’d with the effect of wine,
Nor heady-rash, provok’d with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman lock’d me out this day from dinner.
That goldsmith there, were he not pack’d with her,
Could witness it, for he was with me then,
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthasar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
And in his company that gentleman.
There did this perjur’d goldsmith swear me down
That I this day of him receiv’d the chain,
Which, God he knows, I saw not. For the which
He did arrest me with an officer.
I did obey, and sent my peasant home
For certain ducats. He with none return’d.
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By th’ way we met
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vile confederates. Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller;
A needy, hollow-ey’d, sharp-looking wretch;
A living dead man. This pernicious slave,
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no face (as ’twere) outfacing me,
Cries out, I was possess’d. Then altogether
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together,
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gain’d my freedom and immediately
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames and great indignities.

ANGELO.
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
That he din’d not at home, but was lock’d out.

DUKE.
But had he such a chain of thee, or no?

ANGELO.
He had, my lord, and when he ran in here
These people saw the chain about his neck.

MERCHANT.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
Heard you confess you had the chain of him,
After you first forswore it on the mart,
And thereupon I drew my sword on you;
And then you fled into this abbey here,
From whence I think you are come by miracle.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never came within these abbey walls,
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me.
I never saw the chain, so help me heaven;
And this is false you burden me withal.

DUKE.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
I think you all have drunk of Circe’s cup.
If here you hous’d him, here he would have been.
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
You say he din’d at home, the goldsmith here
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.

COURTESAN.
He did, and from my finger snatch’d that ring.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
’Tis true, my liege, this ring I had of her.

DUKE.
Saw’st thou him enter at the abbey here?

COURTESAN.
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.

DUKE.
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
I think you are all mated, or stark mad.

 [_Exit one to the Abbess._]

EGEON.
Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word;
Haply I see a friend will save my life
And pay the sum that may deliver me.

DUKE.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.

EGEON.
Is not your name, sir, call’d Antipholus?
And is not that your bondman Dromio?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,
But he, I thank him, gnaw’d in two my cords.
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.

EGEON.
I am sure you both of you remember me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you.
For lately we were bound as you are now.
You are not Pinch’s patient, are you, sir?

EGEON.
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never saw you in my life till now.

EGEON.
O! grief hath chang’d me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with time’s deformed hand,
Have written strange defeatures in my face.
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Neither.

EGEON.
Dromio, nor thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
No, trust me, sir, nor I.

EGEON.
I am sure thou dost.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are
now bound to believe him.

EGEON.
Not know my voice! O time’s extremity,
Hast thou so crack’d and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untun’d cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming winter’s drizzled snow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear.
All these old witnesses, I cannot err,
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never saw my father in my life.

EGEON.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
Thou know’st we parted; but perhaps, my son,
Thou sham’st to acknowledge me in misery.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
The duke and all that know me in the city,
Can witness with me that it is not so.
I ne’er saw Syracusa in my life.

DUKE.
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
During which time he ne’er saw Syracusa.
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.

 Enter the Abbess with Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse.

ABBESS.
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong’d.

 [_All gather to see them._]

ADRIANA.
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.

DUKE.
One of these men is _genius_ to the other;
And so of these, which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I, sir, am Dromio, command him away.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I, sir, am Dromio, pray let me stay.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Egeon, art thou not? or else his ghost?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, my old master, who hath bound him here?

ABBESS.
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds,
And gain a husband by his liberty.
Speak, old Egeon, if thou be’st the man
That hadst a wife once called Emilia,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.
O, if thou be’st the same Egeon, speak,
And speak unto the same Emilia!

DUKE.
Why, here begins his morning story right:
These two Antipholus’, these two so like,
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea.
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.

EGEON.
If I dream not, thou art Emilia.
If thou art she, tell me where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?

ABBESS.
By men of Epidamnum, he and I
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
But, by and by, rude fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio and my son from them,
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
What then became of them I cannot tell;
I to this fortune that you see me in.

DUKE.
Antipholus, thou cam’st from Corinth first?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir, not I, I came from Syracuse.

DUKE.
Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And I with him.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.

ADRIANA.
Which of you two did dine with me today?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I, gentle mistress.

ADRIANA.
And are not you my husband?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
No, I say nay to that.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
And so do I, yet did she call me so;
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Did call me brother. What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,
If this be not a dream I see and hear.

ANGELO.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think it be, sir. I deny it not.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.

ANGELO.
I think I did, sir. I deny it not.

ADRIANA.
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
No, none by me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
This purse of ducats I receiv’d from you,
And Dromio my man did bring them me.
I see we still did meet each other’s man,
And I was ta’en for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
These ducats pawn I for my father here.

DUKE.
It shall not need, thy father hath his life.

COURTESAN.
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.

ABBESS.
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here,
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes;
And all that are assembled in this place,
That by this sympathised one day’s error
Have suffer’d wrong, go, keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
Of you, my sons, and till this present hour
My heavy burden ne’er delivered.
The duke, my husband, and my children both,
And you, the calendars of their nativity,
Go to a gossips’ feast, and go with me.
After so long grief, such nativity.

DUKE.
With all my heart, I’ll gossip at this feast.

 [_Exeunt except the two Dromios and two Brothers._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark’d?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
He speaks to me; I am your master, Dromio.
Come, go with us. We’ll look to that anon.
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Antipholus of Ephesus._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
There is a fat friend at your master’s house,
That kitchen’d me for you today at dinner.
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother.
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not I, sir, you are my elder.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
That’s a question, how shall we try it?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
We’ll draw cuts for the senior. Till then, lead thou first.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, then, thus:
We came into the world like brother and brother,
And now let’s go hand in hand, not one before another.

 [_Exeunt._]




THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Rome. A street
 Scene II. Corioles. The Senate House
 Scene III. Rome. An apartment in Martius’ house
 Scene IV. Before Corioles
 Scene V. Within Corioles. A street
 Scene VI. Near the camp of Cominius
 Scene VII. The gates of Corioles
 Scene VIII. A field of battle between the Roman and the Volscian camps
 Scene IX. The Roman camp
 Scene X. The camp of the Volsces

 ACT II
 Scene I. Rome. A public place
 Scene II. Rome. The Capitol
 Scene III. Rome. The Forum

 ACT III
 Scene I. Rome. A street
 Scene II. Rome. A room in Coriolanus’s house
 Scene III. Rome. The Forum

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Rome. Before a gate of the city
 Scene II. Rome. A street near the gate
 Scene III. A highway between Rome and Antium
 Scene IV. Antium. Before Aufidius’s house
 Scene V. Antium. A hall in Aufidius’s house
 Scene VI. Rome. A public place
 Scene VII. A camp at a short distance from Rome

 ACT V
 Scene I. Rome. A public place
 Scene II. An Advanced post of the Volscian camp before Rome.
 Scene III. The tent of Coriolanus
 Scene IV. Rome. A public place
 Scene V. Rome. A street near the gate
 Scene VI. Antium. A public place




Dramatis Personæ

CAIUS MARTIUS CORIOLANUS, a noble Roman
VOLUMNIA, his mother
VIRGILIA, his wife
YOUNG MARTIUS, their son
VALERIA, friend to Volumnia and Virgilia
A GENTLEWOMAN, Volumnia’s attendant

MENENIUS AGRIPPA, Friend to Coriolanus
COMINIUS, General against the Volscians
TITUS LARTIUS, General against the Volscians
SICINIUS VELUTUS, Tribune of the People
JUNIUS BRUTUS, Tribune of the People
A ROMAN HERALD

TULLUS AUFIDIUS, General of the Volscians
LIEUTENANT, to Aufidius
Conspirators with Aufidius
A CITIZEN of Antium
TWO VOLSCIAN GUARDS

Roman and Volscian Senators, Patricians, Aediles, Lictors, Soldiers,
Citizens, Messengers, Servants to Aufidius, and other Attendants

SCENE: Partly in Rome, and partly in the territories of the Volscians
and Antiates.




ACT I

SCENE I. Rome. A street


Enter a company of mutinous Citizens, with staves, clubs, and other
weapons.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

ALL.
Speak, speak!

FIRST CITIZEN.
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

ALL.
Resolved, resolved!

FIRST CITIZEN.
First, you know Caius Martius is chief enemy to the people.

ALL.
We know’t, we know’t!

FIRST CITIZEN.
Let us kill him, and we’ll have corn at our own price. Is’t a verdict?

ALL.
No more talking on’t; let it be done. Away, away!

SECOND CITIZEN.
One word, good citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN.
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. What authority
surfeits on would relieve us. If they would yield us but the
superfluity while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us
humanely. But they think we are too dear. The leanness that afflicts
us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularize their
abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. Let us revenge this with
our pikes ere we become rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger
for bread, not in thirst for revenge.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Would you proceed especially against Caius Martius?

FIRST CITIZEN.
Against him first. He’s a very dog to the commonalty.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?

FIRST CITIZEN.
Very well, and could be content to give him good report for’t, but that
he pays himself with being proud.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.

FIRST CITIZEN.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously he did it to that end.
Though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his
country, he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud, which
he is, even to the altitude of his virtue.

SECOND CITIZEN.
What he cannot help in his nature you account a vice in him. You must
in no way say he is covetous.

FIRST CITIZEN.
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations. He hath faults,
with surplus, to tire in repetition. [_Shouts within_.] What shouts are
these? The other side o’ th’ city is risen. Why stay we prating here?
To th’ Capitol!

ALL.
Come, come!

Enter Menenius Agrippa.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Soft, who comes here?

SECOND CITIZEN.
Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that hath always loved the people.

FIRST CITIZEN.
He’s one honest enough. Would all the rest were so!

MENENIUS.
What work’s, my countrymen, in hand? Where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? Speak, I pray you.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Our business is not unknown to th’ Senate. They have had inkling this
fortnight what we intend to do, which now we’ll show ’em in deeds. They
say poor suitors have strong breaths; they shall know we have strong
arms too.

MENENIUS.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?

FIRST CITIZEN.
We cannot, sir; we are undone already.

MENENIUS.
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o’ th’ state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Care for us? True, indeed! They ne’er cared for us yet. Suffer us to
famish, and their storehouses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury
to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against
the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily to chain up and
restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there’s
all the love they bear us.

MENENIUS.
Either you must confess yourselves wondrous malicious
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale. It may be you have heard it,
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale’t a little more.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Well, I’ll hear it, sir; yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace
with a tale. But, an’t please you, deliver.

MENENIUS.
There was a time when all the body’s members
Rebelled against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I’ th’ midst o’ th’ body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where th’ other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered—

FIRST CITIZEN.
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

MENENIUS.
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne’er came from the lungs, but even thus—
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak—it tauntingly replied
To th’ discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Your belly’s answer—what?
The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
With other muniments and petty helps
Is this our fabric, if that they—

MENENIUS.
What then?
’Fore me, this fellow speaks. What then? What then?

FIRST CITIZEN.
Should by the cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink o’ th’ body—

MENENIUS.
Well, what then?

FIRST CITIZEN.
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?

MENENIUS.
I will tell you,
If you’ll bestow a small—of what you have little—
Patience awhile, you’st hear the belly’s answer.

FIRST CITIZEN.
You are long about it.

MENENIUS.
Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answered:
“True is it, my incorporate friends,” quoth he,
“That I receive the general food at first
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the storehouse and the shop
Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood
Even to the court, the heart, to th’ seat o’ th’ brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live. And though that all at once,
You, my good friends”—this says the belly, mark me—

FIRST CITIZEN.
Ay, sir, well, well.

MENENIUS.
“Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.” What say you to’t?

FIRST CITIZEN.
It was an answer. How apply you this?

MENENIUS.
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members. For examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o’ th’ common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?

FIRST CITIZEN.
I the great toe? Why the great toe?

MENENIUS.
For that, being one o’ th’ lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost.
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead’st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs.
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.

Enter Caius Martius.

Hail, noble Martius.

MARTIUS.
Thanks.—What’s the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?

FIRST CITIZEN.
We have ever your good word.

MARTIUS.
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? The one affrights you;
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese. You are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him,
And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man’s appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust ye?
With every minute you do change a mind
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What’s the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another?—What’s their seeking?

MENENIUS.
For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The city is well stored.

MARTIUS.
Hang ’em! They say?
They’ll sit by th’ fire and presume to know
What’s done i’ th’ Capitol, who’s like to rise,
Who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out
Conjectural marriages, making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there’s grain enough?
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
And let me use my sword, I’d make a quarry
With thousands of these quartered slaves as high
As I could pick my lance.

MENENIUS.
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other troop?

MARTIUS.
They are dissolved. Hang ’em!
They said they were an-hungry, sighed forth proverbs
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only. With these shreds
They vented their complainings, which being answered
And a petition granted them—a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity
And make bold power look pale—they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o’ th’ moon,
Shouting their emulation.

MENENIUS.
What is granted them?

MARTIUS.
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice. One’s Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. ’Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofed the city
Ere so prevailed with me. It will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection’s arguing.

MENENIUS.
This is strange.

MARTIUS.
Go get you home, you fragments.

Enter a Messenger hastily.

MESSENGER.
Where’s Caius Martius?

MARTIUS.
Here. What’s the matter?

MESSENGER.
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

MARTIUS.
I am glad on’t. Then we shall ha’ means to vent
Our musty superfluity.

Enter Sicinius Velutus, Junius Brutus, two Tribunes; Cominius, Titus
Lartius with other Senators.

See, our best elders.

FIRST SENATOR.
Martius, ’tis true that you have lately told us:
The Volsces are in arms.

MARTIUS.
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to’t.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And, were I anything but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

COMINIUS.
You have fought together.

MARTIUS.
Were half to half the world by th’ ears and he
Upon my party, I’d revolt, to make
Only my wars with him. He is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.

FIRST SENATOR.
Then, worthy Martius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

COMINIUS.
It is your former promise.

MARTIUS.
Sir, it is,
And I am constant.—Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus’ face.
What, art thou stiff? Stand’st out?

TITUS LARTIUS.
No, Caius Martius,
I’ll lean upon one crutch and fight with th’ other
Ere stay behind this business.

MENENIUS.
O, true bred!

FIRST SENATOR.
Your company to th’ Capitol, where I know
Our greatest friends attend us.

TITUS LARTIUS.
Lead you on.
Follow Cominius. We must follow you;
Right worthy your priority.

COMINIUS.
Noble Martius.

FIRST SENATOR.
[_To the Citizens_.]
Hence to your homes, begone.

MARTIUS.
Nay, let them follow.
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutineers,
Your valour puts well forth. Pray follow.

[_Exeunt. Sicinius and Brutus remain_.]

SICINIUS.
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?

BRUTUS.
He has no equal.

SICINIUS.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people—

BRUTUS.
Marked you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS.
Nay, but his taunts.

BRUTUS.
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

SICINIUS.
Bemock the modest moon.

BRUTUS.
The present wars devour him! He is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

SICINIUS.
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon. But I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.

BRUTUS.
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he’s well graced, cannot
Better be held nor more attained than by
A place below the first; for what miscarries
Shall be the General’s fault, though he perform
To th’ utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius “O, if he
Had borne the business!”

SICINIUS.
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Martius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

BRUTUS.
Come.
Half all Cominius’ honours are to Martius,
Though Martius earned them not, and all his faults
To Martius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.

SICINIUS.
Let’s hence and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than in singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.

BRUTUS.
Let’s along.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Corioles. The Senate House

Enter Tullus Aufidius with Senators of Corioles.

FIRST SENATOR.
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS.
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? ’Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence. These are the words—I think
I have the letter here. Yes, here it is.
[_Reads_.] _They have pressed a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west. The dearth is great.
The people mutinous; and, it is rumoured,
Cominius, Martius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,—
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither ’tis bent. Most likely ’tis for you.
Consider of it._

FIRST SENATOR.
Our army’s in the field.
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

AUFIDIUS.
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veiled till when
They needs must show themselves, which, in the hatching,
It seemed, appeared to Rome. By the discovery
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.

SECOND SENATOR.
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioles.
If they set down before’s, for the remove
Bring up your army. But I think you’ll find
They’ve not prepared for us.

AUFIDIUS.
O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honours.
If we and Caius Martius chance to meet,
’Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

ALL.
The gods assist you!

AUFIDIUS.
And keep your Honours safe!

FIRST SENATOR.
Farewell.

SECOND SENATOR.
Farewell.

ALL.
Farewell.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Rome. An apartment in Martius’ house

Enter Volumnia and Virgilia, mother and wife to Martius. They set them
down on two low stools and sew.

VOLUMNIA.
I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself in a more comfortable
sort. If my son were my husband, I should freelier rejoice in that
absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but tender-bodied and the only
son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way,
when for a day of kings’ entreaties a mother should not sell him an
hour from her beholding, I, considering how honour would become such a
person—that it was no better than picture-like to hang by th’ wall, if
renown made it not stir—was pleased to let him seek danger where he was
like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him, from whence he returned,
his brows bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in
joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had
proved himself a man.

VIRGILIA.
But had he died in the business, madam, how then?

VOLUMNIA.
Then his good report should have been my son; I therein would have
found issue. Hear me profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my
love alike and none less dear than thine and my good Martius, I had
rather had eleven die nobly for their country than one voluptuously
surfeit out of action.

Enter a Gentlewoman.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

VIRGILIA.
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA.
Indeed you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband’s drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by th’ hair;
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:
“Come on, you cowards! You were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome.” His bloody brow
With his mailed hand then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a harvestman that’s tasked to mow
Or all or lose his hire.

VIRGILIA.
His bloody brow? O Jupiter, no blood!

VOLUMNIA.
Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Than Hector’s forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning.—Tell Valeria
We are fit to bid her welcome.

[_Exit Gentlewoman._]

VIRGILIA.
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

VOLUMNIA.
He’ll beat Aufidius’ head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

Enter Valeria with an Usher and a Gentlewoman.

VALERIA.
My ladies both, good day to you.

VOLUMNIA.
Sweet madam.

VIRGILIA.
I am glad to see your Ladyship.

VALERIA.
How do you both? You are manifest housekeepers. What are you sewing
here? A fine spot, in good faith. How does your little son?

VIRGILIA.
I thank your Ladyship; well, good madam.

VOLUMNIA.
He had rather see the swords and hear a drum than look upon his
schoolmaster.

VALERIA.
O’ my word, the father’s son! I’ll swear ’tis a very pretty boy. O’ my
troth, I looked upon him o’ Wednesday half an hour together. H’as such
a confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded butterfly, and
when he caught it, he let it go again, and after it again, and over and
over he comes, and up again, catched it again. Or whether his fall
enraged him or how ’twas, he did so set his teeth and tear it. O, I
warrant how he mammocked it!

VOLUMNIA.
One on’s father’s moods.

VALERIA.
Indeed, la, ’tis a noble child.

VIRGILIA.
A crack, madam.

VALERIA.
Come, lay aside your stitchery. I must have you play the idle huswife
with me this afternoon.

VIRGILIA.
No, good madam, I will not out of doors.

VALERIA.
Not out of doors?

VOLUMNIA.
She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA.
Indeed, no, by your patience. I’ll not over the threshold till my lord
return from the wars.

VALERIA.
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably. Come, you must go visit
the good lady that lies in.

VIRGILIA.
I will wish her speedy strength and visit her with my prayers, but I
cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA.
Why, I pray you?

VIRGILIA.
’Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

VALERIA.
You would be another Penelope. Yet they say all the yarn she spun in
Ulysses’ absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths. Come, I would your
cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it
for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

VIRGILIA.
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

VALERIA.
In truth, la, go with me, and I’ll tell you excellent news of your
husband.

VIRGILIA.
O, good madam, there can be none yet.

VALERIA.
Verily, I do not jest with you. There came news from him last night.

VIRGILIA.
Indeed, madam!

VALERIA.
In earnest, it’s true. I heard a senator speak it. Thus it is: the
Volsces have an army forth, against whom Cominius the General is gone
with one part of our Roman power. Your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioles. They nothing doubt prevailing, and to
make it brief wars. This is true, on mine honour, and so, I pray, go
with us.

VIRGILIA.
Give me excuse, good madam. I will obey you in everything hereafter.

VOLUMNIA.
Let her alone, lady. As she is now, she will but disease our better
mirth.

VALERIA.
In troth, I think she would.—Fare you well, then.—Come, good sweet
lady.—Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o’ door, and go along
with us.

VIRGILIA.
No, at a word, madam. Indeed I must not. I wish you much mirth.

VALERIA.
Well then, farewell.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Before Corioles

Enter Martius, Titus Lartius, with drum and colours, with Captains and
Soldiers, as before the city of Corioles. To them a Messenger.

MARTIUS.
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS.
My horse to yours, no.

MARTIUS.
’Tis done.

LARTIUS.
Agreed.

MARTIUS.
[_To Messenger_.] Say, has our general met the enemy?

MESSENGER.
They lie in view but have not spoke as yet.

LARTIUS.
So the good horse is mine.

MARTIUS.
I’ll buy him of you.

LARTIUS.
No, I’ll nor sell nor give him. Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years.—Summon the town.

MARTIUS.
How far off lie these armies?

MESSENGER.
Within this mile and half.

MARTIUS.
Then shall we hear their ’larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence
To help our fielded friends!—Come, blow thy blast.

[_They sound a parley._]

Enter two Senators with others on the walls of Corioles.

Tullus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

FIRST SENATOR.
No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
That’s lesser than a little.
[_Drum afar off_.]
Hark, our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We’ll break our walls
Rather than they shall pound us up. Our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinned with rushes.
They’ll open of themselves.
[_Alarum far off_.]
Hark you, far off!
There is Aufidius. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.

MARTIUS.
O, they are at it!

LARTIUS.
Their noise be our instruction.—Ladders, ho!

Enter the Army of the Volsces as through the city gates.

MARTIUS.
They fear us not but issue forth their city.—
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields.—Advance, brave Titus.
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath.—Come on, my fellows!
He that retires, I’ll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.

[_Alarums. The Romans are beat back to their trenches. They exit, with
the Volsces following_.]

Enter Martius cursing, with Roman soldiers.

MARTIUS.
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! You herd of—Boils and plagues
Plaster you o’er, that you may be abhorred
Farther than seen, and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind. Backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend, and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I’ll leave the foe
And make my wars on you. Look to’t. Come on!
If you’ll stand fast we’ll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches. Follow’s!

[_Another alarum. The Volsces re-enter and are driven back to the gates
of Corioles, which open to admit them._]

So, now the gates are ope. Now prove good seconds!
’Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers. Mark me, and do the like.

[_Martius follows the fleeing Volsces through the gates, and is shut
in._]

FIRST SOLDIER.
Foolhardiness, not I.

SECOND SOLDIER.
Nor I.

FIRST SOLDIER.
See, they have shut him in.

[_Alarum continues._]

ALL.
To th’ pot, I warrant him.

Enter Titus Lartius.

LARTIUS.
What is become of Martius?

ALL.
Slain, sir, doubtless.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters, who upon the sudden
Clapped to their gates. He is himself alone,
To answer all the city.

LARTIUS.
O noble fellow,
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And when it bows, stand’st up! Thou art left, Martius.
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato’s wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks and
The thunderlike percussion of thy sounds
Thou mad’st thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

Enter Martius, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Look, sir.

LARTIUS.
O, ’tis Martius!
Let’s fetch him off or make remain alike.

[_They fight, and all enter the city._]

SCENE V. Within Corioles. A street

Enter certain Romans, with spoils.

FIRST ROMAN.
This will I carry to Rome.

SECOND ROMAN.
And I this.

THIRD ROMAN.
A murrain on’t! I took this for silver.

Enter Martius and Titus Lartius with a Trumpet.

MARTIUS.
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a cracked drachma. Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Down with them!

[_Exit the Romans with spoils._]

[_Alarum continues still afar off._]

And hark, what noise the General makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul’s hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans. Then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city,
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

LARTIUS.
Worthy sir, thou bleed’st.
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.

MARTIUS.
Sir, praise me not.
My work hath yet not warmed me. Fare you well.
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me. To Aufidius thus
I will appear and fight.

LARTIUS.
Now the fair goddess Fortune
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers’ swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!

MARTIUS.
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So farewell.

LARTIUS.
Thou worthiest Martius!

[_Exit Martius._]

Go sound thy trumpet in the marketplace.
Call thither all the officers o’ th’ town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Near the camp of Cominius

Enter Cominius as it were in retire, with Soldiers.

COMINIUS.
Breathe you, my friends. Well fought! We are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands
Nor cowardly in retire. Believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. The Roman gods
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling fronts encount’ring,
May give you thankful sacrifice!

Enter a Messenger.

Thy news?

MESSENGER.
The citizens of Corioles have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Martius battle.
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.

COMINIUS.
Though thou speakest truth,
Methinks thou speak’st not well. How long is’t since?

MESSENGER.
Above an hour, my lord.

COMINIUS.
’Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums.
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour
And bring thy news so late?

MESSENGER.
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about; else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.

[_Exit Messenger._]

Enter Martius, bloody.

COMINIUS.
Who’s yonder,
That does appear as he were flayed? O gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before-time seen him thus.

MARTIUS.
Come I too late?

COMINIUS.
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor
More than I know the sound of Martius’ tongue
From every meaner man.

MARTIUS.
Come I too late?

COMINIUS.
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

MARTIUS.
O, let me clip you
In arms as sound as when I wooed, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done
And tapers burned to bedward!

COMINIUS.
Flower of warriors, how is’t with Titus Lartius?

MARTIUS.
As with a man busied about decrees,
Condemning some to death and some to exile;
Ransoming him or pitying, threat’ning the other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.

COMINIUS.
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where’s he? Call him hither.

MARTIUS.
Let him alone.
He did inform the truth. But for our gentlemen,
The common file—a plague! Tribunes for them!—
The mouse ne’er shunned the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.

COMINIUS.
But how prevailed you?

MARTIUS.
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? Are you lords o’ th’ field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

COMINIUS.
Martius, we have at disadvantage fought,
And did retire to win our purpose.

MARTIUS.
How lies their battle? Know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?

COMINIUS.
As I guess, Martius,
Their bands i’ th’ vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o’er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.

MARTIUS.
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By th’ blood we have shed together, by th’ vows we have made
To endure friends, that you directly set me
Against Aufidius and his Antiates,
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.

COMINIUS.
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking. Take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

MARTIUS.
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here—
As it were sin to doubt—that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life,
And that his country’s dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition
And follow Martius.

[_He waves his sword._]

[_They all shout and wave their swords, take him up in their arms, and
cast up their caps._]

O, me alone! Make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? None of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select from all.
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obeyed. Please you to march,
And I shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.

COMINIUS.
March on, my fellows.
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The gates of Corioles

Titus Lartius, having set a guard upon Corioles, going with drum and
trumpet toward Cominius and Caius Martius, enters with a Lieutenant,
other Soldiers, and a Scout.

LARTIUS.
So, let the ports be guarded. Keep your duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
For a short holding. If we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.

LIEUTENANT.
Fear not our care, sir.

LARTIUS.
Hence, and shut your gates upon’s.
Our guider, come. To th’ Roman camp conduct us.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. A field of battle between the Roman and the Volscian camps

Alarum, as in battle. Enter Martius and Aufidius at several doors.

MARTIUS.
I’ll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.

AUFIDIUS.
We hate alike.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

MARTIUS.
Let the first budger die the other’s slave,
And the gods doom him after!

AUFIDIUS.
If I fly, Martius,
Hollo me like a hare.

MARTIUS.
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioles’ walls,
And made what work I pleased. ’Tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me masked. For thy revenge
Wrench up thy power to th’ highest.

AUFIDIUS.
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your bragged progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.

[_Here they fight, and certain Volsces come to the aid of Aufidius._]

Officious and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.

[_Martius fights till they be driven in breathless. Aufidius and
Martius exit, separately._]

SCENE IX. The Roman camp

Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish. Enter, at one door, Cominius
with the Romans; at another door, Martius, with his arm in a scarf.

COMINIUS.
If I should tell thee o’er this thy day’s work,
Thou’t not believe thy deeds. But I’ll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles;
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I’ th’ end admire; where ladies shall be frighted
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull tribunes,
That with the fusty plebeians hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts “We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.”
Yet cam’st thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

Enter Titus Lartius with his power, from the pursuit.

LARTIUS.
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison.
Hadst thou beheld—

MARTIUS.
Pray now, no more. My mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done—that’s what I can;
Induced as you have been—that’s for my country.
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta’en mine act.

COMINIUS.
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving. Rome must know
The value of her own. ’Twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings and to silence that
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest. Therefore, I beseech you—
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done—before our army hear me.

MARTIUS.
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remembered.

COMINIUS.
Should they not,
Well might they fester ’gainst ingratitude
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses—
Whereof we have ta’en good and good store—of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta’en forth
Before the common distribution
At your only choice.

MARTIUS.
I thank you, general,
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword. I do refuse it;
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.

[_A long flourish. They all cry “Martius, Martius!” and cast up their
caps and lances. Cominius and Lartius stand bare._]

May these same instruments which, you profane,
Never sound more! When drums and trumpets shall
I’ th’ field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows soft
Soft as the parasite’s silk, let him be made
An ovator for the wars! No more, I say.
For that I have not washed my nose that bled,
Or foiled some debile wretch—which, without note,
Here’s many else have done—you shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.

COMINIUS.
Too modest are you,
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly. By your patience,
If ’gainst yourself you be incensed, we’ll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore be it known,
As to us to all the world, that Caius Martius
Wears this war’s garland, in token of the which
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging. And from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all th’ applause and clamour of the host,
Caius Martius Coriolanus! Bear
Th’ addition nobly ever!

[_Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums._]

ALL.
Caius Martius Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS.
I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no. Howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To th’ fairness of my power.

COMINIUS.
So, to our tent,
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success.—You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioles back. Send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate
For their own good and ours.

LARTIUS.
I shall, my lord.

CORIOLANUS.
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.

COMINIUS.
Take’t, ’tis yours. What is’t?

CORIOLANUS.
I sometime lay here in Corioles
At a poor man’s house; he used me kindly.
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o’erwhelmed my pity. I request you
To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS.
O, well begged!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind.—Deliver him, Titus.

LARTIUS.
Martius, his name?

CORIOLANUS.
By Jupiter, forgot!
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?

COMINIUS.
Go we to our tent.
The blood upon your visage dries; ’tis time
It should be looked to. Come.

[_A flourish of cornets. Exeunt._]

SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces

A flourish. Cornets. Enter Tullus Aufidius, bloody, with two or three
soldiers.

AUFIDIUS.
The town is ta’en.

SOLDIER.
’Twill be delivered back on good condition.

AUFIDIUS.
Condition?
I would I were a Roman, for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition?
What good condition can a treaty find
I’ th’ part that is at mercy? Five times, Martius,
I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By th’ elements,
If e’er again I meet him beard to beard,
He’s mine or I am his. Mine emulation
Hath not that honour in’t it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I’ll potch at him some way,
Or wrath or craft may get him.

SOLDIER.
He’s the devil.

AUFIDIUS.
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour’s poisoned
With only suff’ring stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself. Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom ’gainst
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in’s heart. Go you to th’ city;
Learn how ’tis held and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.

SOLDIER.
Will not you go?

AUFIDIUS.
I am attended at the cypress grove. I pray you—
’Tis south the city mills,—bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

SOLDIER.
I shall, sir.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Rome. A public place


Enter Menenius with the two Tribunes of the people, Sicinius and
Brutus.

MENENIUS.
The augurer tells me we shall have news tonight.

BRUTUS.
Good or bad?

MENENIUS.
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Martius.

SICINIUS.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

MENENIUS.
Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS.
The lamb.

MENENIUS.
Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians would the noble Martius.

BRUTUS.
He’s a lamb indeed, that baas like a bear.

MENENIUS.
He’s a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two are old men; tell
me one thing that I shall ask you.

BOTH TRIBUNES.
Well, sir.

MENENIUS.
In what enormity is Martius poor in, that you two have not in
abundance?

BRUTUS.
He’s poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

SICINIUS.
Especially in pride.

BRUTUS.
And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS.
This is strange now. Do you two know how you are censured here in the
city, I mean of us o’ th’ right-hand file, do you?

BOTH TRIBUNES.
Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS.
Because you talk of pride now, will you not be angry?

BOTH TRIBUNES.
Well, well, sir, well?

MENENIUS.
Why, ’tis no great matter; for a very little thief of occasion will rob
you of a great deal of patience. Give your dispositions the reins, and
be angry at your pleasures, at the least, if you take it as a pleasure
to you in being so. You blame Martius for being proud.

BRUTUS.
We do it not alone, sir.

MENENIUS.
I know you can do very little alone, for your helps are many, or else
your actions would grow wondrous single. Your abilities are too
infantlike for doing much alone. You talk of pride. O that you could
turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks and make but an interior
survey of your good selves! O, that you could!

BOTH TRIBUNES.
What then, sir?

MENENIUS.
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, proud, violent,
testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in Rome.

SICINIUS.
Menenius, you are known well enough, too.

MENENIUS.
I am known to be a humorous patrician and one that loves a cup of hot
wine with not a drop of allaying Tiber in’t; said to be something
imperfect in favouring the first complaint, hasty and tinder-like upon
too trivial motion; one that converses more with the buttock of the
night than with the forehead of the morning. What I think I utter, and
spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as you are—I
cannot call you Lycurguses—if the drink you give me touch my palate
adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I cannot say your Worships have
delivered the matter well when I find the ass in compound with the
major part of your syllables. And though I must be content to bear with
those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you have good faces. If you see this in the map of my microcosm,
follows it that I am known well enough too? What harm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be known well enough,
too?

BRUTUS.
Come, sir, come; we know you well enough.

MENENIUS.
You know neither me, yourselves, nor anything. You are ambitious for
poor knaves’ caps and legs. You wear out a good wholesome forenoon in
hearing a cause between an orange-wife and a faucet-seller, and then
rejourn the controversy of threepence to a second day of audience. When
you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody
flag against all patience, and, in roaring for a chamber pot, dismiss
the controversy bleeding, the more entangled by your hearing. All the
peace you make in their cause is calling both the parties knaves. You
are a pair of strange ones.

BRUTUS.
Come, come. You are well understood to be a perfecter giber for the
table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol.

MENENIUS.
Our very priests must become mockers if they shall encounter such
ridiculous subjects as you are. When you speak best unto the purpose,
it is not worth the wagging of your beards, and your beards deserve not
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher’s cushion or to be entombed
in an ass’s packsaddle. Yet you must be saying Martius is proud, who,
in a cheap estimation, is worth all your predecessors since Deucalion,
though peradventure some of the best of ’em were hereditary hangmen.
Good e’en to your Worships. More of your conversation would infect my
brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians. I will be bold to
take my leave of you.

[_He begins to exit. Brutus and Sicinius stand aside._]

Enter Volumnia, Virgilia and Valeria

How now, my as fair as noble ladies—and the moon, were she earthly, no
nobler—whither do you follow your eyes so fast?

VOLUMNIA.
Honourable Menenius, my boy Martius approaches. For the love of Juno,
let’s go!

MENENIUS.
Ha? Martius coming home?

VOLUMNIA.
Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous approbation.

MENENIUS.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee! Hoo! Martius coming home?

VALERIA, VIRGILIA.
Nay, ’tis true.

VOLUMNIA.
Look, here’s a letter from him. The state hath another, his wife
another, and I think there’s one at home for you.

MENENIUS.
I will make my very house reel tonight. A letter for me?

VIRGILIA.
Yes, certain, there’s a letter for you; I saw it.

MENENIUS.
A letter for me? It gives me an estate of seven years’ health, in which
time I will make a lip at the physician. The most sovereign
prescription in Galen is but empiricutic and, to this preservative, of
no better report than a horse drench. Is he not wounded? He was wont to
come home wounded.

VIRGILIA.
O, no, no, no!

VOLUMNIA.
O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for’t.

MENENIUS.
So do I too, if it be not too much. Brings he victory in his pocket,
the wounds become him.

VOLUMNIA.
On’s brows, Menenius. He comes the third time home with the oaken
garland.

MENENIUS.
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

VOLUMNIA.
Titus Lartius writes they fought together, but Aufidius got off.

MENENIUS.
And ’twas time for him too, I’ll warrant him that. An he had stayed by
him, I would not have been so ’fidiused for all the chests in Corioles
and the gold that’s in them. Is the Senate possessed of this?

VOLUMNIA.
Good ladies, let’s go.—Yes, yes, yes. The Senate has letters from the
General, wherein he gives my son the whole name of the war. He hath in
this action outdone his former deeds doubly.

VALERIA.
In troth, there’s wondrous things spoke of him.

MENENIUS.
Wondrous? Ay, I warrant you, and not without his true purchasing.

VIRGILIA.
The gods grant them true.

VOLUMNIA.
True? Pow, waw!

MENENIUS.
True? I’ll be sworn they are true. Where is he wounded? [_To the
Tribunes_.] God save your good Worships! Martius is coming home; he has
more cause to be proud.—Where is he wounded?

VOLUMNIA.
I’ th’ shoulder and i’ th’ left arm. There will be large cicatrices to
show the people when he shall stand for his place. He received in the
repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i’ th’ body.

MENENIUS.
One i’ th’ neck and two i’ th’ thigh—there’s nine that I know.

VOLUMNIA.
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five wounds upon him.

MENENIUS.
Now it’s twenty-seven. Every gash was an enemy’s grave.


[_A shout and flourish_.]

Hark, the trumpets!

VOLUMNIA.
These are the ushers of Martius: before him he carries noise, and
behind him he leaves tears.
Death, that dark spirit, in’s nervy arm doth lie,
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

[_A sennet_.]

Enter Cominius the General and Titus Lartius, between them Coriolanus
crowned with an oaken garland, with Captains and Soldiers and a Herald.
Trumpets sound.

HERALD.
Know, Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles’ gates, where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Martius; these
In honour follows “Coriolanus.”
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.

[_Sound flourish._]

ALL.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS.
No more of this, it does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.

COMINIUS.
Look, sir, your mother.

CORIOLANUS.
O,
You have, I know, petitioned all the gods
For my prosperity.

[_Kneels._]

VOLUMNIA.
Nay, my good soldier, up.

[_He stands._]

My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named—
What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?
But, O, thy wife—

CORIOLANUS.
My gracious silence, hail.
Wouldst thou have laughed had I come coffined home,
That weep’st to see me triumph? Ah, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioles wear
And mothers that lack sons.

MENENIUS.
Now the gods crown thee!

CORIOLANUS.
And live you yet? [_To Valeria_] O my sweet lady, pardon.

VOLUMNIA.
I know not where to turn. O, welcome home!
And welcome, general.—And you’re welcome all.

MENENIUS.
A hundred thousand welcomes! I could weep,
And I could laugh; I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on’s heart
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab trees here at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors!
We call a nettle but a nettle, and
The faults of fools but folly.

COMINIUS.
Ever right.

CORIOLANUS.
Menenius ever, ever.

HERALD.
Give way there, and go on!

CORIOLANUS.
[_To Volumnia and Virgilia_.] Your hand, and yours.
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honours.

VOLUMNIA.
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy. Only
There’s one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS.
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way
Than sway with them in theirs.

COMINIUS.
On, to the Capitol.

[_Flourish of cornets. Exeunt in state, as before._]

Brutus and Sicinius come forward.

BRUTUS.
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him. The kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram ’bout her reechy neck,
Clamb’ring the walls to eye him. Stalls, bulks, windows
Are smothered up, leads filled, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him. Seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station. Our veiled dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gauded cheeks to th’ wanton spoil
Of Phoebus’ burning kisses. Such a pother,
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slyly crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.

SICINIUS.
On the sudden
I warrant him consul.

BRUTUS.
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.

SICINIUS.
He cannot temp’rately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.

BRUTUS.
In that there’s comfort.

SICINIUS.
Doubt not the commoners, for whom we stand,
But they, upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours—which
That he will give them make as little question
As he is proud to do’t.

BRUTUS.
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i’ th’ marketplace nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility,
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To th’ people, beg their stinking breaths.

SICINIUS.
’Tis right.

BRUTUS.
It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS.
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.

BRUTUS.
’Tis most like he will.

SICINIUS.
It shall be to him then, as our good wills,
A sure destruction.

BRUTUS.
So it must fall out
To him, or our authorities for an end.
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to’s power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders, and
Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
In human action and capacity
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in their war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

SICINIUS.
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people—which time shall not want
If it be put upon’t, and that’s as easy
As to set dogs on sheep—will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble, and their blaze
Shall darken him for ever.

Enter a Messenger.

BRUTUS.
What’s the matter?

MESSENGER.
You are sent for to the Capitol. ’Tis thought
That Martius shall be consul. I have seen
The dumb men throng to see him, and the blind
to hear him speak; matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarves and handkerchiefs,
Upon him as he passed; the nobles bended
As to Jove’s statue, and the Commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts.
I never saw the like.

BRUTUS.
Let’s to the Capitol;
And carry with us ears and eyes for th’ time,
But hearts for the event.

SICINIUS.
Have with you.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rome. The Capitol

Enter two Officers, to lay cushions, as it were in the Capitol.

FIRST OFFICER.
Come, come. They are almost here. How many stand for consulships?

SECOND OFFICER.
Three, they say; but ’tis thought of everyone Coriolanus will carry it.

FIRST OFFICER.
That’s a brave fellow, but he’s vengeance proud and loves not the
common people.

SECOND OFFICER.
’Faith, there have been many great men that have flattered the people
who ne’er loved them; and there be many that they have loved they know
not wherefore; so that, if they love they know not why, they hate upon
no better a ground. Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether
they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition and, out of his noble carelessness, lets them plainly
see’t.

FIRST OFFICER.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved
indifferently ’twixt doing them neither good nor harm; but he seeks
their hate with greater devotion than they can render it him and leaves
nothing undone that may fully discover him their opposite. Now, to seem
to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that
which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

SECOND OFFICER.
He hath deserved worthily of his country, and his ascent is not by such
easy degrees as those who, having been supple and courteous to the
people, bonnetted, without any further deed to have them at all into
their estimation and report; but he hath so planted his honours in
their eyes and his actions in their hearts that for their tongues to be
silent and not confess so much were a kind of ingrateful injury. To
report otherwise were a malice that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

FIRST OFFICER.
No more of him; he’s a worthy man. Make way. They are coming.

A sennet. Enter the Patricians and the Tribunes of the people, Lictors
before them; Coriolanus, Menenius, Cominius the consul. The Patricians
sit.  Sicinius and Brutus take their places by themselves. Coriolanus
stands.

MENENIUS.
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country. Therefore please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul and last general
In our well-found successes to report
A little of that worthy work performed
By Martius Caius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.

[_Coriolanus sits._]

FIRST SENATOR.
Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state’s defective for requital,
Than we to stretch it out. Masters o’ th’ people,
We do request your kindest ears and, after,
Your loving motion toward the common body
To yield what passes here.

SICINIUS.
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.

BRUTUS.
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.

MENENIUS.
That’s off, that’s off!
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?

BRUTUS.
Most willingly.
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.

MENENIUS.
He loves your people,
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.—
Worthy Cominius, speak.

[_Coriolanus rises, and offers to go away._]

Nay, keep your place.

FIRST SENATOR.
Sit, Coriolanus. Never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.

CORIOLANUS.
Your Honours, pardon.
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.

BRUTUS.
Sir, I hope
My words disbenched you not?

CORIOLANUS.
No, sir. Yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not; but your people,
I love them as they weigh.

MENENIUS.
Pray now, sit down.

CORIOLANUS.
I had rather have one scratch my head i’ th’ sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monstered.

[_Exit._]

MENENIUS.
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter—
That’s thousand to one good one—when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one on’s ears to hear it?—Proceed, Cominius.

COMINIUS.
I shall lack voice. The deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be uttered feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue and
Most dignifies the haver; if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others. Our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him. He bestrid
An o’erpressed Roman and i’ th’ Consul’s view
Slew three opposers. Tarquin’s self he met
And struck him on his knee. In that day’s feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i’ th’ field and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-entered thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurched all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioles, let me say,
I cannot speak him home. He stopped the flyers
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport. As weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obeyed
And fell below his stem. His sword, Death’s stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries. Alone he entered
The mortal gate o’ th’ city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioles like a planet. Now all’s his,
When by and by the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Requickened what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he, where he did
Run reeking o’er the lives of men as if
’Twere a perpetual spoil; and till we called
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.

MENENIUS.
Worthy man!

FIRST SENATOR.
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.

COMINIUS.
Our spoils he kicked at;
And looked upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world. He covets less
Than misery itself would give, rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS.
He’s right noble.
Let him be called for.

FIRST SENATOR.
Call Coriolanus.

OFFICER.
He doth appear.

Enter Coriolanus.

MENENIUS.
The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.

CORIOLANUS.
I do owe them still
My life and services.

MENENIUS.
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.

CORIOLANUS.
I do beseech you
Let me o’erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my wounds’ sake to give their suffrage. Please you
That I may pass this doing.

SICINIUS.
Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.

MENENIUS.
Put them not to’t.
Pray you, go fit you to the custom, and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.

CORIOLANUS.
It is a part
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS.
Mark you that?

CORIOLANUS.
To brag unto them, “thus I did, and thus!”
Show them th’ unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!

MENENIUS.
Do not stand upon’t.—
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them, and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.

SENATORS.
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!

[_Flourish cornets. Exeunt all but Sicinius and Brutus._]

BRUTUS.
You see how he intends to use the people.

SICINIUS.
May they perceive’s intent! He will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.

BRUTUS.
Come, we’ll inform them
Of our proceedings here. On th’ marketplace
I know they do attend us.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Rome. The Forum

Enter seven or eight Citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

SECOND CITIZEN.
We may, sir, if we will.

THIRD CITIZEN.
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no
power to do; for, if he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we
are to put our tongues into those wounds and speak for them. So, if he
tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of
them. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful
were to make a monster of the multitude, of the which we being members,
should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.

FIRST CITIZEN.
And to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve; for once
we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the
many-headed multitude.

THIRD CITIZEN.
We have been called so of many; not that our heads are some brown, some
black, some auburn, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely
coloured; and truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of one
skull, they would fly east, west, north, south, and their consent of
one direct way should be at once to all the points o’ th’ compass.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would fly?

THIRD CITIZEN.
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man’s will; ’tis strongly
wedged up in a blockhead. But if it were at liberty, ’twould, sure,
southward.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Why that way?

THIRD CITIZEN.
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts melted away with
rotten dews, the fourth would return for conscience’ sake, to help to
get thee a wife.

SECOND CITIZEN.
You are never without your tricks. You may, you may.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that’s no matter; the
greater part carries it. I say, if he would incline to the people,
there was never a worthier man.

Enter Coriolanus in a gown of humility, with Menenius.

Here he comes, and in the gown of humility. Mark his behaviour. We are
not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones,
by twos, and by threes. He’s to make his requests by particulars,
wherein everyone of us has a single honour in giving him our own voices
with our own tongues. Therefore follow me, and I’ll direct you how you
shall go by him.

ALL.
Content, content.

[_Exeunt._]

MENENIUS.
O sir, you are not right. Have you not known
The worthiest men have done’t?

CORIOLANUS.
What must I say?
“I pray, sir”—plague upon’t! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace. “Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country’s service when
Some certain of your brethren roared and ran
From th’ noise of our own drums.”

MENENIUS.
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that. You must desire them
To think upon you.

CORIOLANUS.
Think upon me! Hang ’em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by ’em.

MENENIUS.
You’ll mar all.
I’ll leave you. Pray you speak to ’em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.

[_Exit Menenius._]

CORIOLANUS.
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.

Enter three of the Citizens.

So, here comes a brace.
You know the cause, sirs, of my standing here.

THIRD CITIZEN.
We do, sir. Tell us what hath brought you to’t.

CORIOLANUS.
Mine own desert.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Your own desert?

CORIOLANUS.
Ay, but not mine own desire.

THIRD CITIZEN.
How, not your own desire?

CORIOLANUS.
No, sir, ’twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.

THIRD CITIZEN.
You must think if we give you anything, we hope to gain by you.

CORIOLANUS.
Well then, I pray, your price o’ th’ consulship?

FIRST CITIZEN.
The price is to ask it kindly.

CORIOLANUS.
Kindly, sir, I pray, let me ha’t. I have wounds to show you, which
shall be yours in private.—Your good voice, sir. What say you?

SECOND CITIZEN.
You shall ha’ it, worthy sir.

CORIOLANUS.
A match, sir. There’s in all two worthy voices begged. I have your
alms. Adieu.

THIRD CITIZEN.
But this is something odd.

SECOND CITIZEN.
An ’twere to give again—but ’tis no matter.

[_Exeunt two citizens._]

Enter two other Citizens.

CORIOLANUS.
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that I may
be consul, I have here the customary gown.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you have not deserved
nobly.

CORIOLANUS.
Your enigma?

FOURTH CITIZEN.
You have been a scourge to her enemies; you have been a rod to her
friends. You have not indeed loved the common people.

CORIOLANUS.
You should account me the more virtuous that I have not been common in
my love. I will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a
dearer estimation of them; ’tis a condition they account gentle. And
since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my hat than my
heart, I will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly. That is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some
popular man and give it bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech
you, I may be consul.

FIFTH CITIZEN.
We hope to find you our friend, and therefore give you our voices
heartily.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
You have received many wounds for your country.

CORIOLANUS.
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I will make much of
your voices and so trouble you no farther.

BOTH CITIZENS.
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily.

[_Exeunt citizens._]

CORIOLANUS.
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this wolvish toge should I stand here
To beg of Hob and Dick that does appear
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to’t.
What custom wills, in all things should we do’t?
The dust on antique time would lie unswept
And mountainous error be too highly heaped
For truth to o’erpeer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffered, the other will I do.


Enter three Citizens more.

Here come more voices.
Your voices! For your voices I have fought;
Watched for your voices; for your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd. Battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more. Your voices!
Indeed, I would be consul.

SIXTH CITIZEN.
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man’s voice.

SEVENTH CITIZEN.
Therefore let him be consul. The gods give him joy, and make him good
friend to the people!

ALL THREE CITIZENS.
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul.

[_Exeunt citizens._]

CORIOLANUS.
Worthy voices!

Enter Menenius with Brutus and Sicinius.

MENENIUS.
You have stood your limitation, and the Tribunes
Endue you with the people’s voice. Remains
That in th’ official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the Senate.

CORIOLANUS.
Is this done?

SICINIUS.
The custom of request you have discharged.
The people do admit you, and are summoned
To meet anon upon your approbation.

CORIOLANUS.
Where? At the Senate House?

SICINIUS.
There, Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS.
May I change these garments?

SICINIUS.
You may, sir.

CORIOLANUS.
That I’ll straight do and, knowing myself again,
Repair to th’ Senate House.

MENENIUS.
I’ll keep you company.—Will you along?

BRUTUS.
We stay here for the people.

SICINIUS.
Fare you well.

[_Exeunt Coriolanus and Menenius._]

He has it now; and by his looks, methinks,
’Tis warm at his heart.

BRUTUS.
With a proud heart he wore
His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?

Enter the Pebleians.

SICINIUS.
How now, my masters, have you chose this man?

FIRST CITIZEN.
He has our voices, sir.

BRUTUS.
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Amen, sir. To my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked us when he begged our voices.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Certainly, he flouted us downright.

FIRST CITIZEN.
No, ’tis his kind of speech. He did not mock us.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully. He should have showed us
His marks of merit, wounds received for’s country.

SICINIUS.
Why, so he did, I am sure.

ALL.
No, no. No man saw ’em.

THIRD CITIZEN.
He said he had wounds, which he could show in private,
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
“I would be consul,” says he; “aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore.” When we granted that,
Here was “I thank you for your voices. Thank you.
Your most sweet voices! Now you have left your voices,
I have no further with you.” Was not this mockery?

SICINIUS.
Why either were you ignorant to see’t
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?

BRUTUS.
Could you not have told him
As you were lessoned? When he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I’ th’ body of the weal; and, now arriving
A place of potency and sway o’ th’ state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to th’ plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves. You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices, and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.

SICINIUS.
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touched his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him plucked
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught. So putting him to rage,
You should have ta’en th’ advantage of his choler
And passed him unelected.

BRUTUS.
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?

SICINIUS.
Have you ere now denied the asker, and now
Again, of him that did not ask but mock,
Bestow your sued-for tongues?

THIRD CITIZEN.
He’s not confirmed.
We may deny him yet.

SECOND CITIZEN.
And will deny him.
I’ll have five hundred voices of that sound.

FIRST CITIZEN.
I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece ’em.

BRUTUS.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties, make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.

SICINIUS.
Let them assemble
And, on a safer judgment, all revoke
Your ignorant election. Enforce his pride
And his old hate unto you. Besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorned you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
Th’ apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.

BRUTUS.
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes, that we laboured,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.

SICINIUS.
Say you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us.

BRUTUS.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o’ th’ Martians, from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numa’s daughter’s son,
Who, after great Hostilius here was king,
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our best water brought by conduits hither;
And Censorinus, that was so surnamed,
And nobly named so, twice being censor,
Was his great ancestor.

SICINIUS.
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances; but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he’s your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

BRUTUS.
Say you ne’er had done’t—
Harp on that still—but by our putting on.
And presently when you have drawn your number,
Repair to th’ Capitol.

ALL.
We will so. Almost all
Repent in their election.

[_Exeunt Plebeians._]

BRUTUS.
Let them go on.
This mutiny were better put in hazard
Than stay, past doubt, for greater.
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

SICINIUS.
To th’ Capitol, come.
We will be there before the stream o’ th’ people,
And this shall seem, as partly ’tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Rome. A street


Cornets. Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, all the Gentry, Cominius, Titus
Lartius and other Senators.

CORIOLANUS.
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

LARTIUS.
He had, my lord, and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS.
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
Upon’s again.

COMINIUS.
They are worn, lord consul, so
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.

CORIOLANUS.
Saw you Aufidius?

LARTIUS.
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town. He is retired to Antium.

CORIOLANUS.
Spoke he of me?

LARTIUS.
He did, my lord.

CORIOLANUS.
How? What?

LARTIUS.
How often he had met you sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your vanquisher.

CORIOLANUS.
At Antium lives he?

LARTIUS.
At Antium.

CORIOLANUS.
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.

Enter Sicinius and Brutus.

Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o’ th’ common mouth. I do despise them,
For they do prank them in authority
Against all noble sufferance.

SICINIUS.
Pass no further.

CORIOLANUS.
Ha? What is that?

BRUTUS.
It will be dangerous to go on. No further.

CORIOLANUS.
What makes this change?

MENENIUS.
The matter?

COMINIUS.
Hath he not passed the noble and the common?

BRUTUS.
Cominius, no.

CORIOLANUS.
Have I had children’s voices?

FIRST SENATOR.
Tribunes, give way. He shall to the marketplace.

BRUTUS.
The people are incensed against him.

SICINIUS.
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.

CORIOLANUS.
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?

MENENIUS.
Be calm, be calm.

CORIOLANUS.
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility.
Suffer’t, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.

BRUTUS.
Call’t not a plot.
The people cry you mocked them; and, of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandaled the suppliants for the people, called them
Timepleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

CORIOLANUS.
Why, this was known before.

BRUTUS.
Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS.
Have you informed them sithence?

BRUTUS.
How? I inform them?

COMINIUS.
You are like to do such business.

BRUTUS.
Not unlike, each way, to better yours.

CORIOLANUS.
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.

SICINIUS.
You show too much of that
For which the people stir. If you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.

MENENIUS.
Let’s be calm.

COMINIUS.
The people are abused, set on. This palt’ring
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonoured rub, laid falsely
I’ th’ plain way of his merit.

CORIOLANUS.
Tell me of corn?
This was my speech, and I will speak’t again.

MENENIUS.
Not now, not now.

FIRST SENATOR.
Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS.
Now, as I live, I will.
My nobler friends, I crave their pardons. For
The mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me, as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves. I say again,
In soothing them we nourish ’gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have ploughed for, sowed, and scattered
By mingling them with us, the honoured number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.

MENENIUS.
Well, no more.

FIRST SENATOR.
No more words, we beseech you.

CORIOLANUS.
How? No more?
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles
Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

BRUTUS.
You speak o’ th’ people
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.

SICINIUS.
’Twere well
We let the people know’t.

MENENIUS.
What, what? His choler?

CORIOLANUS.
Choler?
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, ’twould be my mind.

SICINIUS.
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.

CORIOLANUS.
“Shall remain”?
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you
His absolute “shall”?

COMINIUS.
’Twas from the canon.

CORIOLANUS.
“Shall”?
O good but most unwise patricians, why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra leave to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory “shall,” being but
The horn and noise o’ th’ monster’s, wants not spirit
To say he’ll turn your current in a ditch
And make your channel his? If he have power,
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learned,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators; and they are no less
When, both your voices blended, the great’st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his “shall,”
His popular “shall,” against a graver bench
Than ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the consuls base! And my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter ’twixt the gap of both and take
The one by th’ other.

COMINIUS.
Well, on to th’ marketplace.

CORIOLANUS.
Whoever gave that counsel to give forth
The corn o’ th’ storehouse gratis, as ’twas used
Sometime in Greece—

MENENIUS.
Well, well, no more of that.

CORIOLANUS.
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say they nourished disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.

BRUTUS.
Why shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?

CORIOLANUS.
I’ll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They ne’er did service for’t. Being pressed to th’ war,
Even when the navel of the state was touched,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i’ th’ war,
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they showed
Most valour, spoke not for them. Th’ accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the native
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multitude digest
The senate’s courtesy? Let deeds express
What’s like to be their words: “We did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.” Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears, which will in time
Break ope the locks o’ th’ Senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.

MENENIUS.
Come, enough.

BRUTUS.
Enough, with over-measure.

CORIOLANUS.
No, take more!
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship—
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance—it must omit
Real necessities and give way the while
To unstable slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you—
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on’t, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That’s sure of death without it—at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become’t,
Not having the power to do the good it would
For th’ ill which doth control’t.

BRUTUS.
’Has said enough.

SICINIUS.
’Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.

CORIOLANUS.
Thou wretch, despite o’erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To th’ greater bench. In a rebellion,
When what’s not meet but what must be was law,
Then were they chosen. In a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i’ th’ dust.

BRUTUS.
Manifest treason.

SICINIUS.
This a consul? No.

BRUTUS.
The aediles, ho! Let him be apprehended.

Enter an Aedile.

SICINIUS.
Go call the people;

[_Exit Aedile._]

in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to th’ public weal. Obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

CORIOLANUS.
Hence, old goat.

ALL PATRICIANS.
We’ll surety him.

COMINIUS.
[_to Sicinius_.] Aged sir, hands off.

CORIOLANUS.
[_to Sicinius_.] Hence, rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.

SICINIUS.
Help, ye citizens!

Enter a rabble of Plebeians with the Aediles.

MENENIUS.
On both sides more respect!

SICINIUS.
Here’s he that would take from you all your power.

BRUTUS.
Seize him, aediles.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Down with him, down with him!

SECOND SENATOR.
Weapons, weapons, weapons!

[_They all bustle about Coriolanus._]

Tribunes, patricians, citizens, what, ho!
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens!

ALL.
Peace, peace, peace! Stay, hold, peace!

MENENIUS.
What is about to be? I am out of breath.
Confusion’s near. I cannot speak. You tribunes
To th’ people!—Coriolanus, patience!—
Speak, good Sicinius.

SICINIUS.
Hear me, people! Peace!

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Let’s hear our tribune. Peace! Speak, speak, speak.

SICINIUS.
You are at point to lose your liberties.
Martius would have all from you, Martius,
Whom late you have named for consul.

MENENIUS.
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

FIRST SENATOR.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

SICINIUS.
What is the city but the people?

ALL PLEBEIANS.
True,
The people are the city.

BRUTUS.
By the consent of all, we were established
The people’s magistrates.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
You so remain.

MENENIUS.
And so are like to do.

COMINIUS.
That is the way to lay the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation
And bury all which yet distinctly ranges
In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS.
This deserves death.

BRUTUS.
Or let us stand to our authority
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o’ th’ people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present death.

SICINIUS.
Therefore lay hold of him,
Bear him to th’ rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

BRUTUS.
Aediles, seize him!

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Yield, Martius, yield!

MENENIUS.
Hear me one word.
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

AEDILES.
Peace, peace!

MENENIUS.
Be that you seem, truly your country’s friend,
And temp’rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.

BRUTUS.
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent.—Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.

[_Coriolanus draws his sword._]

CORIOLANUS.
No; I’ll die here.
There’s some among you have beheld me fighting.
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

MENENIUS.
Down with that sword!—Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BRUTUS.
Lay hands upon him!

MENENIUS.
Help Martius, help!
You that be noble, help him, young and old!

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Down with him, down with him!

[_In this mutiny the Tribunes, the Aediles and the People are beat
in._]

MENENIUS.
Go, get you to your house. Begone, away.
All will be naught else.

SECOND SENATOR.
Get you gone.

CORIOLANUS.
Stand fast!
We have as many friends as enemies.

MENENIUS.
Shall it be put to that?

FIRST SENATOR.
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.

MENENIUS.
For ’tis a sore upon us
You cannot tent yourself. Begone, beseech you.

COMINIUS.
Come, sir, along with us.

CORIOLANUS.
I would they were barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome littered, not Romans, as they are not,
Though calved i’ th’ porch o’ th’ Capitol.

MENENIUS.
Begone!
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue.
One time will owe another.

CORIOLANUS.
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.

MENENIUS.
I could myself
Take up a brace o’ th’ best of them, yea, the two tribunes.

COMINIUS.
But now ’tis odds beyond arithmetic,
And manhood is called foolery when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return, whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters, and o’erbear
What they are used to bear?

MENENIUS.
Pray you, begone.
I’ll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little. This must be patched
With cloth of any colour.

COMINIUS.
Nay, come away.

[_Exeunt Coriolanus and Cominius._]

PATRICIAN.
This man has marred his fortune.

MENENIUS.
His nature is too noble for the world.
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident
Or Jove for’s power to thunder. His heart’s his mouth;
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent,
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.

[_A noise within._]

Here’s goodly work.

PATRICIAN.
I would they were abed!

MENENIUS.
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance,
Could he not speak ’em fair?

Enter Brutus and Sicinius with the rabble again.

SICINIUS.
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?

MENENIUS.
You worthy tribunes—

SICINIUS.
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands. He hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at naught.

FIRST CITIZEN.
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people’s mouths,
And we their hands.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
He shall, sure on’t.

MENENIUS.
Sir, sir—

SICINIUS.
Peace!

MENENIUS.
Do not cry havoc where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

SICINIUS.
Sir, how comes’t that you
Have holp to make this rescue?

MENENIUS.
Hear me speak.
As I do know the Consul’s worthiness,
So can I name his faults.

SICINIUS.
Consul? What consul?

MENENIUS.
The consul Coriolanus.

BRUTUS.
He consul?

ALL PLEBEIANS.
No, no, no, no, no!

MENENIUS.
If, by the Tribunes’ leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.

SICINIUS.
Speak briefly then,
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor. To eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death. Therefore it is decreed
He dies tonight.

MENENIUS.
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enrolled
In Jove’s own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own.

SICINIUS.
He’s a disease that must be cut away.

MENENIUS.
O, he’s a limb that has but a disease—
Mortal to cut it off; to cure it easy.
What has he done to Rome that’s worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost—
Which I dare vouch is more than that he hath
By many an ounce—he dropt it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country
Were to us all, that do’t and suffer it
A brand to th’ end o’ th’ world.

SICINIUS.
This is clean cam.

BRUTUS.
Merely awry. When he did love his country,
It honoured him.

MENENIUS.
The service of the foot,
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

BRUTUS.
We’ll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.

MENENIUS.
One word more, one word!
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscanned swiftness, will too late,
Tie leaden pounds to’s heels. Proceed by process,
Lest parties—as he is beloved—break out
And sack great Rome with Romans.

BRUTUS.
If it were so—

SICINIUS.
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote! Ourselves resisted? Come.

MENENIUS.
Consider this: he has been bred i’ th’ wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill schooled
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I’ll go to him and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.

FIRST SENATOR.
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.

SICINIUS.
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people’s officer.—
Masters, lay down your weapons.

BRUTUS.
Go not home.

SICINIUS.
Meet on the marketplace. We’ll attend you there,
Where if you bring not Martius, we’ll proceed
In our first way.

MENENIUS.
I’ll bring him to you.
[_To Senators_.] Let me desire your company. He must come,
Or what is worst will follow.

FIRST SENATOR.
Pray you, let’s to him.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rome. A room in Coriolanus’s house

Enter Coriolanus with Nobles.

CORIOLANUS.
Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses’ heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.

FIRST PATRICIAN.
You do the nobler.

CORIOLANUS.
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.

Enter Volumnia.

I talk of you.
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.

VOLUMNIA.
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on
Before you had worn it out.

CORIOLANUS.
Let go.

VOLUMNIA.
You might have been enough the man you are
With striving less to be so. Lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions if
You had not showed them how ye were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.

CORIOLANUS.
Let them hang!

VOLUMNIA.
Ay, and burn too.

Enter Menenius with the Senators.

MENENIUS.
Come, come, you have been too rough, something too rough.
You must return and mend it.

FIRST SENATOR.
There’s no remedy,
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst and perish.

VOLUMNIA.
Pray be counselled.
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.

MENENIUS.
Well said, noble woman.
Before he should thus stoop to th’ herd—but that
The violent fit o’ th’ time craves it as physic
For the whole state—I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.

CORIOLANUS.
What must I do?

MENENIUS.
Return to th’ Tribunes.

CORIOLANUS.
Well, what then? What then?

MENENIUS.
Repent what you have spoke.

CORIOLANUS.
For them? I cannot do it to the gods.
Must I then do’t to them?

VOLUMNIA.
You are too absolute,
Though therein you can never be too noble
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say
Honour and policy, like unsevered friends,
I’ th’ war do grow together. Grant that, and tell me
In peace what each of them by th’ other lose
That they combine not there.

CORIOLANUS.
Tush, tush!

MENENIUS.
A good demand.

VOLUMNIA.
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?

CORIOLANUS.
Why force you this?

VOLUMNIA.
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To th’ people, not by your own instruction,
Nor by th’ matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour. I am in this
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon ’em
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

MENENIUS.
Noble lady!—
Come, go with us; speak fair. You may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

VOLUMNIA.
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it—here be with them—
Thy knee bussing the stones—for in such busines
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th’ ignorant
More learned than the ears—waving thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling. Or say to them
Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess
Were fit for thee to use, as they to claim,
In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.

MENENIUS.
This but done
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being asked, as free
As words to little purpose.

VOLUMNIA.
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled; although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower.

Enter Cominius.

Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS.
I have been i’ th’ marketplace; and, sir, ’tis fit
You make strong party or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence. All’s in anger.

MENENIUS.
Only fair speech.

COMINIUS.
I think ’twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.

VOLUMNIA.
He must, and will.—
Prithee, now, say you will, and go about it.

CORIOLANUS.
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce? Must I
With my base tongue give to my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do’t.
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Martius, they to dust should grind it
And throw’t against the wind. To th’ marketplace!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to th’ life.

COMINIUS.
Come, come, we’ll prompt you.

VOLUMNIA.
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.

CORIOLANUS.
Well, I must do’t.
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot’s spirit! My throat of war be turned,
Which choired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! The smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys’ tears take up
The glasses of my sight! A beggar’s tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my armed knees,
Who bowed but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not do’t,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And, by my body’s action, teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.

VOLUMNIA.
At thy choice, then.
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine; thou suck’dst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.

CORIOLANUS.
Pray, be content.
Mother, I am going to the marketplace.
Chide me no more. I’ll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife. I’ll return consul,
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I’ th’ way of flattery further.

VOLUMNIA.
Do your will.

[_Exit Volumnia._]

COMINIUS.
Away! The Tribunes do attend you. Arm yourself
To answer mildly, for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.

CORIOLANUS.
The word is “mildly.” Pray you, let us go.
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.

MENENIUS.
Ay, but mildly.

CORIOLANUS.
Well, mildly be it, then. Mildly.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Rome. The Forum

Enter Sicinius and Brutus.

BRUTUS.
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne’er distributed.

Enter an Aedile.

What, will he come?

AEDILE.
He’s coming.

BRUTUS.
How accompanied?

AEDILE.
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favoured him.

SICINIUS.
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured,
Set down by th’ poll?

AEDILE.
I have. ’Tis ready.

SICINIUS.
Have you collected them by tribes?

AEDILE.
I have.

SICINIUS.
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they hear me say “It shall be so
I’ th’ right and strength o’ th’ commons,” be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say “Fine,” cry “Fine,” if “Death,” cry “Death,”
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i’ th’ truth o’ th’ cause.

AEDILE.
I shall inform them.

BRUTUS.
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.

AEDILE.
Very well.

SICINIUS.
Make them be strong and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to give’t them.

BRUTUS.
Go about it.

[_Exit Aedile._]

Put him to choler straight. He hath been used
Ever to conquer and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chafed, he cannot
Be reined again to temperance; then he speaks
What’s in his heart; and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

Enter Coriolanus, Menenius and Cominius with other Senators.

SICINIUS.
Well, here he comes.

MENENIUS.
Calmly, I do beseech you.

CORIOLANUS.
Ay, as an ostler, that for th’ poorest piece
Will bear the knave by th’ volume.—Th’ honoured gods
Keep Rome in safety and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! Plant love among’s!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace
And not our streets with war!

FIRST SENATOR.
Amen, amen.

MENENIUS.
A noble wish.

Enter the Aedile with the Plebeians.

SICINIUS.
Draw near, ye people.

AEDILE.
List to your tribunes. Audience! Peace, I say!

CORIOLANUS.
First, hear me speak.

BOTH TRIBUNES.
Well, say.—Peace, ho!

CORIOLANUS.
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?

SICINIUS.
I do demand
If you submit you to the people’s voices,
Allow their officers, and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.

CORIOLANUS.
I am content.

MENENIUS.
Lo, citizens, he says he is content.
The warlike service he has done, consider. Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i’ th’ holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS.
Scratches with briars,
Scars to move laughter only.

MENENIUS.
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier. Do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier
Rather than envy you.

COMINIUS.
Well, well, no more.

CORIOLANUS.
What is the matter,
That, being passed for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonoured that the very hour
You take it off again?

SICINIUS.
Answer to us.

CORIOLANUS.
Say then. ’Tis true, I ought so.

SICINIUS.
We charge you that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a traitor to the people.

CORIOLANUS.
How? Traitor?

MENENIUS.
Nay, temperately! Your promise.

CORIOLANUS.
The fires i’ th’ lowest hell fold in the people!
Call me their traitor? Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hands clutched as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
“Thou liest” unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.

SICINIUS.
Mark you this, people?

ALL PLEBEIANS.
To th’ rock, to th’ rock with him!

SICINIUS.
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge.
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him—even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves th’ extremest death.

BRUTUS.
But since he hath
Served well for Rome—

CORIOLANUS.
What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS.
I talk of that that know it.

CORIOLANUS.
You?

MENENIUS.
Is this the promise that you made your mother?

COMINIUS.
Know, I pray you—

CORIOLANUS.
I’ll know no further.
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my courage for what they can give,
To have’t with saying “Good morrow.”

SICINIUS.
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it, in the name o’ th’ people
And in the power of us the Tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. I’ th’ people’s name,
I say it shall be so.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
It shall be so, it shall be so! Let him away!
He’s banished, and it shall be so.

COMINIUS.
Hear me, my masters and my common friends—

SICINIUS.
He’s sentenced. No more hearing.

COMINIUS.
Let me speak.
I have been consul and can show for Rome
Her enemies’ marks upon me. I do love
My country’s good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife’s estimate, her womb’s increase,
And treasure of my loins. Then if I would
Speak that—

SICINIUS.
We know your drift. Speak what?

BRUTUS.
There’s no more to be said, but he is banished
As enemy to the people and his country.
It shall be so.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
It shall be so, it shall be so!

CORIOLANUS.
You common cry of curs, whose breath I hate
As reek o’ th’ rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you!
And here remain with your uncertainty;
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts;
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders, till at length
Your ignorance—which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes—deliver you,
As most abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising
For you the city, thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.

[_Exeunt Coriolanus, Cominius, with other Senators._]

AEDILE.
The people’s enemy is gone, is gone.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Our enemy is banished; he is gone. Hoo, hoo!

[_They all shout and throw up their caps._]

SICINIUS.
Go see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite.
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.

ALL PLEBEIANS.
Come, come, let’s see him out at gates! Come!
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Rome. Before a gate of the city


Enter Coriolanus, Volumnia, Virgilia, Menenius, Cominius with the young
nobility of Rome.

CORIOLANUS.
Come, leave your tears. A brief farewell. The beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? You were used
To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm, all boats alike
Showed mastership in floating; fortune’s blows
When most struck home, being gentle wounded craves
A noble cunning. You were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conned them.

VIRGILIA.
O heavens! O heavens!

CORIOLANUS.
Nay, I prithee, woman—

VOLUMNIA.
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS.
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lacked. Nay, mother,
Resume that spirit when you were wont to say
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours you’d have done and saved
Your husband so much sweat.—Cominius,
Droop not. Adieu.—Farewell, my wife, my mother.
I’ll do well yet.—Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man’s
And venomous to thine eyes.—My sometime general,
I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hard’ning spectacles. Tell these sad women
’Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes
As ’tis to laugh at ’em.—My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and—
Believe’t not lightly—though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon that his fen
Makes feared and talked of more than seen, your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.

VOLUMNIA.
My first son,
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile. Determine on some course
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i’ th’ way before thee.

VIRGILIA.
O the gods!

COMINIUS.
I’ll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee; so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O’er the vast world to seek a single man
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I’ th’ absence of the needer.

CORIOLANUS.
Fare ye well.
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars’ surfeits to go rove with one
That’s yet unbruised. Bring me but out at gate.—
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch. When I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.

MENENIUS.
That’s worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let’s not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I’d with thee every foot.

CORIOLANUS.
Give me thy hand.
Come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rome. A street near the gate

Enter two Tribunes, Sicinius, Brutus with the Aedile.

SICINIUS.
Bid them all home. He’s gone, and we’ll no further.
The nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

BRUTUS.
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.

SICINIUS.
Bid them home.
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.

BRUTUS.
Dismiss them home.

[_Exit Aedile._]

Here comes his mother.

Enter Volumnia, Virgilia and Menenius.

SICINIUS.
Let’s not meet her.

BRUTUS.
Why?

SICINIUS.
They say she’s mad.

BRUTUS.
They have ta’en note of us. Keep on your way.

VOLUMNIA.
O, you’re well met. The hoarded plague o’ th’ gods
Requite your love!

MENENIUS.
Peace, peace! Be not so loud.

VOLUMNIA.
If that I could for weeping, you should hear—
Nay, and you shall hear some. [_To Sicinius_.] Will you be gone?

VIRGILIA.
[_To Brutus_.] You shall stay too. I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.

SICINIUS.
Are you mankind?

VOLUMNIA.
Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS.
O blessed heavens!

VOLUMNIA.
More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
And for Rome’s good. I’ll tell thee what—yet go.
Nay, but thou shalt stay too. I would my son
Were in Arabia and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS.
What then?

VIRGILIA.
What then?
He’d make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA.
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

MENENIUS.
Come, come, peace.

SICINIUS.
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.

BRUTUS.
I would he had.

VOLUMNIA.
“I would he had?” ’Twas you incensed the rabble.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have Earth to know.

BRUTUS.
Pray, let’s go.

VOLUMNIA.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son—
This lady’s husband here, this, do you see?—
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS.
Well, well, we’ll leave you.

SICINIUS.
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?

[_Exeunt Tribunes._]

VOLUMNIA.
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses. Could I meet ’em
But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to’t.

MENENIUS.
You have told them home,
And, by my troth, you have cause. You’ll sup with me?

VOLUMNIA.
Anger’s my meat. I sup upon myself
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let’s go.
Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.

[_Exeunt._]

MENENIUS.
Fie, fie, fie!

[_Exit Menenius._]

SCENE III. A highway between Rome and Antium

Enter a Roman and a Volsce.

ROMAN.
I know you well, sir, and you know me. Your name I think is Adrian.

VOLSCE.
It is so, sir. Truly, I have forgot you.

ROMAN.
I am a Roman, and my services are, as you are, against ’em. Know you me
yet?

VOLSCE.
Nicanor, no?

ROMAN.
The same, sir.

VOLSCE.
You had more beard when I last saw you, but your favour is well
approved by your tongue. What’s the news in Rome? I have a note from
the Volscian state to find you out there. You have well saved me a
day’s journey.

ROMAN.
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections, the people against the
senators, patricians, and nobles.

VOLSCE.
Hath been? Is it ended, then? Our state thinks not so. They are in a
most warlike preparation and hope to come upon them in the heat of
their division.

ROMAN.
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame
again; for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the
people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever. This lies
glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking
out.

VOLSCE.
Coriolanus banished?

ROMAN.
Banished, sir.

VOLSCE.
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

ROMAN.
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said the fittest time
to corrupt a man’s wife is when she’s fallen out with her husband. Your
noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer
Coriolanus being now in no request of his country.

VOLSCE.
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate thus accidentally to encounter
you. You have ended my business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

ROMAN.
I shall between this and supper tell you most strange things from Rome,
all tending to the good of their adversaries. Have you an army ready,
say you?

VOLSCE.
A most royal one. The centurions and their charges, distinctly
billeted, already in th’ entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour’s
warning.

ROMAN.
I am joyful to hear of their readiness and am the man, I think, that
shall set them in present action. So, sir, heartily well met, and most
glad of your company.

VOLSCE.
You take my part from me, sir. I have the most cause to be glad of
yours.

ROMAN.
Well, let us go together.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Antium. Before Aufidius’s house

Enter Coriolanus in mean apparel, disguised and muffled.

CORIOLANUS.
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
’Tis I that made thy widows. Many an heir
Of these fair edifices ’fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop. Then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.

Enter a Citizen.

Save you, sir.

CITIZEN.
And you.

CORIOLANUS.
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies. Is he in Antium?

CITIZEN.
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.

CORIOLANUS.
Which is his house, beseech you?

CITIZEN.
This here before you.

CORIOLANUS.
Thank you, sir. Farewell.

[_Exit Citizen._]

O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise
Are still together, who twin, as ’twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity; so fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birthplace hate I, and my love’s upon
This enemy town. I’ll enter. If he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I’ll do his country service.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. Antium. A hall in Aufidius’s house

Music plays. Enter a Servingman.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Wine, wine, wine! What service is here? I think our fellows are asleep.

[_Exit._]

Enter another Servingman.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Where’s Cotus? My master calls for him. Cotus!

[_Exit._]

Enter Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS.
A goodly house. The feast smells well, but I
Appear not like a guest.

Enter the First Servingman.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
What would you have, friend? Whence are you? Here’s no place for you.
Pray go to the door.

[_Exit._]

CORIOLANUS.
I have deserved no better entertainment
In being Coriolanus.

Enter Second Servingman.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Whence are you, sir?—Has the porter his eyes in his head, that he gives
entrance to such companions?—Pray, get you out.

CORIOLANUS.
Away!

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Away? Get you away.

CORIOLANUS.
Now th’ art troublesome.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Are you so brave? I’ll have you talked with anon.

Enter Third  Servingman; the First, entering, meets him.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
What fellow’s this?

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
A strange one as ever I looked on. I cannot get him out o’ th’ house.
Prithee call my master to him.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid the house.

CORIOLANUS.
Let me but stand. I will not hurt your hearth.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
What are you?

CORIOLANUS.
A gentleman.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
A marv’llous poor one.

CORIOLANUS.
True, so I am.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station. Here’s no place
for you. Pray you, avoid. Come.

CORIOLANUS.
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

[_Pushes him away from him_.]

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
What, you will not?—Prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has
here.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
And I shall.

[_Exit._]

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Where dwell’st thou?

CORIOLANUS.
Under the canopy.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Under the canopy?

CORIOLANUS.
Ay.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Where’s that?

CORIOLANUS.
I’ th’ city of kites and crows.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
I’ th’ city of kites and crows? What an ass it is! Then thou dwell’st
with daws too?

CORIOLANUS.
No, I serve not thy master.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
How, sir? Do you meddle with my master?

CORIOLANUS.
Ay, ’tis an honester service than to meddle with thy mistress. Thou
prat’st and prat’st. Serve with thy trencher, hence!

[_Beats him away_.]

[_Exit Third Servingman._]

Enter Aufidius with the Second Servingman.

AUFIDIUS.
Where is this fellow?

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Here, sir. I’d have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords
within.

AUFIDIUS.
Whence com’st thou? What wouldst thou?
Thy name? Why speak’st not? Speak, man. What’s thy name?

CORIOLANUS.
[_Removing his muffler_.] If, Tullus,
Not yet thou know’st me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.

AUFIDIUS.
What is thy name?

CORIOLANUS.
A name unmusical to the Volscians’ ears
And harsh in sound to thine.

AUFIDIUS.
Say, what’s thy name?
Thou has a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in’t. Though thy tackle’s torn,
Thou show’st a noble vessel. What’s thy name?

CORIOLANUS.
Prepare thy brow to frown. Know’st thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS.
I know thee not. Thy name?

CORIOLANUS.
My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname Coriolanus. The painful service,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname, a good memory
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me. Only that name remains.
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest,
And suffered me by th’ voice of slaves to be
Whooped out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of hope—
Mistake me not—to save my life; for if
I had feared death, of all the men i’ th’ world
I would have ’voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight
And make my misery serve thy turn. So use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my cankered country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou dar’st not this, and that to prove more fortunes
Thou ’rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice,
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country’s breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

AUFIDIUS.
O Martius, Martius,
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things
And say ’tis true, I’d not believe them more
Than thee, all-noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, whereagainst
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarred the moon with splinters. Here I clip
The anvil of my sword and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee
We have a power on foot, and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn
Or lose mine arm for’t. Thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters ’twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other’s throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
Thou art thence banished, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy and, pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o’erbear ’t. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by th’ hands,
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.

CORIOLANUS.
You bless me, gods!

AUFIDIUS.
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
Th’ one half of my commission and set down—
As best thou art experienced, since thou know’st
Thy country’s strength and weakness—thine own ways,
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote
To fright them ere destroy. But come in.
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than e’er an enemy—
Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand. Most welcome!

[_Exeunt Coriolanus and Aufidius._]

Two of the Servingmen come forward.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Here’s a strange alteration!

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel, and yet
my mind gave me his clothes made a false report of him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
What an arm he has! He turned me about with his finger and his thumb as
one would set up a top.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in him. He had, sir, a
kind of face, methought—I cannot tell how to term it.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
He had so, looking as it were—Would I were hanged, but I thought there
was more in him than I could think.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
So did I, I’ll be sworn. He is simply the rarest man i’ th’ world.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
I think he is. But a greater soldier than he you wot one.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Who, my master?

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Nay, it’s no matter for that.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Worth six on him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Nay, not so neither. But I take him to be the greater soldier.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that. For the defence of a
town our general is excellent.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Ay, and for an assault too.

Enter the Third Servingman.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
O slaves, I can tell you news, news, you rascals!

FIRST and SECOND SERVINGMAN.
What, what, what? Let’s partake.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as lief be a condemned
man.

FIRST and SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Wherefore? Wherefore?

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Why, here’s he that was wont to thwack our general, Caius Martius.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Why do you say, “thwack our general”?

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
I do not say “thwack our general,” but he was always good enough for
him.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Come, we are fellows and friends. He was ever too hard for him; I have
heard him say so himself.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on’t, before
Corioles; he scotched him and notched him like a carbonado.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
An he had been cannibally given, he might have boiled and eaten him
too.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
But, more of thy news?

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Why, he is so made on here within as if he were son and heir to Mars;
set at upper end o’ th’ table; no question asked him by any of the
senators but they stand bald before him. Our general himself makes a
mistress of him, sanctifies himself with’s hand, and turns up the white
o’ th’ eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is, our general
is cut i’ th’ middle and but one half of what he was yesterday, for the
other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He’ll go,
he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th’ ears. He will mow all
down before him and leave his passage polled.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
And he’s as like to do’t as any man I can imagine.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Do’t? He will do’t! For look you, sir, he has as many friends as
enemies, which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show
themselves, as we term it, his friends whilest he’s in directitude.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Directitude? What’s that?

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, and the man in blood,
they will out of their burrows like coneys after rain, and revel all
with him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
But when goes this forward?

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Tomorrow, today, presently. You shall have the drum struck up this
afternoon. ’Tis as it were parcel of their feast, and to be executed
ere they wipe their lips.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Why then, we shall have a stirring world again. This peace is nothing
but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Let me have war, say I. It exceeds peace as far as day does night. It’s
sprightly walking, audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy,
lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more bastard
children than war’s a destroyer of men.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
’Tis so, and as war in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it
cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
Reason: because they then less need one another. The wars for my money!
I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volscians. They are rising; they are
rising.

ALL.
In, in, in, in!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Rome. A public place

Enter the two Tribunes. Sicinius and Brutus.

SICINIUS.
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
His remedies are tame—the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by’t, behold
Dissentious numbers pest’ring streets than see
Our tradesmen singing in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS.
We stood to’t in good time.

Enter Menenius.

Is this Menenius?

SICINIUS.
’Tis he, ’tis he. O, he is grown most kind
Of late.—Hail, sir!

MENENIUS.
Hail to you both.

SICINIUS.
Your Coriolanus is not much missed
But with his friends. The commonwealth doth stand,
And so would do were he more angry at it.

MENENIUS.
All’s well, and might have been much better if
He could have temporized.

SICINIUS.
Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS.
Nay, I hear nothing;
His mother and his wife hear nothing from him.

Enter three or four Citizens.

ALL CITIZENS.
The gods preserve you both!

SICINIUS.
Good e’en, our neighbours.

BRUTUS.
Good e’en to you all, good e’en to you all.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
Are bound to pray for you both.

SICINIUS.
Live and thrive!

BRUTUS.
Farewell, kind neighbours. We wished Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.

CITIZENS.
Now the gods keep you!

BOTH TRIBUNES.
Farewell, farewell.

[_Exeunt Citizens._]

SICINIUS.
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets
Crying confusion.

BRUTUS.
Caius Martius was
A worthy officer i’ th’ war, but insolent,
O’ercome with pride, ambitious, past all thinking
Self-loving.

SICINIUS.
And affecting one sole throne, without assistance.

MENENIUS.
I think not so.

SICINIUS.
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

BRUTUS.
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

Enter an Aedile.

AEDILE.
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volsces with two several powers
Are entered in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before ’em.

MENENIUS.
’Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Martius’ banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inshelled when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

SICINIUS.
Come, what talk you of Martius?

BRUTUS.
Go see this rumourer whipped. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.

MENENIUS.
Cannot be?
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like hath been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

SICINIUS.
Tell not me.
I know this cannot be.

BRUTUS.
Not possible.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate House. Some news is coming
That turns their countenances.

SICINIUS.
’Tis this slave—
Go whip him ’fore the people’s eyes—his raising,
Nothing but his report.

MESSENGER.
Yes, worthy sir,
The slave’s report is seconded, and more,
More fearful, is delivered.

SICINIUS.
What more fearful?

MESSENGER.
It is spoke freely out of many mouths—
How probable I do not know—that Martius,
Joined with Aufidius, leads a power ’gainst Rome
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young’st and oldest thing.

SICINIUS.
This is most likely!

BRUTUS.
Raised only that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.

SICINIUS.
The very trick on ’t.

MENENIUS.
This is unlikely;
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violent’st contrariety.

Enter a Second Messenger.

SECOND MESSENGER.
You are sent for to the Senate.
A fearful army, led by Caius Martius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories, and have already
O’erborne their way, consumed with fire and took
What lay before them.

Enter Cominius.

COMINIUS.
O, you have made good work!

MENENIUS.
What news? What news?

COMINIUS.
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonoured to your noses—

MENENIUS.
What’s the news? What’s the news?

COMINIUS.
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger’s bore.

MENENIUS.
Pray now, your news?—
You have made fair work, I fear me.—Pray, your news?
If Martius should be joined with Volscians—

COMINIUS.
If?
He is their god; he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than Nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him
Against us brats with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies
Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS.
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men, you that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic eaters!

COMINIUS.
He’ll shake your Rome about your ears.

MENENIUS.
As Hercules did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work.

BRUTUS.
But is this true, sir?

COMINIUS.
Ay, and you’ll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant ignorance
And perish constant fools. Who is’t can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.

MENENIUS.
We are all undone unless
The noble man have mercy.

COMINIUS.
Who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do’t for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds. For his best friends, if they
Should say “Be good to Rome,” they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate
And therein showed like enemies.

MENENIUS.
’Tis true.
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say “Beseech you, cease.”—You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! You have crafted fair!

COMINIUS.
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome such as was never
S’ incapable of help.

TRIBUNES.
Say not we brought it.

MENENIUS.
How? Was it we? We loved him, but like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o’ th’ city.

COMINIUS.
But I fear
They’ll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer. Desperation
Is all the policy, strength, and defence
That Rome can make against them.

Enter a troop of Citizens.

MENENIUS.
Here comes the clusters.—
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome when you cast
Your stinking, greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus’ exile. Now he’s coming,
And not a hair upon a soldier’s head
Which will not prove a whip. As many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down
And pay you for your voices. ’Tis no matter.
If he could burn us all into one coal
We have deserved it.

ALL CITIZENS.
Faith, we hear fearful news.

FIRST CITIZEN.
For mine own part,
When I said banish him, I said ’twas pity.

SECOND CITIZEN.
And so did I.

THIRD CITIZEN.
And so did I. And, to say the truth, so did very many of us. That we
did we did for the best; and though we willingly consented to his
banishment, yet it was against our will.

COMINIUS.
You are goodly things, you voices!

MENENIUS.
You have made good work, you and your cry!—
Shall’s to the Capitol?

COMINIUS.
O, ay, what else?

[_Exeunt Cominius and Menenius._]

SICINIUS.
Go, masters, get you home. Be not dismayed.
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.

FIRST CITIZEN.
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let’s home. I ever said we were
i’ th’ wrong when we banished him.

SECOND CITIZEN.
So did we all. But, come, let’s home.

[_Exeunt Citizens._]

BRUTUS.
I do not like this news.

SICINIUS.
Nor I.

BRUTUS.
Let’s to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!

SICINIUS.
Pray let’s go.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. A camp at a short distance from Rome

Enter Aufidius with his Lieutenant.

AUFIDIUS.
Do they still fly to th’ Roman?

LIEUTENANT.
I do not know what witchcraft’s in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace ’fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are dark’ned in this action, sir,
Even by your own.

AUFIDIUS.
I cannot help it now,
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his nature
In that’s no changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

LIEUTENANT.
Yet I wish, sir—
I mean for your particular—you had not
Joined in commission with him, but either
Had borne the action of yourself or else
To him had left it solely.

AUFIDIUS.
I understand thee well, and be thou sure,
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems,
And so he thinks and is no less apparent
To th’ vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly,
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine
Whene’er we come to our account.

LIEUTENANT.
Sir, I beseech you, think you he’ll carry Rome?

AUFIDIUS.
All places yield to him ere he sits down,
And the nobility of Rome are his;
The Senators and Patricians love him too.
The Tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he’ll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First, he was
A noble servant to them, but he could not
Carry his honours even. Whether ’twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From th’ casque to th’ cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controlled the war; but one of these—
As he hath spices of them all—not all,
For I dare so far free him—made him feared,
So hated, and so banished. But he has a merit
To choke it in the utt’rance. So our virtues
Lie in th’ interpretation of the time,
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
T’ extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire, one nail one nail;
Rights by rights falter; strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, let’s away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor’st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Rome. A public place


Enter Menenius, Cominius, Sicinius, Brutus (the two Tribunes), with
others.

MENENIUS.
No, I’ll not go. You hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general, who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me father,
But what o’ that? Go you that banished him;
A mile before his tent, fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy. Nay, if he coyed
To hear Cominius speak, I’ll keep at home.

COMINIUS.
He would not seem to know me.

MENENIUS.
Do you hear?

COMINIUS.
Yet one time he did call me by my name.
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. “Coriolanus”
He would not answer to, forbade all names.
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name i’ th’ fire
Of burning Rome.

MENENIUS.
Why, so; you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have wracked Rome
To make coals cheap! A noble memory!

COMINIUS.
I minded him how royal ’twas to pardon
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punished.

MENENIUS.
Very well.
Could he say less?

COMINIUS.
I offered to awaken his regard
For’s private friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff. He said ’twas folly
For one poor grain or two to leave unburnt
And still to nose th’ offence.

MENENIUS.
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those! His mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains;
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
Above the moon. We must be burnt for you.

SICINIUS.
Nay, pray, be patient. If you refuse your aid
In this so-never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid’s with our distress. But sure, if you
Would be your country’s pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS.
No, I’ll not meddle.

SICINIUS.
Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS.
What should I do?

BRUTUS.
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Martius.

MENENIUS.
Well, and say that Martius
Return me, as Cominius is returned, unheard,
What then? But as a discontented friend,
Grief-shot with his unkindness? Say’t be so?

SICINIUS.
Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
As you intended well.

MENENIUS.
I’ll undertake’t.
I think he’ll hear me. Yet to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined.
The veins unfilled, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffed
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priestlike fasts. Therefore I’ll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I’ll set upon him.

BRUTUS.
You know the very road into his kindness
And cannot lose your way.

MENENIUS.
Good faith, I’ll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.

[_Exit._]

COMINIUS.
He’ll never hear him.

SICINIUS.
Not?

COMINIUS.
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as ’twould burn Rome; and his injury
The jailer to his pity. I kneeled before him;
’Twas very faintly he said “Rise”; dismissed me
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me; what he
Would not, bound with an oath to yield to his
Conditions. So that all hope is vain
Unless his noble mother and his wife,
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore let’s hence
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. An Advanced post of the Volscian camp before Rome.

Enter Menenius to the Watch, or Guard.

FIRST WATCH.
Stay! Whence are you?

SECOND WATCH.
Stand, and go back.

MENENIUS.
You guard like men; ’tis well. But by your leave,
I am an officer of state and come
To speak with Coriolanus.

FIRST WATCH.
From whence?

MENENIUS.
From Rome.

FIRST WATCH.
You may not pass; you must return. Our general
Will no more hear from thence.

SECOND WATCH.
You’ll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You’ll speak with Coriolanus.

MENENIUS.
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
My name hath touched your ears. It is Menenius.

FIRST WATCH.
Be it so; go back. The virtue of your name
Is not here passable.

MENENIUS.
I tell thee, fellow,
Thy general is my lover. I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His fame unparalleled happily amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends—
Of whom he’s chief—with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer. Nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
Have almost stamped the leasing. Therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

FIRST WATCH.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have
uttered words in your own, you should not pass here, no, though it were
as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS.
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the
party of your general.

SECOND WATCH.
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you have, I am one that,
telling true under him, must say you cannot pass. Therefore go back.

MENENIUS.
Has he dined, can’st thou tell? For I would not speak with him till
after dinner.

FIRST WATCH.
You are a Roman, are you?

MENENIUS.
I am, as thy general is.

FIRST WATCH.
Then you should hate Rome as he does. Can you, when you have pushed out
your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance given your enemy your shield, think to front his revenges
with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your
daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the intended fire your city
is ready to flame in with such weak breath as this? No, you are
deceived. Therefore back to Rome and prepare for your execution. You
are condemned. Our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.

MENENIUS.
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would use me with
estimation.

SECOND WATCH.
Come, my captain knows you not.

MENENIUS.
I mean thy general.

FIRST WATCH.
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go, lest I let forth your
half pint of blood. Back! That’s the utmost of your having. Back!

MENENIUS.
Nay, but fellow, fellow—

Enter Coriolanus with Aufidius.

CORIOLANUS.
What’s the matter?

MENENIUS.
Now, you companion, I’ll say an errand for you. You shall know now that
I am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack guardant cannot
office me from my son Coriolanus. Guess but by my entertainment with
him if thou stand’st not i’ th’ state of hanging or of some death more
long in spectatorship and crueller in suffering; behold now presently,
and swoon for what’s to come upon thee. [_to Coriolanus_.] The glorious
gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity and love thee
no worse than thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son! Thou art
preparing fire for us; look thee, here’s water to quench it. I was
hardly moved to come to thee; but being assured none but myself could
move thee, I have been blown out of your gates with sighs, and conjure
thee to pardon Rome and thy petitionary countrymen. The good gods
assuage thy wrath and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here, this,
who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.

CORIOLANUS.
Away!

MENENIUS.
How? Away?

CORIOLANUS.
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others. Though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore begone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake,

[_He gives Menenius a paper._]

And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak.—This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome; yet thou behold’st.

AUFIDIUS.
You keep a constant temper.

[_They exit._]

[_The Guard and Menenius remain._]

FIRST WATCH.
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

SECOND WATCH.
’Tis a spell, you see, of much power. You know the way home again.

FIRST WATCH.
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your Greatness back?

SECOND WATCH.
What cause do you think I have to swoon?

MENENIUS.
I neither care for th’ world nor your general. For such things as you,
I can scarce think there’s any, you’re so slight. He that hath a will
to die by himself fears it not from another. Let your general do his
worst. For you, be that you are, long; and your misery increase with
your age! I say to you, as I was said to, away!

[_Exit._]

FIRST WATCH.
A noble fellow, I warrant him.

SECOND WATCH.
The worthy fellow is our general. He is the rock, the oak not to be
wind-shaken.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus

Enter Coriolanus and Aufidius.

CORIOLANUS.
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to th’ Volscian lords how plainly
I have borne this business.

AUFIDIUS.
Only their ends
You have respected, stopped your ears against
The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS.
This last old man,
Whom with cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father,
Nay, godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him, for whose old love I have—
Though I showed sourly to him—once more offered
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept, to grace him only
That thought he could do more. A very little
I have yielded to. Fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to.

[_Shout within._]

Ha? What shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time ’tis made? I will not.

Enter Virgilia, Volumnia, Valeria, young Martius with attendants.

My wife comes foremost, then the honoured mold
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curtsy worth? Or those doves’ eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows,
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod; and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession which
Great Nature cries “Deny not!” Let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy, I’ll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself,
And knew no other kin.

VIRGILIA.
My lord and husband.

CORIOLANUS.
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

VIRGILIA.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS.
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
For that, “Forgive our Romans.”

[_They kiss._]

O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip
Hath virgined it e’er since. You gods! I prate
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, i’ th’ earth;

[_Kneels._]

Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.

VOLUMNIA.
O, stand up blest,

[_He rises_.]

Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint
I kneel before thee and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.

[_She kneels._]

CORIOLANUS.
What is this?
Your knees to me? To your corrected son?

[_He raises her up._]

Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars! Then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars ’gainst the fiery sun,
Murdering impossibility to make
What cannot be slight work.

VOLUMNIA.
Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

CORIOLANUS.
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That’s curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian’s temple!—Dear Valeria.

VOLUMNIA.
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by th’ interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS.
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i’ th’ wars
Like a great seamark standing every flaw
And saving those that eye thee.

VOLUMNIA.
[_To young Martius_.] Your knee, sirrah.

[_He kneels._]

CORIOLANUS.
That’s my brave boy!

VOLUMNIA.
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself
Are suitors to you.

[_Young Martius rises._]

CORIOLANUS.
I beseech you, peace;
Or, if you’d ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers or capitulate
Again with Rome’s mechanics. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
T’ allay my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.

VOLUMNIA.
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us anything;
For we have nothing else to ask but that
Which you deny already. Yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we’ll
Hear naught from Rome in private. Your request?

VOLUMNIA.
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,
Making the mother, wife, and child to see
The son, the husband, and the father tearing
His country’s bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity’s most capital. Thou barr’st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we—
Alas, how can we—for our country pray,
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? Alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win, for either thou
Must as a foreign recreant be led
With manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy country’s ruin
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children’s blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine. If I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread—
Trust to’t, thou shalt not—on thy mother’s womb
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA.
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy to keep your name
Living to time.

YOUNG MARTIUS.
He shall not tread on me.
I’ll run away till I am bigger, but then I’ll fight.

CORIOLANUS.
Not of a woman’s tenderness to be
Requires nor child nor woman’s face to see.—
I have sat too long.

[_He rises._]

VOLUMNIA.
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us
As poisonous of your honour. No, our suit
Is that you reconcile them, while the Volsces
May say “This mercy we have showed,” the Romans
“This we received,” and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry, “Be blessed
For making up this peace!” Thou know’st, great son,
The end of war’s uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with curses,
Whose chronicle thus writ: “The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroyed his country, and his name remains
To th’ ensuing age abhorred.” Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour
To imitate the graces of the gods,
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o’ th’ air
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think’st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs?—Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.—Speak thou, boy.
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons.—There’s no man in the world
More bound to’s mother, yet here he lets me prate
Like one i’ th’ stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Showed thy dear mother any courtesy
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request’s unjust
And spurn me back; but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee
That thou restrain’st from me the duty which
To a mother’s part belongs.—He turns away.—
Down, ladies! Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus ’longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down! An end.

[_They kneel._]

This is the last. So we will home to Rome
And die among our neighbours.—Nay, behold’s.
This boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny’t.—Come, let us go.

[_They rise._]

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,
His wife is in Corioles, and his child
Like him by chance.—Yet give us our dispatch.
I am hushed until our city be afire,
And then I’ll speak a little.

[_He holds her by the hand, silent._]

CORIOLANUS.
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother, O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome,
But, for your son—believe it, O, believe it!—
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come.—
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I’ll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? Or granted less, Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS.
I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS.
I dare be sworn you were.
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you’ll make, advise me. For my part,
I’ll not to Rome, I’ll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause.—O mother!—Wife!

[_He speaks with them aside._]

AUFIDIUS.
[_Aside_.] I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honour
At difference in thee. Out of that I’ll work
Myself a former fortune.

CORIOLANUS.
[_To the Women_.] Ay, by and by;
But we’ll drink together, and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have countersealed.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you. All the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Rome. A public place

Enter Menenius and Sicinius.

MENENIUS.
See you yond coign o’ the Capitol, yond cornerstone?

SICINIUS.
Why, what of that?

MENENIUS.
If it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there
is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his mother, may prevail
with him. But I say there is no hope in’t. Our throats are sentenced
and stay upon execution.

SICINIUS.
Is’t possible that so short a time can alter the condition of a man?

MENENIUS.
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly, yet your butterfly
was a grub. This Martius is grown from man to dragon. He has wings;
he’s more than a creeping thing.

SICINIUS.
He loved his mother dearly.

MENENIUS.
So did he me; and he no more remembers his mother now than an
eight-year-old horse. The tartness of his face sours ripe grapes. When
he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his
treading. He is able to pierce a corslet with his eye, talks like a
knell, and his hum is a battery. He sits in his state as a thing made
for Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with his bidding. He
wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.

SICINIUS.
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

MENENIUS.
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mother shall bring
from him. There is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male
tiger. That shall our poor city find, and all this is long of you.

SICINIUS.
The gods be good unto us.

MENENIUS.
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us. When we banished
him, we respected not them; and he returning to break our necks, they
respect not us.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Sir, if you’d save your life, fly to your house.
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They’ll give him death by inches.

Enter another Messenger.

SICINIUS.
What’s the news?

SECOND MESSENGER.
Good news, good news! The ladies have prevailed.
The Volscians are dislodged and Martius gone.
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not th’ expulsion of the Tarquins.

SICINIUS.
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? Is’t most certain?

SECOND MESSENGER.
As certain as I know the sun is fire.
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it?
Ne’er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
As the recomforted through th’ gates. Why, hark you!

[_Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together._]

The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes,
Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans
Make the sun dance. Hark you!

[_A shout within._]

MENENIUS.
This is good news.
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians
A city full; of tribunes such as you
A sea and land full. You have prayed well today.
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I’d not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!

[_Sound still with the shouts._]

SICINIUS.
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next, accept my
thankfulness.

SECOND MESSENGER.
Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.

SICINIUS.
They are near the city?

MESSENGER.
Almost at point to enter.

SICINIUS.
We’ll meet them, and help the joy.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Rome. A street near the gate

Enter two Senators, with Ladies (Volumnia, Virgilia, Valeria) passing
over the stage, with other Lords.

SENATOR.
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires. Strew flowers before them,
Unshout the noise that banished Martius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother.
Cry “Welcome, ladies, welcome!”

ALL.
Welcome, ladies, welcome!

[_A flourish with drums and trumpets._]

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Antium. A public place

Enter Tullus Aufidius with Attendants.

AUFIDIUS.
Go tell the lords o’ th’ city I am here.
Deliver them this paper.

[_He gives them a paper_.]

Having read it,
Bid them repair to th’ marketplace, where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons’ ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath entered and
Intends t’ appear before the people, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.

[_Exeunt Attendants._]

Enter three or four Conspirators of Aufidius’s faction.

Most welcome!

FIRST CONSPIRATOR.
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS.
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoisoned
And with his charity slain.

SECOND CONSPIRATOR.
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wished us parties, we’ll deliver you
Of your great danger.

AUFIDIUS.
Sir, I cannot tell.
We must proceed as we do find the people.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
The people will remain uncertain whilst
’Twixt you there’s difference, but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS.
I know it,
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned
Mine honour for his truth, who being so heightened,
He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and to this end,
He bowed his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable, and free.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping—

AUFIDIUS.
That I would have spoke of.
Being banished for’t, he came unto my hearth,
Presented to my knife his throat. I took him,
Made him joint servant with me, gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong; till at the last
I seemed his follower, not partner; and
He waged me with his countenance as if
I had been mercenary.

FIRST CONSPIRATOR.
So he did, my lord.
The army marvelled at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we looked
For no less spoil than glory—

AUFIDIUS.
There was it
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.
At a few drops of women’s rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action. Therefore shall he die,
And I’ll renew me in his fall. But, hark!

[_Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the people._]

FIRST CONSPIRATOR.
Your native town you entered like a post
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the air with noise.

SECOND CONSPIRATOR.
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
Therefore at your vantage,
Ere he express himself or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.

AUFIDIUS.
Say no more.
Here come the lords.

Enter the Lords of the city.

ALL LORDS.
You are most welcome home.

AUFIDIUS.
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

ALL LORDS.
We have.

FIRST LORD.
And grieve to hear’t.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines, but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding—this admits no excuse.

Enter Coriolanus marching with Drum and Colours, the Commoners being
with him.

AUFIDIUS.
He approaches. You shall hear him.

CORIOLANUS.
Hail, lords! I am returned your soldier,
No more infected with my country’s love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Doth more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to th’ Romans, and we here deliver,
Subscribed by th’ Consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o’ th’ Senate, what
We have compounded on.

[_He offers the lords a paper._]

AUFIDIUS.
Read it not, noble lords,
But tell the traitor in the highest degree
He hath abused your powers.

CORIOLANUS.
“Traitor?” How now?

AUFIDIUS.
Ay, traitor, Martius.

CORIOLANUS.
Martius?

AUFIDIUS.
Ay, Martius, Caius Martius. Dost thou think
I’ll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol’n name
Coriolanus, in Corioles?
You lords and heads o’ th’ state, perfidiously
He has betrayed your business and given up
For certain drops of salt your city Rome—
I say your city—to his wife and mother,
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o’ th’ war, but at his nurse’s tears
He whined and roared away your victory,
That pages blushed at him and men of heart
Looked wond’ring each at other.

CORIOLANUS.
Hear’st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS.
Name not the god, thou boy of tears.

CORIOLANUS.
Ha?

AUFIDIUS.
No more.

CORIOLANUS.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. “Boy”? O slave!—
Pardon me, lords, ’tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion—
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his grave—shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.

FIRST LORD.
Peace, both, and hear me speak.

CORIOLANUS.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces. Men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. “Boy”? False hound!
If you have writ your annals true, ’tis there,
That like an eagle in a dovecote, I
Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles,
Alone I did it. “Boy”!

AUFIDIUS.
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
’Fore your own eyes and ears?

ALL CONSPIRATORS.
Let him die for’t.

ALL PEOPLE
Tear him to pieces! Do it presently! He killed my son! My daughter! He
killed my cousin Marcus! He killed my father!

SECOND LORD.
Peace, ho! No outrage! Peace!
The man is noble, and his fame folds in
This orb o’ th’ Earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.

CORIOLANUS.
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword.

AUFIDIUS.
Insolent villain!

ALL CONSPIRATORS.
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!


[_Draw the Conspirators, and kills Martius, who falls. Aufidius stands
on him._]

LORDS.
Hold, hold, hold, hold!

AUFIDIUS.
My noble masters, hear me speak.

FIRST LORD.
O Tullus!

SECOND LORD.
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

THIRD LORD.
Tread not upon him.—Masters, all be quiet.—
Put up your swords.

AUFIDIUS.
My lords, when you shall know—as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot—the great danger
Which this man’s life did owe you, you’ll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honours
To call me to your senate, I’ll deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.

FIRST LORD.
Bear from hence his body,
And mourn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.

SECOND LORD.
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let’s make the best of it.

AUFIDIUS.
My rage is gone,
And I am struck with sorrow.—Take him up.
Help, three o’ th’ chiefest soldiers; I’ll be one.—
Beat thou the drum that it speak mournfully.—
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory.
Assist.

[_Exeunt, bearing the body of Martius. A dead march sounded._]




CYMBELINE




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Britain. The garden of Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. Britain. A public place.
Scene IV. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene V. Rome. Philario’s house.
Scene VI. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene VII. Britain. The palace.

ACT II
Scene I. Britain. Before Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene II. Britain. Imogen’s bedchamber in Cymbeline’s palace; a trunk
in one corner.
Scene III. Cymbeline’s palace. An ante-chamber adjoining Imogen’s
apartments.
Scene IV. Rome. Philario’s house.
Scene V. Rome. Another room in Philario’s house.

ACT III
Scene I. Britain. A hall in Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene II. Britain. Another room in Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene III. Wales. A mountainous country with a cave.
Scene IV. Wales, near Milford Haven.
Scene V. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene VI. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.
Scene VII. The same.
Scene VIII. Rome. A public place.

ACT IV
Scene I. Wales. Near the cave of Belarius.
Scene II. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.
Scene III. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.
Scene IV. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.

ACT V
Scene I. Britain. The Roman camp.
Scene II. Britain. A field of battle between the British and Roman
camps.
Scene III. Another part of the field.
Scene IV. Britain. A prison.
Scene V. Britain. Cymbeline’s tent.




Dramatis Personæ

CYMBELINE, King of Britain
CLOTEN, son to the Queen by a former husband
POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, a gentleman, husband to Imogen
BELARIUS, a banished lord, disguised under the name of Morgan
GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS, sons to Cymbeline, disguised under the names
of POLYDORE and CADWAL, supposed sons to Belarius
PHILARIO, Italian, friend to Posthumus
IACHIMO, Italian, friend to Philario
CAIUS LUCIUS, General of the Roman forces
PISANIO, servant to Posthumus
CORNELIUS, a physician
A SOOTHSAYER
A ROMAN CAPTAIN
TWO BRITISH CAPTAINS
A FRENCH GENTLEMAN, friend to Philario
TWO LORDS of Cymbeline’s court
TWO GENTLEMEN of the same
TWO GAOLERS

QUEEN, wife to Cymbeline
IMOGEN, daughter to Cymbeline by a former queen
HELEN, a lady attending on Imogen

APPARITIONS

Lords, Ladies, Roman Senators, Tribunes, a Dutch Gentleman, a Spanish
Gentleman, Musicians, Officers, Captains, Soldiers, Messengers, and
Attendants

SCENE: Britain; Italy.




ACT I

SCENE I. Britain. The garden of Cymbeline’s palace.


 Enter two Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
You do not meet a man but frowns; our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
Still seem as does the King’s.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
But what’s the matter?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
His daughter, and the heir of’s kingdom, whom
He purpos’d to his wife’s sole son—a widow
That late he married—hath referr’d herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman. She’s wedded;
Her husband banish’d; she imprison’d. All
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touch’d at very heart.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
None but the King?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
He that hath lost her too. So is the Queen,
That most desir’d the match. But not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the King’s looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
And why so?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
He that hath miss’d the Princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report; and he that hath her—
I mean that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banish’d—is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
You speak him far.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I do extend him, sir, within himself;
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
What’s his name and birth?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I cannot delve him to the root; his father
Was call’d Sicilius, who did join his honour
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius, whom
He serv’d with glory and admir’d success,
So gain’d the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who, in the wars o’ th’ time,
Died with their swords in hand; for which their father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being; and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman, our theme, deceas’d
As he was born. The King he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of; which he took,
As we do air, fast as ’twas minist’red,
And in’s spring became a harvest, liv’d in court—
Which rare it is to do—most prais’d, most lov’d,
A sample to the youngest; to th’ more mature
A glass that feated them; and to the graver
A child that guided dotards. To his mistress,
For whom he now is banish’d, her own price
Proclaims how she esteem’d him and his virtue;
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I honour him
Even out of your report. But pray you tell me,
Is she sole child to th’ King?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
His only child.
He had two sons—if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it—the eldest of them at three years old,
I’ th’ swathing clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stol’n; and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
How long is this ago?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Some twenty years.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
That a king’s children should be so convey’d,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them!

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Howsoe’er ’tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laugh’d at,
Yet is it true, sir.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I do well believe you.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
We must forbear; here comes the gentleman,
The Queen, and Princess.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Queen, Posthumus and Imogen.

QUEEN.
No, be assur’d you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-ey’d unto you. You’re my prisoner, but
Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win th’ offended King,
I will be known your advocate. Marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and ’twere good
You lean’d unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.

POSTHUMUS.
Please your Highness,
I will from hence today.

QUEEN.
You know the peril.
I’ll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barr’d affections, though the King
Hath charg’d you should not speak together.

 [_Exit._]

IMOGEN.
O dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
I something fear my father’s wrath, but nothing
(Always reserv’d my holy duty) what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone;
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.

POSTHUMUS.
My queen! my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyal’st husband that did e’er plight troth;
My residence in Rome at one Philario’s,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter; thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I’ll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.

 Enter Queen.

QUEEN.
Be brief, I pray you.
If the King come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure. [_Aside._] Yet I’ll move him
To walk this way. I never do him wrong
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends;
Pays dear for my offences.

 [_Exit._]

POSTHUMUS.
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!

IMOGEN.
Nay, stay a little.
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love:
This diamond was my mother’s; take it, heart;
But keep it till you woo another wife,
When Imogen is dead.

POSTHUMUS.
How, how? Another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death! Remain, remain thou here

 [_Puts on the ring._]

While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
I still win of you. For my sake wear this;
It is a manacle of love; I’ll place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.

 [_Puts a bracelet on her arm._]

IMOGEN.
O the gods!
When shall we see again?

 Enter Cymbeline and Lords.

POSTHUMUS.
Alack, the King!

CYMBELINE.
Thou basest thing, avoid; hence from my sight
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest. Away!
Thou’rt poison to my blood.

POSTHUMUS.
The gods protect you,
And bless the good remainders of the court!
I am gone.

 [_Exit._]

IMOGEN.
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.

CYMBELINE.
O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap’st
A year’s age on me!

IMOGEN.
I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation.
I am senseless of your wrath; a touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.

CYMBELINE.
Past grace? obedience?

IMOGEN.
Past hope, and in despair; that way past grace.

CYMBELINE.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!

IMOGEN.
O blessed that I might not! I chose an eagle,
And did avoid a puttock.

CYMBELINE.
Thou took’st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne
A seat for baseness.

IMOGEN.
No; I rather added
A lustre to it.

CYMBELINE.
O thou vile one!

IMOGEN.
Sir,
It is your fault that I have lov’d Posthumus.
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman; overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays.

CYMBELINE.
What, art thou mad?

IMOGEN.
Almost, sir. Heaven restore me! Would I were
A neat-herd’s daughter, and my Leonatus
Our neighbour shepherd’s son!

 Enter Queen.

CYMBELINE.
Thou foolish thing!
[_To the Queen._] They were again together. You have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.

QUEEN.
Beseech your patience. Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace!—Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some comfort
Out of your best advice.

CYMBELINE.
Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day and, being aged,
Die of this folly.

 [_Exit with Lords._]

 Enter Pisanio.

QUEEN.
Fie! you must give way.
Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?

PISANIO.
My lord your son drew on my master.

QUEEN.
Ha!
No harm, I trust, is done?

PISANIO.
There might have been,
But that my master rather play’d than fought,
And had no help of anger; they were parted
By gentlemen at hand.

QUEEN.
I am very glad on’t.

IMOGEN.
Your son’s my father’s friend; he takes his part
To draw upon an exile! O brave sir!
I would they were in Afric both together;
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back. Why came you from your master?

PISANIO.
On his command. He would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven; left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to,
When’t pleas’d you to employ me.

QUEEN.
This hath been
Your faithful servant. I dare lay mine honour
He will remain so.

PISANIO.
I humbly thank your Highness.

QUEEN.
Pray walk awhile.

IMOGEN.
About some half-hour hence,
Pray you speak with me.
You shall at least go see my lord aboard.
For this time leave me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Britain. A public place.

 Enter Cloten and two Lords.

FIRST LORD.
Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt; the violence of action hath
made you reek as a sacrifice. Where air comes out, air comes in;
there’s none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.

CLOTEN.
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] No, faith; not so much as his patience.

FIRST LORD.
Hurt him! His body’s a passable carcass if he be not hurt. It is a
throughfare for steel if it be not hurt.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] His steel was in debt; it went o’ th’ backside the town.

CLOTEN.
The villain would not stand me.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] No; but he fled forward still, toward your face.

FIRST LORD.
Stand you? You have land enough of your own; but he added to your
having, gave you some ground.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] As many inches as you have oceans.
Puppies!

CLOTEN.
I would they had not come between us.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] So would I, till you had measur’d how long a fool you were
upon the ground.

CLOTEN.
And that she should love this fellow, and refuse me!

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] If it be a sin to make a true election, she is damn’d.

FIRST LORD.
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain go not together;
she’s a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] She shines not upon fools, lest the reflection should hurt
her.

CLOTEN.
Come, I’ll to my chamber. Would there had been some hurt done!

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] I wish not so; unless it had been the fall of an ass, which
is no great hurt.

CLOTEN.
You’ll go with us?

FIRST LORD.
I’ll attend your lordship.

CLOTEN.
Nay, come, let’s go together.

SECOND LORD.
Well, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.

 Enter Imogen and Pisanio.

IMOGEN.
I would thou grew’st unto the shores o’ th’ haven,
And questioned’st every sail; if he should write,
And I not have it, ’twere a paper lost,
As offer’d mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee?

PISANIO.
It was: his queen, his queen!

IMOGEN.
Then wav’d his handkerchief?

PISANIO.
And kiss’d it, madam.

IMOGEN.
Senseless linen, happier therein than I!
And that was all?

PISANIO.
No, madam; for so long
As he could make me with his eye, or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of’s mind
Could best express how slow his soul sail’d on,
How swift his ship.

IMOGEN.
Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.

PISANIO.
Madam, so I did.

IMOGEN.
I would have broke mine eyestrings, crack’d them but
To look upon him, till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle;
Nay, followed him till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
Have turn’d mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him?

PISANIO.
Be assur’d, madam,
With his next vantage.

IMOGEN.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say. Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such; or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honour; or have charg’d him,
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
T’ encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.

 Enter a Lady.

LADY.
The Queen, madam,
Desires your Highness’ company.

IMOGEN.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch’d.
I will attend the Queen.

PISANIO.
Madam, I shall.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Rome. Philario’s house.

 Enter Philario, Iachimo, a Frenchman, a Dutchman and a Spaniard.

IACHIMO.
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain. He was then of a crescent
note, expected to prove so worthy as since he hath been allowed the
name of. But I could then have look’d on him without the help of
admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments had been tabled by
his side, and I to peruse him by items.

PHILARIO.
You speak of him when he was less furnish’d than now he is with that
which makes him both without and within.

FRENCHMAN.
I have seen him in France; we had very many there could behold the sun
with as firm eyes as he.

IACHIMO.
This matter of marrying his king’s daughter, wherein he must be weighed
rather by her value than his own, words him, I doubt not, a great deal
from the matter.

FRENCHMAN.
And then his banishment.

IACHIMO.
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce
under her colours are wonderfully to extend him, be it but to fortify
her judgement, which else an easy battery might lay flat, for taking a
beggar, without less quality. But how comes it he is to sojourn with
you? How creeps acquaintance?

PHILARIO.
His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I have been often
bound for no less than my life.

 Enter Posthumus.

Here comes the Briton. Let him be so entertained amongst you as suits
with gentlemen of your knowing to a stranger of his quality. I beseech
you all be better known to this gentleman, whom I commend to you as a
noble friend of mine. How worthy he is I will leave to appear
hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.

FRENCHMAN.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.

POSTHUMUS.
Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies, which I will be
ever to pay and yet pay still.

FRENCHMAN.
Sir, you o’errate my poor kindness. I was glad I did atone my
countryman and you; it had been pity you should have been put together
with so mortal a purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so
slight and trivial a nature.

POSTHUMUS.
By your pardon, sir. I was then a young traveller; rather shunn’d to go
even with what I heard than in my every action to be guided by others’
experiences; but upon my mended judgement (if I offend not to say it is
mended) my quarrel was not altogether slight.

FRENCHMAN.
Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, and by such two
that would by all likelihood have confounded one the other or have
fall’n both.

IACHIMO.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?

FRENCHMAN.
Safely, I think. ’Twas a contention in public, which may, without
contradiction, suffer the report. It was much like an argument that
fell out last night, where each of us fell in praise of our country
mistresses; this gentleman at that time vouching (and upon warrant of
bloody affirmation) his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste,
constant, qualified, and less attemptable, than any the rarest of our
ladies in France.

IACHIMO.
That lady is not now living, or this gentleman’s opinion, by this, worn
out.

POSTHUMUS.
She holds her virtue still, and I my mind.

IACHIMO.
You must not so far prefer her ’fore ours of Italy.

POSTHUMUS.
Being so far provok’d as I was in France, I would abate her nothing,
though I profess myself her adorer, not her friend.

IACHIMO.
As fair and as good—a kind of hand-in-hand comparison—had been
something too fair and too good for any lady in Britain. If she went
before others I have seen as that diamond of yours outlustres many I
have beheld, I could not but believe she excelled many; but I have not
seen the most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.

POSTHUMUS.
I prais’d her as I rated her. So do I my stone.

IACHIMO.
What do you esteem it at?

POSTHUMUS.
More than the world enjoys.

IACHIMO.
Either your unparagon’d mistress is dead, or she’s outpriz’d by a
trifle.

POSTHUMUS.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, if there were wealth
enough for the purchase or merit for the gift; the other is not a thing
for sale, and only the gift of the gods.

IACHIMO.
Which the gods have given you?

POSTHUMUS.
Which by their graces I will keep.

IACHIMO.
You may wear her in title yours; but you know strange fowl light upon
neighbouring ponds. Your ring may be stol’n too. So your brace of
unprizable estimations, the one is but frail and the other casual; a
cunning thief, or a that-way-accomplish’d courtier, would hazard the
winning both of first and last.

POSTHUMUS.
Your Italy contains none so accomplish’d a courtier to convince the
honour of my mistress, if in the holding or loss of that you term her
frail. I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves; notwithstanding, I
fear not my ring.

PHILARIO.
Let us leave here, gentlemen.

POSTHUMUS.
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I thank him, makes no
stranger of me; we are familiar at first.

IACHIMO.
With five times so much conversation I should get ground of your fair
mistress; make her go back even to the yielding, had I admittance and
opportunity to friend.

POSTHUMUS.
No, no.

IACHIMO.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your ring, which, in
my opinion, o’ervalues it something. But I make my wager rather against
your confidence than her reputation; and, to bar your offence herein
too, I durst attempt it against any lady in the world.

POSTHUMUS.
You are a great deal abus’d in too bold a persuasion, and I doubt not
you sustain what y’are worthy of by your attempt.

IACHIMO.
What’s that?

POSTHUMUS.
A repulse; though your attempt, as you call it, deserve more; a
punishment too.

PHILARIO.
Gentlemen, enough of this. It came in too suddenly; let it die as it
was born, and I pray you be better acquainted.

IACHIMO.
Would I had put my estate and my neighbour’s on th’ approbation of what
I have spoke!

POSTHUMUS.
What lady would you choose to assail?

IACHIMO.
Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I will lay you ten
thousand ducats to your ring that, commend me to the court where your
lady is, with no more advantage than the opportunity of a second
conference, and I will bring from thence that honour of hers which you
imagine so reserv’d.

POSTHUMUS.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it. My ring I hold dear as my
finger; ’tis part of it.

IACHIMO.
You are a friend, and therein the wiser. If you buy ladies’ flesh at a
million a dram, you cannot preserve it from tainting. But I see you
have some religion in you, that you fear.

POSTHUMUS.
This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a graver purpose, I hope.

IACHIMO.
I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo what’s spoken, I
swear.

POSTHUMUS.
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your return. Let there be
covenants drawn between’s. My mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness
of your unworthy thinking. I dare you to this match: here’s my ring.

PHILARIO.
I will have it no lay.

IACHIMO.
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no sufficient testimony that I
have enjoy’d the dearest bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand
ducats are yours; so is your diamond too. If I come off, and leave her
in such honour as you have trust in, she your jewel, this your jewel,
and my gold are yours: provided I have your commendation for my more
free entertainment.

POSTHUMUS.
I embrace these conditions; let us have articles betwixt us. Only, thus
far you shall answer: if you make your voyage upon her, and give me
directly to understand you have prevail’d, I am no further your enemy;
she is not worth our debate; if she remain unseduc’d, you not making it
appear otherwise, for your ill opinion and th’ assault you have made to
her chastity you shall answer me with your sword.

IACHIMO.
Your hand, a covenant! We will have these things set down by lawful
counsel, and straight away for Britain, lest the bargain should catch
cold and starve. I will fetch my gold and have our two wagers recorded.

POSTHUMUS.
Agreed.

 [_Exeunt Posthumus and Iachimo._]

FRENCHMAN.
Will this hold, think you?

PHILARIO.
Signior Iachimo will not from it. Pray let us follow ’em.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.

 Enter Queen, Ladies and Cornelius.

QUEEN.
Whiles yet the dew’s on ground, gather those flowers;
Make haste; who has the note of them?

LADY.
I, madam.

QUEEN.
Dispatch.

 [_Exeunt Ladies._]

Now, Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?

CORNELIUS.
Pleaseth your Highness, ay. Here they are, madam.

 [_Presenting a box._]

But I beseech your Grace, without offence,
(My conscience bids me ask) wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds
Which are the movers of a languishing death,
But, though slow, deadly?

QUEEN.
I wonder, Doctor,
Thou ask’st me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn’d me how
To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded
(Unless thou think’st me devilish) is’t not meet
That I did amplify my judgement in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging (but none human)
To try the vigour of them, and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.

CORNELIUS.
Your Highness
Shall from this practice but make hard your heart;
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.

QUEEN.
O, content thee.

 Enter Pisanio.

[_Aside._] Here comes a flattering rascal; upon him
Will I first work. He’s for his master,
An enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio!
Doctor, your service for this time is ended;
Take your own way.

CORNELIUS.
[_Aside._] I do suspect you, madam;
But you shall do no harm.

QUEEN.
[_To Pisanio._] Hark thee, a word.

CORNELIUS.
[_Aside._] I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange ling’ring poisons. I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
A drug of such damn’d nature. Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
Which first perchance she’ll prove on cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher; but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fool’d
With a most false effect; and I the truer
So to be false with her.

QUEEN.
No further service, Doctor,
Until I send for thee.

CORNELIUS.
I humbly take my leave.

 [_Exit._]

QUEEN.
Weeps she still, say’st thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench, and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work.
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
I’ll tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master; greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is. To shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A day’s work in him. What shalt thou expect
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends
So much as but to prop him?

 [_The Queen drops the box. Pisanio takes it up._]

Thou tak’st up
Thou know’st not what; but take it for thy labour.
It is a thing I made, which hath the King
Five times redeem’d from death. I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee take it;
It is an earnest of a further good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her; do’t as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on; but think
Thou hast thy mistress still; to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I’ll move the King
To any shape of thy preferment, such
As thou’lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words.

 [_Exit Pisanio._]

A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shak’d; the agent for his master,
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet; and which she after,
Except she bend her humour, shall be assur’d
To taste of too.

 Enter Pisanio and Ladies.

So, so. Well done, well done.
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses,
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio;
Think on my words.

 [_Exeunt Queen and Ladies._]

PISANIO.
And shall do.
But when to my good lord I prove untrue
I’ll choke myself: there’s all I’ll do for you.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VII. Britain. The palace.

 Enter Imogen alone.

IMOGEN.
A father cruel and a step-dame false;
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady
That hath her husband banish’d. O, that husband!
My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol’n,
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
Is the desire that’s glorious. Blessed be those,
How mean soe’er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!

 Enter Pisanio and Iachimo.

PISANIO.
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome
Comes from my lord with letters.

IACHIMO.
Change you, madam?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety,
And greets your Highness dearly.

 [_Presents a letter._]

IMOGEN.
Thanks, good sir.
You’re kindly welcome.

IACHIMO.
[_Aside._] All of her that is out of door most rich!
If she be furnish’d with a mind so rare,
She is alone th’ Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend!
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot!
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight;
Rather, directly fly.

IMOGEN.
[_Reads._] _He is one of the noblest note, to whose kindnesses I am
most infinitely tied. Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your
trust.
                    LEONATUS._

So far I read aloud;
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warm’d by th’ rest and takes it thankfully.
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you; and shall find it so
In all that I can do.

IACHIMO.
Thanks, fairest lady.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish ’twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinn’d stones
Upon the number’d beach, and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
’Twixt fair and foul?

IMOGEN.
What makes your admiration?

IACHIMO.
It cannot be i’ th’ eye, for apes and monkeys,
’Twixt two such shes, would chatter this way and
Contemn with mows the other; nor i’ th’ judgement,
For idiots in this case of favour would
Be wisely definite; nor i’ th’ appetite;
Sluttery, to such neat excellence oppos’d,
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allur’d to feed.

IMOGEN.
What is the matter, trow?

IACHIMO.
The cloyed will—
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both fill’d and running—ravening first the lamb,
Longs after for the garbage.

IMOGEN.
What, dear sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?

IACHIMO.
Thanks, madam; well. Beseech you, sir,
Desire my man’s abode where I did leave him.
He’s strange and peevish.

PISANIO.
I was going, sir,
To give him welcome.

 [_Exit._]

IMOGEN.
Continues well my lord? His health beseech you?

IACHIMO.
Well, madam.

IMOGEN.
Is he dispos’d to mirth? I hope he is.

IACHIMO.
Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome. He is call’d
The Briton reveller.

IMOGEN.
When he was here
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Not knowing why.

IACHIMO.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur that, it seems, much loves
A Gallian girl at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Briton
(Your lord, I mean) laughs from’s free lungs, cries “O,
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
By history, report, or his own proof,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will’s free hours languish for
Assured bondage?”

IMOGEN.
Will my lord say so?

IACHIMO.
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter.
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But heavens know
Some men are much to blame.

IMOGEN.
Not he, I hope.

IACHIMO.
Not he; but yet heaven’s bounty towards him might
Be us’d more thankfully. In himself, ’tis much;
In you, which I account his, beyond all talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.

IMOGEN.
What do you pity, sir?

IACHIMO.
Two creatures heartily.

IMOGEN.
Am I one, sir?
You look on me: what wreck discern you in me
Deserves your pity?

IACHIMO.
Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
I’ th’ dungeon by a snuff?

IMOGEN.
I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?

IACHIMO.
That others do,
I was about to say, enjoy your—But
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on’t.

IMOGEN.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me; pray you,
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do; for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born—discover to me
What both you spur and stop.

IACHIMO.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch, would force the feeler’s soul
To th’ oath of loyalty; this object, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here; should I, damn’d then,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood (falsehood as
With labour): then by-peeping in an eye
Base and illustrious as the smoky light
That’s fed with stinking tallow: it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.

IMOGEN.
My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain.

IACHIMO.
And himself. Not I
Inclin’d to this intelligence pronounce
The beggary of his change; but ’tis your graces
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.

IMOGEN.
Let me hear no more.

IACHIMO.
O dearest soul, your cause doth strike my heart
With pity that doth make me sick! A lady
So fair, and fasten’d to an empery,
Would make the great’st king double, to be partner’d
With tomboys hir’d with that self exhibition
Which your own coffers yield! with diseas’d ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature! Such boil’d stuff
As well might poison poison! Be reveng’d;
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.

IMOGEN.
Reveng’d?
How should I be reveng’d? If this be true,
(As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse) if it be true,
How should I be reveng’d?

IACHIMO.
Should he make me
Live like Diana’s priest betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.

IMOGEN.
What ho, Pisanio!

IACHIMO.
Let me my service tender on your lips.

IMOGEN.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek’st, as base as strange.
Thou wrong’st a gentleman who is as far
From thy report as thou from honour; and
Solicits here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio!
The King my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault. If he shall think it fit
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew, and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for, and a daughter who
He not respects at all. What ho, Pisanio!

IACHIMO.
O happy Leonatus! I may say
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assur’d credit. Blessed live you long,
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country call’d his! and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this to know if your affiance
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord
That which he is new o’er; and he is one
The truest manner’d, such a holy witch
That he enchants societies into him,
Half all men’s hearts are his.

IMOGEN.
You make amends.

IACHIMO.
He sits ’mongst men like a descended god:
He hath a kind of honour sets him off
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty Princess, that I have adventur’d
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honour’d with confirmation your great judgement
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err. The love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus; but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray your pardon.

IMOGEN.
All’s well, sir; take my pow’r i’ th’ court for yours.

IACHIMO.
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
T’ entreat your Grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns
Your lord; myself and other noble friends
Are partners in the business.

IMOGEN.
Pray what is’t?

IACHIMO.
Some dozen Romans of us, and your lord
(The best feather of our wing) have mingled sums
To buy a present for the Emperor;
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France. ’Tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form, their values great;
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage. May it please you
To take them in protection?

IMOGEN.
Willingly;
And pawn mine honour for their safety. Since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.

IACHIMO.
They are in a trunk,
Attended by my men. I will make bold
To send them to you only for this night;
I must aboard tomorrow.

IMOGEN.
O, no, no.

IACHIMO.
Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word
By length’ning my return. From Gallia
I cross’d the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your Grace.

IMOGEN.
I thank you for your pains.
But not away tomorrow!

IACHIMO.
O, I must, madam.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, do’t tonight.
I have outstood my time, which is material
To th’ tender of our present.

IMOGEN.
I will write.
Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept
And truly yielded you. You’re very welcome.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Britain. Before Cymbeline’s palace.


 Enter Cloten and the two Lords.

CLOTEN.
Was there ever man had such luck! When I kiss’d the jack, upon an
upcast to be hit away! I had a hundred pound on’t; and then a whoreson
jackanapes must take me up for swearing, as if I borrowed mine oaths of
him, and might not spend them at my pleasure.

FIRST LORD.
What got he by that? You have broke his pate with your bowl.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] If his wit had been like him that broke it, it would have
run all out.

CLOTEN.
When a gentleman is dispos’d to swear, it is not for any standers-by to
curtail his oaths. Ha?

SECOND LORD.
No, my lord; [_Aside._] nor crop the ears of them.

CLOTEN.
Whoreson dog! I gave him satisfaction. Would he had been one of my
rank!

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] To have smell’d like a fool.

CLOTEN.
I am not vex’d more at anything in th’ earth. A pox on’t! I had rather
not be so noble as I am; they dare not fight with me, because of the
Queen my mother. Every jackslave hath his bellyful of fighting, and I
must go up and down like a cock that nobody can match.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] You are cock and capon too; and you crow, cock, with your
comb on.

CLOTEN.
Sayest thou?

SECOND LORD.
It is not fit your lordship should undertake every companion that you
give offence to.

CLOTEN.
No, I know that; but it is fit I should commit offence to my inferiors.

SECOND LORD.
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.

CLOTEN.
Why, so I say.

FIRST LORD.
Did you hear of a stranger that’s come to court tonight?

CLOTEN.
A stranger, and I not known on’t?

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] He’s a strange fellow himself, and knows it not.

FIRST LORD.
There’s an Italian come, and, ’tis thought, one of Leonatus’ friends.

CLOTEN.
Leonatus? A banish’d rascal; and he’s another, whatsoever he be. Who
told you of this stranger?

FIRST LORD.
One of your lordship’s pages.

CLOTEN.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no derogation in’t?

SECOND LORD.
You cannot derogate, my lord.

CLOTEN.
Not easily, I think.

SECOND LORD.
[_Aside._] You are a fool granted; therefore your issues, being
foolish, do not derogate.

CLOTEN.
Come, I’ll go see this Italian. What I have lost today at bowls I’ll
win tonight of him. Come, go.

SECOND LORD.
I’ll attend your lordship.

 [_Exeunt Cloten and First Lord._]

That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! A woman that
Bears all down with her brain; and this her son
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur’st,
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern’d,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce he’d make! The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshak’d
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
T’ enjoy thy banish’d lord and this great land!

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Britain. Imogen’s bedchamber in Cymbeline’s palace; a trunk
in one corner.

 Enter Imogen in her bed, and a Lady attending.

IMOGEN.
Who’s there? My woman Helen?

LADY.
Please you, madam.

IMOGEN.
What hour is it?

LADY.
Almost midnight, madam.

IMOGEN.
I have read three hours then. Mine eyes are weak;
Fold down the leaf where I have left. To bed.
Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
And if thou canst awake by four o’ th’ clock,
I prithee call me. Sleep hath seiz’d me wholly.

 [_Exit Lady._]

To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech ye!

 [_Sleeps. Iachimo comes from the trunk._]

IACHIMO.
The crickets sing, and man’s o’er-labour’d sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes ere he waken’d
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becom’st thy bed! fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
But kiss; one kiss! Rubies unparagon’d,
How dearly they do’t! ’Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus. The flame o’ th’ taper
Bows toward her and would under-peep her lids
To see th’ enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows white and azure, lac’d
With blue of heaven’s own tinct. But my design
To note the chamber. I will write all down:
Such and such pictures; there the window; such
Th’ adornment of her bed; the arras, figures,
Why, such and such; and the contents o’ th’ story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her body
Above ten thousand meaner movables
Would testify, t’ enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her!
And be her sense but as a monument,
Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off;

 [_Taking off her bracelet._]

As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
’Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the conscience does within,
To th’ madding of her lord. On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I’ th’ bottom of a cowslip. Here’s a voucher
Stronger than ever law could make; this secret
Will force him think I have pick’d the lock and ta’en
The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down that’s riveted,
Screw’d to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf’s turn’d down
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough.
To th’ trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the raven’s eye! I lodge in fear;
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.

 [_Clock strikes._]

One, two, three. Time, time!

 [_Exit into the trunk._]

SCENE III. Cymbeline’s palace. An ante-chamber adjoining Imogen’s
apartments.

 Enter Cloten and Lords.

FIRST LORD.
Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most coldest that
ever turn’d up ace.

CLOTEN.
It would make any man cold to lose.

FIRST LORD.
But not every man patient after the noble temper of your lordship. You
are most hot and furious when you win.

CLOTEN.
Winning will put any man into courage. If I could get this foolish
Imogen, I should have gold enough. It’s almost morning, is’t not?

FIRST LORD.
Day, my lord.

CLOTEN.
I would this music would come. I am advised to give her music a
mornings; they say it will penetrate.

 Enter Musicians.

Come on, tune. If you can penetrate her with your fingering, so. We’ll
try with tongue too. If none will do, let her remain; but I’ll never
give o’er. First, a very excellent good-conceited thing; after, a
wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to it, and then let her
consider.

SONG


    Hark, hark! the lark at heaven’s gate sings,
        And Phœbus ’gins arise,
    His steeds to water at those springs
        On chalic’d flow’rs that lies;
    And winking Mary-buds begin
        To ope their golden eyes.
    With everything that pretty is,
        My lady sweet, arise;
            Arise, arise!

CLOTEN.
So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will consider your music the
better; if it do not, it is a vice in her ears which horsehairs and
calves’ guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot, can never amend.

 [_Exeunt Musicians._]

 Enter Cymbeline and Queen.

SECOND LORD.
Here comes the King.

CLOTEN.
I am glad I was up so late, for that’s the reason I was up so early. He
cannot choose but take this service I have done fatherly.—Good morrow
to your Majesty and to my gracious mother.

CYMBELINE.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?

CLOTEN.
I have assail’d her with musics, but she vouchsafes no notice.

CYMBELINE.
The exile of her minion is too new;
She hath not yet forgot him; some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on’t,
And then she’s yours.

QUEEN.
You are most bound to th’ King,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
To orderly solicits, and be friended
With aptness of the season; make denials
Increase your services; so seem as if
You were inspir’d to do those duties which
You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.

CLOTEN.
Senseless? Not so.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.

CYMBELINE.
A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that’s no fault of his. We must receive him
According to the honour of his sender;
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice. Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the Queen and us; we shall have need
T’ employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.

 [_Exeunt all but Cloten._]

CLOTEN.
If she be up, I’ll speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream. By your leave, ho!

 [_Knocks._]

I know her women are about her; what
If I do line one of their hands? ’Tis gold
Which buys admittance (oft it doth) yea, and makes
Diana’s rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to th’ stand o’ th’ stealer; and ’tis gold
Which makes the true man kill’d and saves the thief;
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man. What
Can it not do and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
By your leave.

 [_Knocks._]

 Enter a Lady.

LADY.
Who’s there that knocks?

CLOTEN.
A gentleman.

LADY.
No more?

CLOTEN.
Yes, and a gentlewoman’s son.

LADY.
That’s more
Than some whose tailors are as dear as yours
Can justly boast of. What’s your lordship’s pleasure?

CLOTEN.
Your lady’s person; is she ready?

LADY.
Ay,
To keep her chamber.

CLOTEN.
There is gold for you; sell me your good report.

LADY.
How? My good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good? The Princess!

 Enter Imogen.

CLOTEN.
Good morrow, fairest sister. Your sweet hand.

 [_Exit Lady._]

IMOGEN.
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble. The thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks,
And scarce can spare them.

CLOTEN.
Still I swear I love you.

IMOGEN.
If you but said so, ’twere as deep with me.
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.

CLOTEN.
This is no answer.

IMOGEN.
But that you shall not say I yield, being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you spare me. Faith,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness; one of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.

CLOTEN.
To leave you in your madness ’twere my sin;
I will not.

IMOGEN.
Fools are not mad folks.

CLOTEN.
Do you call me fool?

IMOGEN.
As I am mad, I do;
If you’ll be patient, I’ll no more be mad;
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady’s manners
By being so verbal; and learn now, for all,
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By th’ very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity
To accuse myself I hate you; which I had rather
You felt than make’t my boast.

CLOTEN.
You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
One bred of alms and foster’d with cold dishes,
With scraps o’ th’ court, it is no contract, none.
And though it be allowed in meaner parties
(Yet who than he more mean?) to knit their souls
(On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary) in self-figur’d knot,
Yet you are curb’d from that enlargement by
The consequence o’ th’ crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it with a base slave,
A hilding for a livery, a squire’s cloth,
A pantler; not so eminent!

IMOGEN.
Profane fellow!
Wert thou the son of Jupiter, and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom. Thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if ’twere made
Comparative for your virtues to be styl’d
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
For being preferr’d so well.

CLOTEN.
The south fog rot him!

IMOGEN.
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but nam’d of thee. His mean’st garment
That ever hath but clipp’d his body, is dearer
In my respect, than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!

 Enter Pisanio.

CLOTEN.
‘His garment’! Now the devil—

IMOGEN.
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.

CLOTEN.
‘His garment’!

IMOGEN.
I am sprited with a fool;
Frighted, and ang’red worse. Go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm. It was thy master’s; shrew me,
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king’s in Europe! I do think
I saw’t this morning; confident I am
Last night ’twas on mine arm; I kiss’d it.
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he.

PISANIO.
’Twill not be lost.

IMOGEN.
I hope so. Go and search.

 [_Exit Pisanio._]

CLOTEN.
You have abus’d me.
‘His meanest garment’!

IMOGEN.
Ay, I said so, sir.
If you will make ’t an action, call witness to ’t.

CLOTEN.
I will inform your father.

IMOGEN.
Your mother too.
She’s my good lady and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So I leave you, sir,
To th’ worst of discontent.

 [_Exit._]

CLOTEN.
I’ll be reveng’d.
‘His mean’st garment’! Well.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Rome. Philario’s house.

 Enter Posthumus and Philario.

POSTHUMUS.
Fear it not, sir; I would I were so sure
To win the King as I am bold her honour
Will remain hers.

PHILARIO.
What means do you make to him?

POSTHUMUS.
Not any; but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter’s state, and wish
That warmer days would come. In these fear’d hopes
I barely gratify your love; they failing,
I must die much your debtor.

PHILARIO.
Your very goodness and your company
O’erpays all I can do. By this your king
Hath heard of great Augustus. Caius Lucius
Will do’s commission throughly; and I think
He’ll grant the tribute, send th’ arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.

POSTHUMUS.
I do believe
Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more order’d than when Julius Cæsar
Smil’d at their lack of skill, but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.

 Enter Iachimo.

PHILARIO.
See! Iachimo!

POSTHUMUS.
The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
And winds of all the corners kiss’d your sails,
To make your vessel nimble.

PHILARIO.
Welcome, sir.

POSTHUMUS.
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return.

IACHIMO.
Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have look’d upon.

POSTHUMUS.
And therewithal the best; or let her beauty
Look through a casement to allure false hearts,
And be false with them.

IACHIMO.
Here are letters for you.

POSTHUMUS.
Their tenour good, I trust.

IACHIMO.
’Tis very like.

PHILARIO.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
When you were there?

IACHIMO.
He was expected then,
But not approach’d.

POSTHUMUS.
All is well yet.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont, or is’t not
Too dull for your good wearing?

IACHIMO.
If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
I’ll make a journey twice as far t’ enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain; for the ring is won.

POSTHUMUS.
The stone’s too hard to come by.

IACHIMO.
Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy.

POSTHUMUS.
Make not, sir,
Your loss your sport. I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.

IACHIMO.
Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honour,
Together with your ring; and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.

POSTHUMUS.
If you can make’t apparent
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure honour gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both
To who shall find them.

IACHIMO.
Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath; which I doubt not
You’ll give me leave to spare when you shall find
You need it not.

POSTHUMUS.
Proceed.

IACHIMO.
First, her bedchamber,
(Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching) it was hang’d
With tapestry of silk and silver; the story,
Proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman
And Cydnus swell’d above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride. A piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value; which I wonder’d
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
Since the true life on’t was—

POSTHUMUS.
This is true;
And this you might have heard of here, by me
Or by some other.

IACHIMO.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.

POSTHUMUS.
So they must,
Or do your honour injury.

IACHIMO.
The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimneypiece
Chaste Dian bathing. Never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves. The cutter
Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her,
Motion and breath left out.

POSTHUMUS.
This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.

IACHIMO.
The roof o’ th’ chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted; her andirons
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.

POSTHUMUS.
This is her honour!
Let it be granted you have seen all this, and praise
Be given to your remembrance; the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.

IACHIMO.
Then, if you can, [_Shows the bracelet_]
Be pale. I beg but leave to air this jewel. See!
And now ’tis up again. It must be married
To that your diamond; I’ll keep them.

POSTHUMUS.
Jove!
Once more let me behold it. Is it that
Which I left with her?

IACHIMO.
Sir (I thank her) that.
She stripp’d it from her arm; I see her yet;
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
And yet enrich’d it too. She gave it me, and said
She priz’d it once.

POSTHUMUS.
May be she pluck’d it off
To send it me.

IACHIMO.
She writes so to you, doth she?

POSTHUMUS.
O, no, no, no! ’tis true. Here, take this too;

 [_Gives the ring._]

It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on’t. Let there be no honour
Where there is beauty; truth where semblance; love
Where there’s another man. The vows of women
Of no more bondage be to where they are made
Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
O, above measure false!

PHILARIO.
Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again; ’tis not yet won.
It may be probable she lost it, or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted
Hath stol’n it from her?

POSTHUMUS.
Very true;
And so I hope he came by’t. Back my ring.
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
More evident than this; for this was stol’n.

IACHIMO.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm!

POSTHUMUS.
Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears.
’Tis true, nay, keep the ring, ’tis true. I am sure
She would not lose it. Her attendants are
All sworn and honourable:—they induc’d to steal it!
And by a stranger! No, he hath enjoy’d her.
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this: she hath bought the name of whore thus dearly.
There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell
Divide themselves between you!


PHILARIO.
Sir, be patient;
This is not strong enough to be believ’d
Of one persuaded well of.

POSTHUMUS.
Never talk on’t;
She hath been colted by him.

IACHIMO.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast
(Worthy the pressing) lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging. By my life,
I kiss’d it; and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?

POSTHUMUS.
Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.

IACHIMO.
Will you hear more?

POSTHUMUS.
Spare your arithmetic; never count the turns.
Once, and a million!

IACHIMO.
I’ll be sworn—

POSTHUMUS.
No swearing.
If you will swear you have not done’t, you lie;
And I will kill thee if thou dost deny
Thou’st made me cuckold.

IACHIMO.
I’ll deny nothing.

POSTHUMUS.
O that I had her here to tear her limb-meal!
I will go there and do’t, i’ th’ court, before
Her father. I’ll do something—

 [_Exit._]

PHILARIO.
Quite besides
The government of patience! You have won.
Let’s follow him and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.

IACHIMO.
With all my heart.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Rome. Another room in Philario’s house.

 Enter Posthumus.

POSTHUMUS.
Is there no way for men to be, but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father was I know not where
When I was stamp’d. Some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seem’d
The Dian of that time. So doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain’d,
And pray’d me oft forbearance; did it with
A pudency so rosy, the sweet view on’t
Might well have warm’d old Saturn; that I thought her
As chaste as unsunn’d snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was’t not?
Or less; at first? Perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acorn’d boar, a German one,
Cried “O!” and mounted; found no opposition
But what he look’d for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman’s part in me! For there’s no motion
That tends to vice in man but I affirm
It is the woman’s part. Be it lying, note it,
The woman’s; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that man may name, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all; but rather all;
For even to vice
They are not constant, but are changing still
One vice but of a minute old for one
Not half so old as that. I’ll write against them,
Detest them, curse them. Yet ’tis greater skill
In a true hate to pray they have their will:
The very devils cannot plague them better.

 [_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Britain. A hall in Cymbeline’s palace.


 Enter in state Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten and Lords at one door, and at
 another Caius Lucius and Attendants.

CYMBELINE.
Now say, what would Augustus Cæsar with us?

LUCIUS.
When Julius Cæsar, (whose remembrance yet
Lives in men’s eyes, and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever) was in this Britain,
And conquer’d it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,
Famous in Cæsar’s praises no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it, for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untender’d.

QUEEN.
And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.

CLOTEN.
There be many Cæsars ere such another Julius. Britain is a world by
itself, and we will nothing pay for wearing our own noses.

QUEEN.
That opportunity,
Which then they had to take from’s, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune’s park, ribb’d and pal’d in
With rocks unscaleable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies’ boats
But suck them up to th’ top-mast. A kind of conquest
Cæsar made here, but made not here his brag
Of ‘Came, and saw, and overcame.’ With shame
(The first that ever touch’d him) he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping
(Poor ignorant baubles!) on our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells mov’d upon their surges, crack’d
As easily ’gainst our rocks; for joy whereof
The fam’d Cassibelan, who was once at point
(O, giglot fortune!) to master Cæsar’s sword,
Made Lud’s Town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.

CLOTEN.
Come, there’s no more tribute to be paid. Our kingdom is stronger than
it was at that time; and, as I said, there is no moe such Cæsars. Other
of them may have crook’d noses; but to owe such straight arms, none.

CYMBELINE.
Son, let your mother end.

CLOTEN.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan. I do not say
I am one; but I have a hand. Why tribute? Why should we pay tribute? If
Cæsar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or put the moon in his
pocket, we will pay him tribute for light; else, sir, no more tribute,
pray you now.

CYMBELINE.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free. Cæsar’s ambition,
Which swell’d so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o’ th’ world, against all colour here
Did put the yoke upon’s; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be.

CLOTEN.
We do.

CYMBELINE.
Say then to Cæsar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordain’d our laws, whose use the sword of Cæsar
Hath too much mangled; whose repair and franchise
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
Though Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made our laws,
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown, and call’d
Himself a king.

LUCIUS.
I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Cæsar
(Cæsar, that hath moe kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers) thine enemy.
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Cæsar’s name pronounce I ’gainst thee; look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself.

CYMBELINE.
Thou art welcome, Caius.
Thy Cæsar knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him I gather’d honour,
Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent
Which not to read would show the Britons cold;
So Cæsar shall not find them.

LUCIUS.
Let proof speak.

CLOTEN.
His majesty bids you welcome. Make pastime with us a day or two, or
longer. If you seek us afterwards in other terms, you shall find us in
our salt-water girdle. If you beat us out of it, it is yours; if you
fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare the better for you; and
there’s an end.

LUCIUS.
So, sir.

CYMBELINE.
I know your master’s pleasure, and he mine;
All the remain is, welcome.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Britain. Another room in Cymbeline’s palace.

 Enter Pisanio reading of a letter.

PISANIO.
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monsters her accuse? Leonatus!
O master, what a strange infection
Is fall’n into thy ear! What false Italian
(As poisonous-tongu’d as handed) hath prevail’d
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She’s punish’d for her truth, and undergoes,
More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master,
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How? that I should murder her?
Upon the love, and truth, and vows, which I
Have made to thy command? I, her? Her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I
That I should seem to lack humanity
So much as this fact comes to?

 [_Reads._]

‘Do’t. The letter
That I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity.’ O damn’d paper,
Black as the ink that’s on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a fedary for this act, and look’st
So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.

 Enter Imogen.

I am ignorant in what I am commanded.

IMOGEN.
How now, Pisanio?

PISANIO.
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.

IMOGEN.
Who? thy lord? That is my lord, Leonatus?
O, learn’d indeed were that astronomer
That knew the stars as I his characters;
He’d lay the future open. You good gods,
Let what is here contain’d relish of love,
Of my lord’s health, of his content; yet not
That we two are asunder; let that grieve him!
Some griefs are med’cinable; that is one of them,
For it doth physic love: of his content,
All but in that. Good wax, thy leave. Blest be
You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike;
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupid’s tables. Good news, gods!

 [_Reads._]

_Justice and your father’s wrath, should he take me in his dominion,
could not be so cruel to me as you, O the dearest of creatures, would
even renew me with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria, at
Milford Haven. What your own love will out of this advise you, follow.
So he wishes you all happiness that remains loyal to his vow, and your
increasing in love.
                    LEONATUS POSTHUMUS._

O for a horse with wings! Hear’st thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford Haven. Read, and tell me
How far ’tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,
Who long’st like me to see thy lord, who long’st
(O, let me ’bate!) but not like me, yet long’st,
But in a fainter kind. O, not like me,
For mine’s beyond beyond: say, and speak thick,
(Love’s counsellor should fill the bores of hearing
To th’ smothering of the sense) how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by th’ way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
T’ inherit such a haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence; and for the gap
That we shall make in time from our hence-going
And our return, to excuse. But first, how get hence.
Why should excuse be born or ere begot?
We’ll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many score of miles may we well rid
’Twixt hour and hour?

PISANIO.
One score ’twixt sun and sun,
Madam, ’s enough for you, and too much too.

IMOGEN.
Why, one that rode to’s execution, man,
Could never go so slow. I have heard of riding wagers
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
That run i’ th’ clock’s behalf. But this is fool’ry.
Go bid my woman feign a sickness; say
She’ll home to her father; and provide me presently
A riding suit, no costlier than would fit
A franklin’s huswife.

PISANIO.
Madam, you’re best consider.

IMOGEN.
I see before me, man. Nor here, nor here,
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
Do as I bid thee. There’s no more to say.
Accessible is none but Milford way.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Wales. A mountainous country with a cave.

 Enter from the cave Belarius, Guiderius and Arviragus.

BELARIUS.
A goodly day not to keep house with such
Whose roof’s as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate
Instructs you how t’ adore the heavens, and bows you
To a morning’s holy office. The gates of monarchs
Are arch’d so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
We house i’ th’ rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.

GUIDERIUS.
Hail, heaven!

ARVIRAGUS.
Hail, heaven!

BELARIUS.
Now for our mountain sport. Up to yond hill,
Your legs are young; I’ll tread these flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off;
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
This service is not service so being done,
But being so allow’d. To apprehend thus
Draws us a profit from all things we see,
And often to our comfort shall we find
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
Than is the full-wing’d eagle. O, this life
Is nobler than attending for a check,
Richer than doing nothing for a robe,
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine,
Yet keeps his book uncross’d. No life to ours!

GUIDERIUS.
Out of your proof you speak. We, poor unfledg’d,
Have never wing’d from view o’ th’ nest, nor know not
What air’s from home. Haply this life is best,
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
That have a sharper known; well corresponding
With your stiff age. But unto us it is
A cell of ignorance, travelling abed,
A prison for a debtor that not dares
To stride a limit.

ARVIRAGUS.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse.
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.
Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage
We make a choir, as doth the prison’d bird,
And sing our bondage freely.

BELARIUS.
How you speak!
Did you but know the city’s usuries,
And felt them knowingly; the art o’ th’ court,
As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slipp’ry that
The fear’s as bad as falling; the toil o’ th’ war,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
I’ th’ name of fame and honour, which dies i’ th’ search,
And hath as oft a sland’rous epitaph
As record of fair act; nay, many times,
Doth ill deserve by doing well; what’s worse,
Must curtsy at the censure. O, boys, this story
The world may read in me; my body’s mark’d
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note. Cymbeline lov’d me;
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off. Then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night
A storm, or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.

GUIDERIUS.
Uncertain favour!

BELARIUS.
My fault being nothing, as I have told you oft,
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail’d
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans. So
Follow’d my banishment, and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world,
Where I have liv’d at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time. But up to th’ mountains!
This is not hunters’ language. He that strikes
The venison first shall be the lord o’ th’ feast;
To him the other two shall minister;
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater state. I’ll meet you in the valleys.

 [_Exeunt Guiderius and Arviragus._]

How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to th’ King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine; and though train’d up thus meanly
I’ th’ cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
In simple and low things to prince it much
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his father call’d Guiderius—Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story; say ‘Thus mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on’s neck’; even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more
His own conceiving. Hark, the game is rous’d!
O Cymbeline, heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me! Whereon,
At three and two years old, I stole these babes,
Thinking to bar thee of succession as
Thou refts me of my lands. Euriphile,
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave.
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call’d,
They take for natural father. The game is up.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Wales, near Milford Haven.

 Enter Pisanio and Imogen.

IMOGEN.
Thou told’st me, when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand. Ne’er long’d my mother so
To see me first as I have now. Pisanio! Man!
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From th’ inward of thee? One but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplex’d
Beyond self-explication. Put thyself
Into a haviour of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider senses. What’s the matter?
Why tender’st thou that paper to me with
A look untender? If’t be summer news,
Smile to’t before; if winterly, thou need’st
But keep that count’nance still. My husband’s hand?
That drug-damn’d Italy hath out-craftied him,
And he’s at some hard point. Speak, man; thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.

PISANIO.
Please you read,
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdain’d of fortune.

IMOGEN.
[_Reads._] _Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath play’d the strumpet in my bed,
the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak
surmises, but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain as I
expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio, must act for me, if thy
faith be not tainted with the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take
away her life; I shall give thee opportunity at Milford Haven; she hath
my letter for the purpose; where, if thou fear to strike, and to make
me certain it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour, and
equally to me disloyal._

PISANIO.
What shall I need to draw my sword? The paper
Hath cut her throat already. No, ’tis slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave,
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?

IMOGEN.
False to his bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry myself awake? That’s false to’s bed,
Is it?

PISANIO.
Alas, good lady!

IMOGEN.
I false! Thy conscience witness! Iachimo,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
Thou then look’dst like a villain; now, methinks,
Thy favour’s good enough. Some jay of Italy,
Whose mother was her painting, hath betray’d him.
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
And for I am richer than to hang by th’ walls
I must be ripp’d. To pieces with me! O,
Men’s vows are women’s traitors! All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villainy; not born where’t grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.

PISANIO.
Good madam, hear me.

IMOGEN.
True honest men being heard, like false Æneas,
Were, in his time, thought false; and Sinon’s weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men:
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjur’d
From thy great fail. Come, fellow, be thou honest;
Do thou thy master’s bidding; when thou seest him,
A little witness my obedience. Look!
I draw the sword myself; take it, and hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart.
Fear not; ’tis empty of all things but grief;
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding; strike.
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause,
But now thou seem’st a coward.

PISANIO.
Hence, vile instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand.

IMOGEN.
Why, I must die;
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master’s. Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand. Come, here’s my heart:
Something’s afore’t. Soft, soft! we’ll no defence,
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus
All turn’d to heresy? Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith, you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers; though those that are betray’d
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe. And thou, Posthumus,
That didst set up my disobedience ’gainst the King
My father, and make me put into contempt the suits
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage but
A strain of rareness; and I grieve myself
To think, when thou shalt be disedg’d by her
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Will then be pang’d by me. Prithee dispatch.
The lamb entreats the butcher. Where’s thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master’s bidding,
When I desire it too.

PISANIO.
O gracious lady,
Since I receiv’d command to do this busines
I have not slept one wink.

IMOGEN.
Do’t, and to bed then.

PISANIO.
I’ll wake mine eyeballs first.

IMOGEN.
Wherefore then
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abus’d
So many miles with a pretence? This place?
Mine action and thine own? our horses’ labour?
The time inviting thee? The perturb’d court,
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far
To be unbent when thou hast ta’en thy stand,
Th’ elected deer before thee?

PISANIO.
But to win time
To lose so bad employment, in the which
I have consider’d of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience.

IMOGEN.
Talk thy tongue weary, speak.
I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear,
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.

PISANIO.
Then, madam,
I thought you would not back again.

IMOGEN.
Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me.

PISANIO.
Not so, neither;
But if I were as wise as honest, then
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
But that my master is abus’d. Some villain,
Ay, and singular in his art, hath done you both
This cursed injury.

IMOGEN.
Some Roman courtezan!

PISANIO.
No, on my life!
I’ll give but notice you are dead, and send him
Some bloody sign of it, for ’tis commanded
I should do so. You shall be miss’d at court,
And that will well confirm it.

IMOGEN.
Why, good fellow,
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life what comfort, when I am
Dead to my husband?

PISANIO.
If you’ll back to th’ court—

IMOGEN.
No court, no father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me
As fearful as a siege.

PISANIO.
If not at court,
Then not in Britain must you bide.

IMOGEN.
Where then?
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
Are they not but in Britain? I’ th’ world’s volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in’t;
In a great pool a swan’s nest. Prithee think
There’s livers out of Britain.

PISANIO.
I am most glad
You think of other place. Th’ ambassador,
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford Haven
Tomorrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which t’ appear itself must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view; yea, happily, near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear
As truly as he moves.

IMOGEN.
O! for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on’t,
I would adventure.

PISANIO.
Well then, here’s the point:
You must forget to be a woman; change
Command into obedience; fear and niceness
(The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
Woman it pretty self) into a waggish courage;
Ready in gibes, quick-answer’d, saucy, and
As quarrelous as the weasel. Nay, you must
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
Exposing it (but, O, the harder heart!
Alack, no remedy) to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
Your laboursome and dainty trims wherein
You made great Juno angry.

IMOGEN.
Nay, be brief;
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.

PISANIO.
First, make yourself but like one.
Fore-thinking this, I have already fit
(’Tis in my cloak-bag) doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them. Would you, in their serving,
And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season, ’fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
Wherein you’re happy; which will make him know
If that his head have ear in music; doubtless
With joy he will embrace you; for he’s honourable,
And, doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me, rich; and I will never fail
Beginning nor supplyment.

IMOGEN.
Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with. Prithee away!
There’s more to be consider’d; but we’ll even
All that good time will give us. This attempt
I am soldier to, and will abide it with
A prince’s courage. Away, I prithee.

PISANIO.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being miss’d, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Here is a box; I had it from the Queen.
What’s in’t is precious. If you are sick at sea
Or stomach-qualm’d at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Direct you to the best!

IMOGEN.
Amen. I thank thee.

 [_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE V. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.

 Enter Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten, Lucius and Lords.

CYMBELINE.
Thus far, and so farewell.

LUCIUS.
Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote; I must from hence,
And am right sorry that I must report ye
My master’s enemy.

CYMBELINE.
Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
Appear unkinglike.

LUCIUS.
So, sir. I desire of you
A conduct overland to Milford Haven.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you!

CYMBELINE.
My lords, you are appointed for that office;
The due of honour in no point omit.
So farewell, noble Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Your hand, my lord.

CLOTEN.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy.

LUCIUS.
Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.

CYMBELINE.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have cross’d the Severn. Happiness!

 [_Exeunt Lucius and Lords._]

QUEEN.
He goes hence frowning; but it honours us
That we have given him cause.

CLOTEN.
’Tis all the better;
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.

CYMBELINE.
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness.
The pow’rs that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.

QUEEN.
’Tis not sleepy business,
But must be look’d to speedily and strongly.

CYMBELINE.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appear’d
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender’d
The duty of the day. She looks us like
A thing more made of malice than of duty;
We have noted it. Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

QUEEN.
Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retir’d
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
’Tis time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her; she’s a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes,
And strokes death to her.

 Enter Attendant.

CYMBELINE.
Where is she, sir? How
Can her contempt be answer’d?

ATTENDANT.
Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all lock’d, and there’s no answer
That will be given to th’ loud of noise we make.

QUEEN.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She pray’d me to excuse her keeping close;
Whereto constrain’d by her infirmity
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer. This
She wish’d me to make known; but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.

CYMBELINE.
Her doors lock’d?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
Prove false!

 [_Exit._]

QUEEN.
Son, I say, follow the King.

CLOTEN.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
I have not seen these two days.

QUEEN.
Go, look after.

 [_Exit Cloten._]

Pisanio, thou that stand’st so for Posthumus!
He hath a drug of mine. I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that; for he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seiz’d her;
Or, wing’d with fervour of her love, she’s flown
To her desir’d Posthumus. Gone she is
To death or to dishonour, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British crown.

 Enter Cloten.

How now, my son?

CLOTEN.
’Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the King. He rages; none
Dare come about him.

QUEEN.
All the better. May
This night forestall him of the coming day!

 [_Exit._]

CLOTEN.
I love and hate her; for she’s fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman. From every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all. I love her therefore; but
Disdaining me and throwing favours on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgement
That what’s else rare is chok’d; and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
To be reveng’d upon her. For when fools
Shall—

 Enter Pisanio.

Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither. Ah, you precious pandar! Villain,
Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.

PISANIO.
O good my lord!

CLOTEN.
Where is thy lady? or, by Jupiter—
I will not ask again. Close villain,
I’ll have this secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.

PISANIO.
Alas, my lord,
How can she be with him? When was she miss’d?
He is in Rome.

CLOTEN.
Where is she, sir? Come nearer.
No farther halting! Satisfy me home
What is become of her.

PISANIO.
O my all-worthy lord!

CLOTEN.
All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word. No more of ‘worthy lord’!
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.

PISANIO.
Then, sir,
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.

 [_Presenting a letter._]

CLOTEN.
Let’s see’t. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus’ throne.

PISANIO.
[_Aside._] Or this or perish.
She’s far enough; and what he learns by this
May prove his travel, not her danger.

CLOTEN.
Humh!

PISANIO.
[_Aside._] I’ll write to my lord she’s dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!

CLOTEN.
Sirrah, is this letter true?

PISANIO.
Sir, as I think.

CLOTEN.
It is Posthumus’ hand; I know’t. Sirrah, if thou wouldst not be a
villain, but do me true service, undergo those employments wherein I
should have cause to use thee with a serious industry—that is, what
villainy soe’er I bid thee do, to perform it directly and truly—I would
think thee an honest man; thou shouldst neither want my means for thy
relief nor my voice for thy preferment.

PISANIO.
Well, my good lord.

CLOTEN.
Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou hast stuck
to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not, in the
course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of mine. Wilt thou
serve me?

PISANIO.
Sir, I will.

CLOTEN.
Give me thy hand; here’s my purse. Hast any of thy late master’s
garments in thy possession?

PISANIO.
I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he wore when he took
leave of my lady and mistress.

CLOTEN.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither. Let it be thy
first service; go.

PISANIO.
I shall, my lord.

 [_Exit._]

CLOTEN.
Meet thee at Milford Haven! I forgot to ask him one thing; I’ll
remember’t anon. Even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee.
I would these garments were come. She said upon a time—the bitterness
of it I now belch from my heart—that she held the very garment of
Posthumus in more respect than my noble and natural person, together
with the adornment of my qualities. With that suit upon my back will I
ravish her; first kill him, and in her eyes. There shall she see my
valour, which will then be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground,
my speech of insultment ended on his dead body, and when my lust hath
dined—which, as I say, to vex her I will execute in the clothes that
she so prais’d—to the court I’ll knock her back, foot her home again.
She hath despis’d me rejoicingly, and I’ll be merry in my revenge.

 Enter Pisanio with the clothes.

Be those the garments?

PISANIO.
Ay, my noble lord.

CLOTEN.
How long is’t since she went to Milford Haven?

PISANIO.
She can scarce be there yet.

CLOTEN.
Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second thing that I have
commanded thee. The third is that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my
design. Be but duteous and true, preferment shall tender itself to
thee. My revenge is now at Milford, would I had wings to follow it!
Come, and be true.

 [_Exit._]

PISANIO.
Thou bid’st me to my loss; for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool’s speed
Be cross’d with slowness! Labour be his meed!

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VI. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.

 Enter Imogen alone, in boy’s clothes.

IMOGEN.
I see a man’s life is a tedious one.
I have tir’d myself, and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
When from the mountain-top Pisanio show’d thee,
Thou wast within a ken. O Jove! I think
Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean,
Where they should be reliev’d. Two beggars told me
I could not miss my way. Will poor folks lie,
That have afflictions on them, knowing ’tis
A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder,
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness
Is sorer than to lie for need; and falsehood
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord!
Thou art one o’ th’ false ones. Now I think on thee
My hunger’s gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
Here is a path to’t; ’tis some savage hold.
I were best not call; I dare not call. Yet famine,
Ere clean it o’erthrow nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty and peace breeds cowards; hardness ever
Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who’s here?
If anything that’s civil, speak; if savage,
Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I’ll enter.
Best draw my sword; and if mine enemy
But fear the sword, like me, he’ll scarcely look on’t.
Such a foe, good heavens!

 [_Exit into the cave._]

SCENE VII. The same.

 Enter Belarius, Guiderius and Arviragus.

BELARIUS.
You, Polydore, have prov’d best woodman and
Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I
Will play the cook and servant; ’tis our match.
The sweat of industry would dry and die
But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs
Will make what’s homely savoury; weariness
Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard. Now, peace be here,
Poor house, that keep’st thyself!

GUIDERIUS.
I am thoroughly weary.

ARVIRAGUS.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.

GUIDERIUS.
There is cold meat i’ th’ cave; we’ll browse on that
Whilst what we have kill’d be cook’d.

BELARIUS.
[_Looking into the cave._] Stay, come not in.
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.

GUIDERIUS.
What’s the matter, sir?

BELARIUS.
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
No elder than a boy!

 Enter Imogen.

IMOGEN.
Good masters, harm me not.
Before I enter’d here I call’d, and thought
To have begg’d or bought what I have took. Good troth,
I have stol’n nought; nor would not though I had found
Gold strew’d i’ th’ floor. Here’s money for my meat.
I would have left it on the board, so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted
With pray’rs for the provider.

GUIDERIUS.
Money, youth?

ARVIRAGUS.
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
As ’tis no better reckon’d but of those
Who worship dirty gods.

IMOGEN.
I see you’re angry.
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.

BELARIUS.
Whither bound?

IMOGEN.
To Milford Haven.

BELARIUS.
What’s your name?

IMOGEN.
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
Is bound for Italy; he embark’d at Milford;
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall’n in this offence.

BELARIUS.
Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encounter’d!
’Tis almost night; you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.

GUIDERIUS.
Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard but be your groom. In honesty
I bid for you as I’d buy.

ARVIRAGUS.
I’ll make’t my comfort
He is a man. I’ll love him as my brother;
And such a welcome as I’d give to him
After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome!
Be sprightly, for you fall ’mongst friends.

IMOGEN.
’Mongst friends,
If brothers. [_Aside._] Would it had been so that they
Had been my father’s sons! Then had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee, Posthumus.

BELARIUS.
He wrings at some distress.

GUIDERIUS.
Would I could free’t!

ARVIRAGUS.
Or I, whate’er it be,
What pain it cost, what danger! Gods!

BELARIUS.
[_Whispering._] Hark, boys.

IMOGEN.
[_Aside._] Great men,
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
Which their own conscience seal’d them, laying by
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
I’d change my sex to be companion with them,
Since Leonatus false.

BELARIUS.
It shall be so.
Boys, we’ll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in.
Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supp’d,
We’ll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
So far as thou wilt speak it.

GUIDERIUS.
Pray draw near.

ARVIRAGUS.
The night to th’ owl and morn to th’ lark less
welcome.

IMOGEN.
Thanks, sir.

ARVIRAGUS.
I pray draw near.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Rome. A public place.

 Enter two Roman Senators and Tribunes.

FIRST SENATOR.
This is the tenour of the Emperor’s writ:
That since the common men are now in action
’Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Full weak to undertake our wars against
The fall’n-off Britons, that we do incite
The gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius proconsul; and to you, the tribunes,
For this immediate levy, he commands
His absolute commission. Long live Cæsar!

TRIBUNE.
Is Lucius general of the forces?

SECOND SENATOR.
Ay.

TRIBUNE.
Remaining now in Gallia?

FIRST SENATOR.
With those legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be supplyant. The words of your commission
Will tie you to the numbers and the time
Of their dispatch.

TRIBUNE.
We will discharge our duty.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Wales. Near the cave of Belarius.


 Enter Cloten alone.

CLOTEN.
I am near to th’ place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapp’d
it truly. How fit his garments serve me! Why should his mistress, who
was made by him that made the tailor, not be fit too? The rather,
saving reverence of the word, for ’tis said a woman’s fitness comes by
fits. Therein I must play the workman. I dare speak it to myself, for
it is not vain-glory for a man and his glass to confer in his own
chamber; I mean, the lines of my body are as well drawn as his; no less
young, more strong, not beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the
advantage of the time, above him in birth, alike conversant in general
services, and more remarkable in single oppositions. Yet this
imperceiverant thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is!
Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon thy shoulders, shall
within this hour be off; thy mistress enforced; thy garments cut to
pieces before her face; and all this done, spurn her home to her
father, who may, haply, be a little angry for my so rough usage; but my
mother, having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my
commendations. My horse is tied up safe. Out, sword, and to a sore
purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand. This is the very description
of their meeting-place; and the fellow dares not deceive me.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.

 Enter from the cave, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus and Imogen.

BELARIUS.
[_To Imogen._] You are not well. Remain here in the cave;
We’ll come to you after hunting.

ARVIRAGUS.
[_To Imogen._] Brother, stay here.
Are we not brothers?

IMOGEN.
So man and man should be;
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.

GUIDERIUS.
Go you to hunting; I’ll abide with him.

IMOGEN.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick. So please you, leave me;
Stick to your journal course. The breach of custom
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort
To one not sociable. I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you trust me here.
I’ll rob none but myself; and let me die,
Stealing so poorly.

GUIDERIUS.
I love thee; I have spoke it.
How much the quantity, the weight as much
As I do love my father.

BELARIUS.
What? how? how?

ARVIRAGUS.
If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
In my good brother’s fault. I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say
Love’s reason’s without reason. The bier at door,
And a demand who is’t shall die, I’d say
‘My father, not this youth.’

BELARIUS.
[_Aside._] O noble strain!
O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness!
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base.
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
I’m not their father; yet who this should be
Doth miracle itself, lov’d before me.—
’Tis the ninth hour o’ th’ morn.

ARVIRAGUS.
Brother, farewell.

IMOGEN.
I wish ye sport.

ARVIRAGUS.
Your health. [_To Belarius._] So please you, sir.

IMOGEN.
[_Aside._] These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies I
have heard!
Our courtiers say all’s savage but at court.
Experience, O, thou disprov’st report!
Th’ imperious seas breed monsters; for the dish,
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still; heart-sick. Pisanio,
I’ll now taste of thy drug.

 [_Swallows some._]

GUIDERIUS.
I could not stir him.
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.

ARVIRAGUS.
Thus did he answer me; yet said hereafter
I might know more.

BELARIUS.
To th’ field, to th’ field!
We’ll leave you for this time. Go in and rest.

ARVIRAGUS.
We’ll not be long away.

BELARIUS.
Pray be not sick,
For you must be our huswife.

IMOGEN.
Well, or ill,
I am bound to you.

BELARIUS.
And shalt be ever.

 [_Exit Imogen into the cave._]

This youth, howe’er distress’d, appears he hath had
Good ancestors.

ARVIRAGUS.
How angel-like he sings!

GUIDERIUS.
But his neat cookery! He cut our roots in characters,
And sauc’d our broths as Juno had been sick,
And he her dieter.

ARVIRAGUS.
Nobly he yokes
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
Was that it was for not being such a smile;
The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly
From so divine a temple to commix
With winds that sailors rail at.

GUIDERIUS.
I do note
That grief and patience, rooted in him both,
Mingle their spurs together.

ARVIRAGUS.
Grow patience!
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine!

BELARIUS.
It is great morning. Come, away! Who’s there?

 Enter Cloten.

CLOTEN.
I cannot find those runagates; that villain
Hath mock’d me. I am faint.

BELARIUS.
Those runagates?
Means he not us? I partly know him; ’tis
Cloten, the son o’ th’ Queen. I fear some ambush.
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know ’tis he. We are held as outlaws. Hence!

GUIDERIUS.
He is but one; you and my brother search
What companies are near. Pray you away;
Let me alone with him.

 [_Exeunt Belarius and Arviragus._]

CLOTEN.
Soft! What are you
That fly me thus? Some villain mountaineers?
I have heard of such. What slave art thou?

GUIDERIUS.
A thing
More slavish did I ne’er than answering
A slave without a knock.

CLOTEN.
Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain. Yield thee, thief.

GUIDERIUS.
To who? To thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine, a heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art;
Why I should yield to thee.

CLOTEN.
Thou villain base,
Know’st me not by my clothes?

GUIDERIUS.
No, nor thy tailor, rascal,
Who is thy grandfather; he made those clothes,
Which, as it seems, make thee.

CLOTEN.
Thou precious varlet,
My tailor made them not.

GUIDERIUS.
Hence, then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool;
I am loath to beat thee.

CLOTEN.
Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.

GUIDERIUS.
What’s thy name?

CLOTEN.
Cloten, thou villain.

GUIDERIUS.
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it. Were it Toad, or Adder, Spider,
’Twould move me sooner.

CLOTEN.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
I am son to th’ Queen.

GUIDERIUS.
I’m sorry for’t; not seeming
So worthy as thy birth.

CLOTEN.
Art not afeard?

GUIDERIUS.
Those that I reverence, those I fear—the wise;
At fools I laugh, not fear them.

CLOTEN.
Die the death.
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
I’ll follow those that even now fled hence,
And on the gates of Lud’s Town set your heads.
Yield, rustic mountaineer.

 [_Exeunt, fighting._]

 Enter Belarius and Arviragus.

BELARIUS.
No company’s abroad?

ARVIRAGUS.
None in the world; you did mistake him, sure.

BELARIUS.
I cannot tell; long is it since I saw him,
But time hath nothing blurr’d those lines of favour
Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice,
And burst of speaking, were as his. I am absolute
’Twas very Cloten.

ARVIRAGUS.
In this place we left them.
I wish my brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.

BELARIUS.
Being scarce made up,
I mean to man, he had not apprehension
Or roaring terrors; for defect of judgement
Is oft the cease of fear.

 Enter Guiderius with Cloten’s head.

But, see, thy brother.

GUIDERIUS.
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse;
There was no money in’t. Not Hercules
Could have knock’d out his brains, for he had none;
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
My head as I do his.

BELARIUS.
What hast thou done?

GUIDERIUS.
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten’s head,
Son to the Queen, after his own report;
Who call’d me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he’d take us in,
Displace our heads where, thank the gods, they grow,
And set them on Lud’s Town.

BELARIUS.
We are all undone.

GUIDERIUS.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Protects not us; then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law? What company
Discover you abroad?

BELARIUS.
No single soul
Can we set eye on, but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants. Though his humour
Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that
From one bad thing to worse, not frenzy, not
Absolute madness could so far have rav’d,
To bring him here alone. Although perhaps
It may be heard at court that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing,
As it is like him, might break out and swear
He’d fetch us in; yet is’t not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking
Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.

ARVIRAGUS.
Let ordinance
Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe’er,
My brother hath done well.

BELARIUS.
I had no mind
To hunt this day; the boy Fidele’s sickness
Did make my way long forth.

GUIDERIUS.
With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta’en
His head from him. I’ll throw’t into the creek
Behind our rock, and let it to the sea
And tell the fishes he’s the Queen’s son, Cloten.
That’s all I reck.

 [_Exit._]

BELARIUS.
I fear ’twill be reveng’d.
Would, Polydore, thou hadst not done’t! though valour
Becomes thee well enough.

ARVIRAGUS.
Would I had done’t,
So the revenge alone pursu’d me! Polydore,
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robb’d me of this deed. I would revenges,
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through,
And put us to our answer.

BELARIUS.
Well, ’tis done.
We’ll hunt no more today, nor seek for danger
Where there’s no profit. I prithee to our rock.
You and Fidele play the cooks; I’ll stay
Till hasty Polydore return, and bring him
To dinner presently.

ARVIRAGUS.
Poor sick Fidele!
I’ll willingly to him; to gain his colour
I’d let a parish of such Cloten’s blood,
And praise myself for charity.

 [_Exit._]

BELARIUS.
O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon’st
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchaf’d, as the rud’st wind
That by the top doth take the mountain pine
And make him stoop to th’ vale. ’Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearn’d, honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other, valour
That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been sow’d. Yet still it’s strange
What Cloten’s being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.

 Enter Guiderius.

GUIDERIUS.
Where’s my brother?
I have sent Cloten’s clotpoll down the stream,
In embassy to his mother; his body’s hostage
For his return.

 [_Solemn music._]

BELARIUS.
My ingenious instrument!
Hark, Polydore, it sounds. But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!

GUIDERIUS.
Is he at home?

BELARIUS.
He went hence even now.

GUIDERIUS.
What does he mean? Since death of my dear’st mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
Is Cadwal mad?

 Enter Arviragus with Imogen as dead, bearing her in his arms.

BELARIUS.
Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
Of what we blame him for!

ARVIRAGUS.
The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipp’d from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turn’d my leaping time into a crutch,
Than have seen this.

GUIDERIUS.
O sweetest, fairest lily!
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
As when thou grew’st thyself.

BELARIUS.
O melancholy!
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find
The ooze to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might’st easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing!
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy.
How found you him?

ARVIRAGUS.
Stark, as you see;
Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber,
Not as death’s dart, being laugh’d at; his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.

GUIDERIUS.
Where?

ARVIRAGUS.
O’ th’ floor;
His arms thus leagu’d. I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answer’d my steps too loud.

GUIDERIUS.
Why, he but sleeps.
If he be gone he’ll make his grave a bed;
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted,
And worms will not come to thee.

ARVIRAGUS.
With fairest flowers,
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
I’ll sweeten thy sad grave. Thou shalt not lack
The flower that’s like thy face, pale primrose; nor
The azur’d hare-bell, like thy veins; no, nor
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweet’ned not thy breath. The ruddock would,
With charitable bill (O bill, sore shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument!) bring thee all this;
Yea, and furr’d moss besides, when flow’rs are none,
To winter-ground thy corse—

GUIDERIUS.
Prithee have done,
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
And not protract with admiration what
Is now due debt. To th’ grave.

ARVIRAGUS.
Say, where shall’s lay him?

GUIDERIUS.
By good Euriphile, our mother.

ARVIRAGUS.
Be’t so;
And let us, Polydore, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th’ ground,
As once to our mother; use like note and words,
Save that Euriphile must be Fidele.

GUIDERIUS.
Cadwal,
I cannot sing. I’ll weep, and word it with thee;
For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse
Than priests and fanes that lie.

ARVIRAGUS.
We’ll speak it, then.

BELARIUS.
Great griefs, I see, med’cine the less, for Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a queen’s son, boys;
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that. Though mean and mighty rotting
Together have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place ’tween high and low. Our foe was princely;
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.

GUIDERIUS.
Pray you fetch him hither.
Thersites’ body is as good as Ajax’,
When neither are alive.

ARVIRAGUS.
If you’ll go fetch him,
We’ll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.

 [_Exit Belarius._]

GUIDERIUS.
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to th’ East;
My father hath a reason for’t.

ARVIRAGUS.
’Tis true.

GUIDERIUS.
Come on, then, and remove him.

ARVIRAGUS.
So. Begin.

SONG

GUIDERIUS.
_    Fear no more the heat o’ th’ sun,
        Nor the furious winter’s rages;
    Thou thy worldly task hast done,
        Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages.
    Golden lads and girls all must,
    As chimney-sweepers, come to dust._

ARVIRAGUS.
_    Fear no more the frown o’ th’ great;
        Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke.
    Care no more to clothe and eat;
        To thee the reed is as the oak.
    The sceptre, learning, physic, must
    All follow this and come to dust._

GUIDERIUS.
_    Fear no more the lightning flash._

ARVIRAGUS.
_        Nor th’ all-dreaded thunder-stone._

GUIDERIUS.
_    Fear not slander, censure rash;_

ARVIRAGUS.
_    Thou hast finish’d joy and moan._

BOTH.
_    All lovers young, all lovers must
    Consign to thee and come to dust._

GUIDERIUS.
_    No exorciser harm thee!_

ARVIRAGUS.
_    Nor no witchcraft charm thee!_

GUIDERIUS.
_    Ghost unlaid forbear thee!_

ARVIRAGUS.
_    Nothing ill come near thee!_

BOTH.
_    Quiet consummation have,
    And renowned be thy grave!_

 Enter Belarius with the body of Cloten.

GUIDERIUS.
We have done our obsequies. Come, lay him down.

BELARIUS.
Here’s a few flowers; but ’bout midnight, more.
The herbs that have on them cold dew o’ th’ night
Are strewings fit’st for graves. Upon their faces.
You were as flow’rs, now wither’d. Even so
These herblets shall which we upon you strew.
Come on, away. Apart upon our knees.
The ground that gave them first has them again.
Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.

 [_Exeunt all but Imogen._]

IMOGEN.
[_Awaking._] Yes, sir, to Milford Haven. Which is the way?
I thank you. By yond bush? Pray, how far thither?
’Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?
I have gone all night. Faith, I’ll lie down and sleep.
But, soft! no bedfellow. O gods and goddesses!

 [_Seeing the body._]

These flow’rs are like the pleasures of the world;
This bloody man, the care on’t. I hope I dream;
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper,
And cook to honest creatures. But ’tis not so;
’Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes. Our very eyes
Are sometimes, like our judgements, blind. Good faith,
I tremble still with fear; but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren’s eye, fear’d gods, a part of it!
The dream’s here still. Even when I wake it is
Without me, as within me; not imagin’d, felt.
A headless man? The garments of Posthumus?
I know the shape of’s leg; this is his hand,
His foot Mercurial, his Martial thigh,
The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face—
Murder in heaven! How! ’Tis gone. Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Conspir’d with that irregulous devil, Cloten,
Hath here cut off my lord. To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous! Damn’d Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters (damn’d Pisanio)
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the main-top. O Posthumus! alas,
Where is thy head? Where’s that? Ay me! where’s that?
Pisanio might have kill’d thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
’Tis he and Cloten; malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, ’tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murd’rous to th’ senses? That confirms it home.
This is Pisanio’s deed, and Cloten. O!
Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us. O, my lord, my lord!

 [_Falls fainting on the body._]

 Enter Lucius, Captains and a Soothsayer.

CAPTAIN.
To them the legions garrison’d in Gallia,
After your will, have cross’d the sea, attending
You here at Milford Haven; with your ships,
They are in readiness.

LUCIUS.
But what from Rome?

CAPTAIN.
The Senate hath stirr’d up the confiners
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits,
That promise noble service; and they come
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
Sienna’s brother.

LUCIUS.
When expect you them?

CAPTAIN.
With the next benefit o’ th’ wind.

LUCIUS.
This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be muster’d; bid the captains look to’t. Now, sir,
What have you dream’d of late of this war’s purpose?

SOOTHSAYER.
Last night the very gods show’d me a vision
(I fast and pray’d for their intelligence) thus:
I saw Jove’s bird, the Roman eagle, wing’d
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanish’d in the sunbeams; which portends,
Unless my sins abuse my divination,
Success to th’ Roman host.

LUCIUS.
Dream often so,
And never false. Soft, ho! what trunk is here
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
It was a worthy building. How? a page?
Or dead or sleeping on him? But dead, rather;
For nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
Let’s see the boy’s face.

CAPTAIN.
He’s alive, my lord.

LUCIUS.
He’ll then instruct us of this body. Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes; for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou mak’st thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
That, otherwise than noble nature did,
Hath alter’d that good picture? What’s thy interest
In this sad wreck? How came’t? Who is’t?
What art thou?

IMOGEN.
I am nothing; or if not,
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
A very valiant Briton and a good,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas!
There is no more such masters. I may wander
From east to occident; cry out for service;
Try many, all good; serve truly; never
Find such another master.

LUCIUS.
’Lack, good youth!
Thou mov’st no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding. Say his name, good friend.

IMOGEN.
Richard du Champ. [_Aside._] If I do lie, and do
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
They’ll pardon it.—Say you, sir?

LUCIUS.
Thy name?

IMOGEN.
Fidele, sir.

LUCIUS.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same;
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well master’d; but, be sure,
No less belov’d. The Roman Emperor’s letters,
Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner
Than thine own worth prefer thee. Go with me.

IMOGEN.
I’ll follow, sir. But first, an’t please the gods,
I’ll hide my master from the flies, as deep
As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha’ strew’d his grave,
And on it said a century of prayers,
Such as I can, twice o’er, I’ll weep and sigh;
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.

LUCIUS.
Ay, good youth;
And rather father thee than master thee.
My friends,
The boy hath taught us manly duties; let us
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
A grave. Come, arm him. Boy, he is preferr’d
By thee to us; and he shall be interr’d
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes.
Some falls are means the happier to arise.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Britain. Cymbeline’s palace.

 Enter Cymbeline, Lords, Pisanio and Attendants.

CYMBELINE.
Again! and bring me word how ’tis with her.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

A fever with the absence of her son;
A madness, of which her life’s in danger. Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
So needful for this present. It strikes me past
The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure and
Dost seem so ignorant, we’ll enforce it from thee
By a sharp torture.

PISANIO.
Sir, my life is yours;
I humbly set it at your will; but for my mistress,
I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your Highness,
Hold me your loyal servant.

LORD.
Good my liege,
The day that she was missing he was here.
I dare be bound he’s true and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will no doubt be found.

CYMBELINE.
The time is troublesome.
[_To Pisanio._] We’ll slip you for a season; but our jealousy
Does yet depend.

LORD.
So please your Majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen by the Senate sent.

CYMBELINE.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amaz’d with matter.

LORD.
Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of. Come more, for more you’re ready.
The want is but to put those pow’rs in motion
That long to move.

CYMBELINE.
I thank you. Let’s withdraw,
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us; but
We grieve at chances here. Away!

 [_Exeunt all but Pisanio._]

PISANIO.
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain. ’Tis strange.
Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betid to Cloten, but remain
Perplex’d in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o’ th’ King, or I’ll fall in them.
All other doubts, by time let them be clear’d:
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer’d.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.

 Enter Belarius, Guiderius and Arviragus.

GUIDERIUS.
The noise is round about us.

BELARIUS.
Let us from it.

ARVIRAGUS.
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?

GUIDERIUS.
Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
Must or for Britons slay us, or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
During their use, and slay us after.

BELARIUS.
Sons,
We’ll higher to the mountains; there secure us.
To the King’s party there’s no going. Newness
Of Cloten’s death (we being not known, not muster’d
Among the bands) may drive us to a render
Where we have liv’d, and so extort from’s that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death,
Drawn on with torture.

GUIDERIUS.
This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becoming you
Nor satisfying us.

ARVIRAGUS.
It is not likely
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quarter’d fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloy’d importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.

BELARIUS.
O, I am known
Of many in the army. Many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
From my remembrance. And, besides, the King
Hath not deserv’d my service nor your loves,
Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
The certainty of this hard life; aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your cradle promis’d,
But to be still hot summer’s tanlings and
The shrinking slaves of winter.

GUIDERIUS.
Than be so,
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to th’ army.
I and my brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so o’ergrown,
Cannot be questioned.

ARVIRAGUS.
By this sun that shines,
I’ll thither. What thing is’t that I never
Did see man die! scarce ever look’d on blood
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne’er wore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I am asham’d
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.

GUIDERIUS.
By heavens, I’ll go!
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
I’ll take the better care; but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
The hands of Romans!

ARVIRAGUS.
So say I. Amen.

BELARIUS.
No reason I, since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation, should reserve
My crack’d one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed too, lads, and there I’ll lie.
Lead, lead. [_Aside._] The time seems long; their blood thinks scorn
Till it fly out and show them princes born.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Britain. The Roman camp.


 Enter Posthumus alone, with a bloody handkerchief.

POSTHUMUS.
Yea, bloody cloth, I’ll keep thee; for I wish’d
Thou shouldst be colour’d thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio!
Every good servant does not all commands;
No bond but to do just ones. Gods! if you
Should have ta’en vengeance on my faults, I never
Had liv’d to put on this; so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that’s love,
To have them fall no more. You some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers’ thrift.
But Imogen is your own. Do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey. I am brought hither
Among th’ Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady’s kingdom. ’Tis enough
That, Britain, I have kill’d thy mistress; peace!
I’ll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose. I’ll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds, and suit myself
As does a Britain peasant. So I’ll fight
Against the part I come with; so I’ll die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death. And thus unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I’ll dedicate. Let me make men know
More valour in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o’ th’ Leonati in me!
To shame the guise o’ th’ world, I will begin
The fashion less without and more within.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Britain. A field of battle between the British and Roman
camps.

 Enter Lucius, Iachimo and the Roman army at one door, and the British
 army at another, Leonatus Posthumus following like a poor soldier.
 They march over and go out. Alarums. Then enter again, in skirmish,
 Iachimo and Posthumus. He vanquisheth and disarmeth Iachimo and then
 leaves him.

IACHIMO.
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood. I have belied a lady,
The Princess of this country, and the air on’t
Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl,
A very drudge of nature’s, have subdu’d me
In my profession? Knighthoods and honours borne
As I wear mine are titles but of scorn.
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is that we scarce are men, and you are gods.

 [_Exit._]

 The battle continues; the Britons fly; Cymbeline is taken. Then enter
 to his rescue Belarius, Guiderius and Arviragus.

BELARIUS.
Stand, stand! We have th’ advantage of the ground;
The lane is guarded; nothing routs us but
The villainy of our fears.

GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS.
Stand, stand, and fight!

 Enter Posthumus and seconds the Britons; they rescue Cymbeline and
 exeunt. Then re-enter Lucius and Iachimo with Imogen.

LUCIUS.
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;
For friends kill friends, and the disorder’s such
As war were hoodwink’d.

IACHIMO.
’Tis their fresh supplies.

LUCIUS.
It is a day turn’d strangely. Or betimes
Let’s reinforce or fly.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the field.

 Enter Posthumus and a Briton Lord.

LORD.
Cam’st thou from where they made the stand?

POSTHUMUS.
I did:
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.

LORD.
I did.

POSTHUMUS.
No blame be to you, sir, for all was lost,
But that the heavens fought. The King himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying,
Through a strait lane; the enemy, full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaught’ring, having work
More plentiful than tools to do’t, struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touch’d, some falling
Merely through fear, that the strait pass was damm’d
With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living
To die with length’ned shame.

LORD.
Where was this lane?

POSTHUMUS.
Close by the battle, ditch’d, and wall’d with turf,
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant, who deserv’d
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
In doing this for’s country. Athwart the lane
He, with two striplings (lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter;
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cas’d or shame)
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled
‘Our Britain’s harts die flying, not our men.
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards! Stand;
Or we are Romans and will give you that,
Like beasts, which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown. Stand, stand!’ These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many—
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing—with this word ‘Stand, stand!’
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turn’d
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,
Part shame, part spirit renew’d; that some turn’d coward
But by example (O, a sin in war
Damn’d in the first beginners) ’gan to look
The way that they did and to grin like lions
Upon the pikes o’ th’ hunters. Then began
A stop i’ th’ chaser, a retire; anon
A rout, confusion thick. Forthwith they fly,
Chickens, the way which they stoop’d eagles; slaves,
The strides they victors made; and now our cowards,
Like fragments in hard voyages, became
The life o’ th’ need. Having found the back-door open
Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound!
Some slain before, some dying, some their friends
O’erborne i’ th’ former wave. Ten chas’d by one
Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.
Those that would die or ere resist are grown
The mortal bugs o’ th’ field.

LORD.
This was strange chance:
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.

POSTHUMUS.
Nay, do not wonder at it; you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon’t,
And vent it for a mock’ry? Here is one:


        ‘Two boys, an old man (twice a boy), a lane,
        Preserv’d the Britons, was the Romans’ bane.’

LORD.
Nay, be not angry, sir.

POSTHUMUS.
’Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his foe I’ll be his friend;
For if he’ll do as he is made to do,
I know he’ll quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into rhyme.

LORD.
Farewell; you’re angry.

 [_Exit._]

POSTHUMUS.
Still going? This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i’ th’ field and ask ‘What news?’ of me!
Today how many would have given their honours
To have sav’d their carcasses! took heel to do’t,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charm’d,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he struck. Being an ugly monster,
’Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds,
Sweet words; or hath moe ministers than we
That draw his knives i’ th’ war. Well, I will find him;
For being now a favourer to the Briton,
No more a Briton, I have resum’d again
The part I came in. Fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
Here made by th’ Roman; great the answer be
Britons must take. For me, my ransom’s death;
On either side I come to spend my breath,
Which neither here I’ll keep nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.

 Enter two British Captains and soldiers.

FIRST CAPTAIN.
Great Jupiter be prais’d! Lucius is taken.
’Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.

SECOND CAPTAIN.
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
That gave th’ affront with them.

FIRST CAPTAIN.
So ’tis reported;
But none of ’em can be found. Stand! who’s there?

POSTHUMUS.
A Roman,
Who had not now been drooping here if seconds
Had answer’d him.

SECOND CAPTAIN.
Lay hands on him; a dog!
A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
What crows have peck’d them here. He brags his service,
As if he were of note. Bring him to th’ King.

 Enter Cymbeline, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, Pisanio and Roman
 captives. The Captains present Posthumus to Cymbeline, who delivers
 him over to a gaoler.

 [_Exeunt omnes._]

SCENE IV. Britain. A prison.

 Enter Posthumus and two Gaolers.

FIRST GAOLER. You shall not now be stol’n, you have locks upon you;
So graze as you find pasture.

SECOND GAOLER.
Ay, or a stomach.

 [_Exeunt Gaolers._]

POSTHUMUS.
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art a way,
I think, to liberty. Yet am I better
Than one that’s sick o’ th’ gout, since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity than be cur’d
By th’ sure physician death, who is the key
T’ unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter’d
More than my shanks and wrists; you good gods, give me
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt,
Then, free for ever! Is’t enough I am sorry?
So children temporal fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent,
I cannot do it better than in gyves,
Desir’d more than constrain’d. To satisfy,
If of my freedom ’tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me than my all.
I know you are more clement than vile men,
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement; that’s not my desire.
For Imogen’s dear life take mine; and though
’Tis not so dear, yet ’tis a life; you coin’d it.
’Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
Though light, take pieces for the figure’s sake;
You rather mine, being yours. And so, great pow’rs,
If you will take this audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen!
I’ll speak to thee in silence.

 [_Sleeps._]

 Solemn music. Enter, as in an apparition, Sicilius Leonatus, father to
 Posthumus, an old man attired like a warrior; leading in his hand an
 ancient matron, his wife and Mother to Posthumus, with music before
 them. Then, after other music, follows the two young Leonati, brothers
 to Posthumus, with wounds, as they died in the wars. They circle
 Posthumus round as he lies sleeping.

SICILIUS.
No more, thou thunder-master, show
Thy spite on mortal flies.
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
That thy adulteries
Rates and revenges.
Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
Whose face I never saw?
I died whilst in the womb he stay’d
Attending nature’s law;
Whose father then, as men report
Thou orphans’ father art,
Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
From this earth-vexing smart.

MOTHER.
Lucina lent not me her aid,
But took me in my throes,
That from me was Posthumus ripp’d,
Came crying ’mongst his foes,
A thing of pity.

SICILIUS.
Great Nature like his ancestry
Moulded the stuff so fair
That he deserv’d the praise o’ th’ world
As great Sicilius’ heir.

FIRST BROTHER.
When once he was mature for man,
In Britain where was he
That could stand up his parallel,
Or fruitful object be
In eye of Imogen, that best
Could deem his dignity?

MOTHER.
With marriage wherefore was he mock’d,
To be exil’d and thrown
From Leonati seat and cast
From her his dearest one,
Sweet Imogen?

SICILIUS.
Why did you suffer Iachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his nobler heart and brain
With needless jealousy,
And to become the geck and scorn
O’ th’ other’s villainy?

SECOND BROTHER.
For this from stiller seats we came,
Our parents and us twain,
That, striking in our country’s cause,
Fell bravely and were slain,
Our fealty and Tenantius’ right
With honour to maintain.

FIRST BROTHER.
Like hardiment Posthumus hath
To Cymbeline perform’d.
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
Why hast thou thus adjourn’d
The graces for his merits due,
Being all to dolours turn’d?

SICILIUS.
Thy crystal window ope; look out;
No longer exercise
Upon a valiant race thy harsh
And potent injuries.

MOTHER.
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
Take off his miseries.

SICILIUS.
Peep through thy marble mansion. Help!
Or we poor ghosts will cry
To th’ shining synod of the rest
Against thy deity.

BROTHERS.
Help, Jupiter! or we appeal,
And from thy justice fly.

 Jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle. He
 throws a thunderbolt. The Ghosts fall on their knees.

JUPITER.
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts
Accuse the Thunderer whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of flow’rs.
Be not with mortal accidents opprest:
No care of yours it is; you know ’tis ours.
Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift,
The more delay’d, delighted. Be content;
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift;
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reign’d at his birth, and in
Our temple was he married. Rise and fade!
He shall be lord of Lady Imogen,
And happier much by his affliction made.
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine;
And so, away; no farther with your din
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.

 [_Ascends._]

SICILIUS.
He came in thunder; his celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell; the holy eagle
Stoop’d as to foot us. His ascension is
More sweet than our blest fields. His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleas’d.

ALL.
Thanks, Jupiter!

SICILIUS.
The marble pavement closes, he is enter’d
His radiant roof. Away! and, to be blest,
Let us with care perform his great behest.

 [_Ghosts vanish._]

POSTHUMUS.
[_Waking._] Sleep, thou has been a grandsire and begot
A father to me; and thou hast created
A mother and two brothers. But, O scorn,
Gone! They went hence so soon as they were born.
And so I am awake. Poor wretches, that depend
On greatness’ favour, dream as I have done;
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve;
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steep’d in favours; so am I,
That have this golden chance, and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one!
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers. Let thy effects
So follow to be most unlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.

[_Reads._] _When as a lion’s whelp shall, to himself unknown, without
seeking find, and be embrac’d by a piece of tender air; and when from a
stately cedar shall be lopp’d branches which, being dead many years,
shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow; then
shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish in
peace and plenty._

’Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen
Tongue, and brain not; either both or nothing,
Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which
I’ll keep, if but for sympathy.

 Enter Gaoler.

GAOLER.
Come, sir, are you ready for death?

POSTHUMUS.
Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.

GAOLER.
Hanging is the word, sir; if you be ready for that, you are well
cook’d.

POSTHUMUS.
So, if I prove a good repast to the spectators, the dish pays the shot.

GAOLER.
A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is, you shall be called
to no more payments, fear no more tavern bills, which are often the
sadness of parting, as the procuring of mirth. You come in faint for
want of meat, depart reeling with too much drink; sorry that you have
paid too much, and sorry that you are paid too much; purse and brain
both empty; the brain the heavier for being too light, the purse too
light, being drawn of heaviness. O, of this contradiction you shall now
be quit. O, the charity of a penny cord! It sums up thousands in a
trice. You have no true debitor and creditor but it; of what’s past,
is, and to come, the discharge. Your neck, sir, is pen, book, and
counters; so the acquittance follows.

POSTHUMUS.
I am merrier to die than thou art to live.

GAOLER.
Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the toothache. But a man that
were to sleep your sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, I think he
would change places with his officer; for look you, sir, you know not
which way you shall go.

POSTHUMUS.
Yes indeed do I, fellow.

GAOLER.
Your death has eyes in’s head, then; I have not seen him so pictur’d.
You must either be directed by some that take upon them to know, or to
take upon yourself that which I am sure you do not know, or jump the
after-inquiry on your own peril. And how you shall speed in your
journey’s end, I think you’ll never return to tell one.

POSTHUMUS.
I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to direct them the way I
am going, but such as wink and will not use them.

GAOLER.
What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the best use of
eyes to see the way of blindness! I am sure hanging’s the way of
winking.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the King.

POSTHUMUS.
Thou bring’st good news: I am call’d to be made free.

GAOLER.
I’ll be hang’d then.

POSTHUMUS.
Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the dead.

 [_Exeunt Posthumus and Messenger._]

GAOLER.
Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets, I never saw
one so prone. Yet, on my conscience, there are verier knaves desire to
live, for all he be a Roman; and there be some of them too that die
against their wills; so should I, if I were one. I would we were all of
one mind, and one mind good. O, there were desolation of gaolers and
gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but my wish hath a
preferment in’t.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE V. Britain. Cymbeline’s tent.

 Enter Cymbeline, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, Pisanio, Lords,
 Officers and Attendants.

CYMBELINE.
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags sham’d gilded arms, whose naked breast
Stepp’d before targes of proof, cannot be found.
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our grace can make him so.

BELARIUS.
I never saw
Such noble fury in so poor a thing;
Such precious deeds in one that promis’d nought
But beggary and poor looks.

CYMBELINE.
No tidings of him?

PISANIO.
He hath been search’d among the dead and living,
But no trace of him.

CYMBELINE.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward, [_To Belarius, Guiderius, and Arviragus_] which
I will add
To you, the liver, heart, and brain of Britain,
By whom I grant she lives. ’Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.

BELARIUS.
Sir,
In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen;
Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
Unless I add we are honest.

CYMBELINE.
Bow your knees.
Arise my knights o’ th’ battle; I create you
Companions to our person, and will fit you
With dignities becoming your estates.

 Enter Cornelius and Ladies.

There’s business in these faces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? You look like Romans,
And not o’ th’ court of Britain.

CORNELIUS.
Hail, great King!
To sour your happiness I must report
The Queen is dead.

CYMBELINE.
Who worse than a physician
Would this report become? But I consider
By med’cine life may be prolong’d, yet death
Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?

CORNELIUS.
With horror, madly dying, like her life;
Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confess’d
I will report, so please you; these her women
Can trip me if I err, who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finish’d.

CYMBELINE.
Prithee say.

CORNELIUS.
First, she confess’d she never lov’d you; only
Affected greatness got by you, not you;
Married your royalty, was wife to your place;
Abhorr’d your person.

CYMBELINE.
She alone knew this;
And but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.

CORNELIUS.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a scorpion to her sight; whose life,
But that her flight prevented it, she had
Ta’en off by poison.

CYMBELINE.
O most delicate fiend!
Who is’t can read a woman? Is there more?

CORNELIUS.
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal mineral, which, being took,
Should by the minute feed on life, and ling’ring,
By inches waste you. In which time she purpos’d,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
O’ercome you with her show; and in time,
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her son into th’ adoption of the crown;
But failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless-desperate, open’d, in despite
Of heaven and men, her purposes, repented
The evils she hatch’d were not effected; so,
Despairing, died.

CYMBELINE.
Heard you all this, her women?

LADIES.
We did, so please your Highness.

CYMBELINE.
Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart
That thought her like her seeming. It had been vicious
To have mistrusted her; yet, O my daughter!
That it was folly in me thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!

 Enter Lucius, Iachimo, the Soothsayer and other Roman prisoners,
 guarded; Posthumus behind, and Imogen.

Thou com’st not, Caius, now for tribute; that
The Britons have raz’d out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one, whose kinsmen have made suit
That their good souls may be appeas’d with slaughter
Of you their captives, which ourself have granted;
So think of your estate.

LUCIUS.
Consider, sir, the chance of war. The day
Was yours by accident; had it gone with us,
We should not, when the blood was cool, have threaten’d
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be call’d ransom, let it come. Sufficeth
A Roman with a Roman’s heart can suffer.
Augustus lives to think on’t; and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
I will entreat: my boy, a Briton born,
Let him be ransom’d. Never master had
A page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so nurse-like; let his virtue join
With my request, which I’ll make bold your Highness
Cannot deny; he hath done no Briton harm
Though he have serv’d a Roman. Save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside.

CYMBELINE.
I have surely seen him;
His favour is familiar to me. Boy,
Thou hast look’d thyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore
To say “Live, boy.” Ne’er thank thy master. Live;
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I’ll give it;
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
The noblest ta’en.

IMOGEN.
I humbly thank your Highness.

LUCIUS.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad,
And yet I know thou wilt.

IMOGEN.
No, no! Alack,
There’s other work in hand. I see a thing
Bitter to me as death; your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself.

LUCIUS.
The boy disdains me,
He leaves me, scorns me. Briefly die their joys
That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
Why stands he so perplex’d?

CYMBELINE.
What wouldst thou, boy?
I love thee more and more; think more and more
What’s best to ask. Know’st him thou look’st on? Speak,
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?

IMOGEN.
He is a Roman, no more kin to me
Than I to your Highness; who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer.

CYMBELINE.
Wherefore ey’st him so?

IMOGEN.
I’ll tell you, sir, in private, if you please
To give me hearing.

CYMBELINE.
Ay, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. What’s thy name?

IMOGEN.
Fidele, sir.

CYMBELINE.
Thou’rt my good youth, my page;
I’ll be thy master. Walk with me; speak freely.

 [_Cymbeline and Imogen converse apart._]

BELARIUS.
Is not this boy reviv’d from death?

ARVIRAGUS.
One sand another
Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad
Who died and was Fidele. What think you?

GUIDERIUS.
The same dead thing alive.

BELARIUS.
Peace, peace! see further. He eyes us not; forbear.
Creatures may be alike; were’t he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us.

GUIDERIUS.
But we see him dead.

BELARIUS.
Be silent; let’s see further.

PISANIO.
[_Aside._] It is my mistress.
Since she is living, let the time run on
To good or bad.

 [_Cymbeline and Imogen advance._]

CYMBELINE.
Come, stand thou by our side;
Make thy demand aloud. [_To Iachimo._] Sir, step you forth;
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely,
Or, by our greatness and the grace of it,
Which is our honour, bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood. On, speak to him.

IMOGEN.
My boon is that this gentleman may render
Of whom he had this ring.

POSTHUMUS.
[_Aside._] What’s that to him?

CYMBELINE.
That diamond upon your finger, say
How came it yours?

IACHIMO.
Thou’lt torture me to leave unspoken that
Which to be spoke would torture thee.

CYMBELINE.
How? me?

IACHIMO.
I am glad to be constrain’d to utter that
Which torments me to conceal. By villainy
I got this ring; ’twas Leonatus’ jewel,
Whom thou didst banish; and—which more may grieve thee,
As it doth me—a nobler sir ne’er liv’d
’Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord?

CYMBELINE.
All that belongs to this.

IACHIMO.
That paragon, thy daughter,
For whom my heart drops blood and my false spirits
Quail to remember—Give me leave, I faint.

CYMBELINE.
My daughter? What of her? Renew thy strength;
I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will
Than die ere I hear more. Strive, man, and speak.

IACHIMO.
Upon a time, unhappy was the clock
That struck the hour: was in Rome, accurs’d
The mansion where: ’twas at a feast, O, would
Our viands had been poison’d (or at least
Those which I heav’d to head) the good Posthumus
(What should I say? he was too good to be
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
Amongst the rar’st of good ones) sitting sadly
Hearing us praise our loves of Italy
For beauty that made barren the swell’d boast
Of him that best could speak; for feature, laming
The shrine of Venus or straight-pight Minerva,
Postures beyond brief nature; for condition,
A shop of all the qualities that man
Loves woman for; besides that hook of wiving,
Fairness which strikes the eye.

CYMBELINE.
I stand on fire.
Come to the matter.

IACHIMO.
All too soon I shall,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
Most like a noble lord in love and one
That had a royal lover, took his hint;
And (not dispraising whom we prais’d, therein
He was as calm as virtue) he began
His mistress’ picture; which by his tongue being made,
And then a mind put in’t, either our brags
Were crack’d of kitchen trulls, or his description
Prov’d us unspeaking sots.

CYMBELINE.
Nay, nay, to th’ purpose.

IACHIMO.
Your daughter’s chastity (there it begins)
He spake of her as Dian had hot dreams
And she alone were cold; whereat I, wretch,
Made scruple of his praise, and wager’d with him
Pieces of gold ’gainst this which then he wore
Upon his honour’d finger, to attain
In suit the place of’s bed, and win this ring
By hers and mine adultery. He, true knight,
No lesser of her honour confident
Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring;
And would so, had it been a carbuncle
Of Phoebus’ wheel; and might so safely, had it
Been all the worth of’s car. Away to Britain
Post I in this design. Well may you, sir,
Remember me at court, where I was taught
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
’Twixt amorous and villainous. Being thus quench’d
Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain
Gan in your duller Britain operate
Most vilely; for my vantage, excellent;
And, to be brief, my practice so prevail’d
That I return’d with simular proof enough
To make the noble Leonatus mad,
By wounding his belief in her renown
With tokens thus and thus; averring notes
Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet
(O cunning, how I got it!) nay, some marks
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of chastity quite crack’d,
I having ta’en the forfeit. Whereupon
Methinks I see him now—

POSTHUMUS.
[_Coming forward._] Ay, so thou dost,
Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool,
Egregious murderer, thief, anything
That’s due to all the villains past, in being,
To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer! Thou, King, send out
For torturers ingenious. It is I
That all th’ abhorred things o’ th’ earth amend
By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
That kill’d thy daughter; villain-like, I lie;
That caus’d a lesser villain than myself,
A sacrilegious thief, to do’t. The temple
Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself.
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs o’ th’ street to bay me. Every villain
Be call’d Posthumus Leonatus, and
Be villainy less than ’twas! O Imogen!
My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen!

IMOGEN.
Peace, my lord. Hear, hear!

POSTHUMUS.
Shall’s have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
There lies thy part.

 [_Strikes her. She falls._]

PISANIO.
O gentlemen, help!
Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus!
You ne’er kill’d Imogen till now. Help, help!
Mine honour’d lady!

CYMBELINE.
Does the world go round?

POSTHUMUS.
How comes these staggers on me?

PISANIO.
Wake, my mistress!

CYMBELINE.
If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me
To death with mortal joy.

PISANIO.
How fares my mistress?

IMOGEN.
O, get thee from my sight;
Thou gav’st me poison. Dangerous fellow, hence!
Breathe not where princes are.

CYMBELINE.
The tune of Imogen!

PISANIO.
Lady,
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if
That box I gave you was not thought by me
A precious thing! I had it from the Queen.

CYMBELINE.
New matter still?

IMOGEN.
It poison’d me.

CORNELIUS.
O gods!
I left out one thing which the Queen confess’d,
Which must approve thee honest. ‘If Pisanio
Have’ said she ‘given his mistress that confection
Which I gave him for cordial, she is serv’d
As I would serve a rat.’

CYMBELINE.
What’s this, Cornelius?

CORNELIUS.
The Queen, sir, very oft importun’d me
To temper poisons for her; still pretending
The satisfaction of her knowledge only
In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs,
Of no esteem. I, dreading that her purpose
Was of more danger, did compound for her
A certain stuff, which, being ta’en would cease
The present pow’r of life, but in short time
All offices of nature should again
Do their due functions. Have you ta’en of it?

IMOGEN.
Most like I did, for I was dead.

BELARIUS.
My boys,
There was our error.

GUIDERIUS.
This is sure Fidele.

IMOGEN.
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
Think that you are upon a rock, and now
Throw me again.

 [_Embracing him._]

POSTHUMUS.
Hang there like fruit, my soul,
Till the tree die!

CYMBELINE.
How now, my flesh? my child?
What, mak’st thou me a dullard in this act?
Wilt thou not speak to me?

IMOGEN.
[_Kneeling._] Your blessing, sir.

BELARIUS.
[_To Guiderius and Arviragus._] Though you did love this youth, I blame
ye not;
You had a motive for’t.

CYMBELINE.
My tears that fall
Prove holy water on thee! Imogen,
Thy mother’s dead.

IMOGEN.
I am sorry for’t, my lord.

CYMBELINE.
O, she was naught, and long of her it was
That we meet here so strangely; but her son
Is gone, we know not how nor where.

PISANIO.
My lord,
Now fear is from me, I’ll speak troth. Lord Cloten,
Upon my lady’s missing, came to me
With his sword drawn, foam’d at the mouth, and swore,
If I discover’d not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death. By accident
I had a feigned letter of my master’s
Then in my pocket, which directed him
To seek her on the mountains near to Milford;
Where, in a frenzy, in my master’s garments,
Which he enforc’d from me, away he posts
With unchaste purpose, and with oath to violate
My lady’s honour. What became of him
I further know not.

GUIDERIUS.
Let me end the story:
I slew him there.

CYMBELINE.
Marry, the gods forfend!
I would not thy good deeds should from my lips
Pluck a hard sentence. Prithee, valiant youth,
Deny’t again.

GUIDERIUS.
I have spoke it, and I did it.

CYMBELINE.
He was a prince.

GUIDERIUS.
A most incivil one. The wrongs he did me
Were nothing prince-like; for he did provoke me
With language that would make me spurn the sea,
If it could so roar to me. I cut off’s head,
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine.

CYMBELINE.
I am sorry for thee.
By thine own tongue thou art condemn’d, and must
Endure our law. Thou’rt dead.

IMOGEN.
That headless man
I thought had been my lord.

CYMBELINE.
Bind the offender,
And take him from our presence.

BELARIUS.
Stay, sir King.
This man is better than the man he slew,
As well descended as thyself, and hath
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
Had ever scar for. [_To the guard._] Let his arms alone;
They were not born for bondage.

CYMBELINE.
Why, old soldier,
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
As good as we?

ARVIRAGUS.
In that he spake too far.

CYMBELINE.
And thou shalt die for’t.

BELARIUS.
We will die all three;
But I will prove that two on’s are as good
As I have given out him. My sons, I must
For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech,
Though haply well for you.

ARVIRAGUS.
Your danger’s ours.

GUIDERIUS.
And our good his.

BELARIUS.
Have at it then by leave!
Thou hadst, great King, a subject who
Was call’d Belarius.

CYMBELINE.
What of him? He is
A banish’d traitor.

BELARIUS.
He it is that hath
Assum’d this age; indeed a banish’d man;
I know not how a traitor.

CYMBELINE.
Take him hence,
The whole world shall not save him.

BELARIUS.
Not too hot.
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons,
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
As I have receiv’d it.

CYMBELINE.
Nursing of my sons?

BELARIUS.
I am too blunt and saucy: here’s my knee.
Ere I arise I will prefer my sons;
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen that call me father,
And think they are my sons, are none of mine;
They are the issue of your loins, my liege,
And blood of your begetting.

CYMBELINE.
How? my issue?

BELARIUS.
So sure as you your father’s. I, old Morgan,
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish’d.
Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment
Itself, and all my treason; that I suffer’d
Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes
(For such and so they are) these twenty years
Have I train’d up; those arts they have as I
Could put into them. My breeding was, sir, as
Your Highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile,
Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children
Upon my banishment; I mov’d her to’t,
Having receiv’d the punishment before
For that which I did then. Beaten for loyalty
Excited me to treason. Their dear loss,
The more of you ’twas felt, the more it shap’d
Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
Here are your sons again, and I must lose
Two of the sweet’st companions in the world.
The benediction of these covering heavens
Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
To inlay heaven with stars.

CYMBELINE.
Thou weep’st and speak’st.
The service that you three have done is more
Unlike than this thou tell’st. I lost my children.
If these be they, I know not how to wish
A pair of worthier sons.

BELARIUS.
Be pleas’d awhile.
This gentleman, whom I call Polydore,
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius;
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,
Your younger princely son; he, sir, was lapp’d
In a most curious mantle, wrought by th’ hand
Of his queen mother, which for more probation
I can with ease produce.

CYMBELINE.
Guiderius had
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star;
It was a mark of wonder.

BELARIUS.
This is he,
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp.
It was wise nature’s end in the donation,
To be his evidence now.

CYMBELINE.
O, what am I?
A mother to the birth of three? Ne’er mother
Rejoic’d deliverance more. Blest pray you be,
That, after this strange starting from your orbs,
You may reign in them now! O Imogen,
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.

IMOGEN.
No, my lord;
I have got two worlds by’t. O my gentle brothers,
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker! You call’d me brother,
When I was but your sister: I you brothers,
When we were so indeed.

CYMBELINE.
Did you e’er meet?

ARVIRAGUS.
Ay, my good lord.

GUIDERIUS.
And at first meeting lov’d,
Continu’d so until we thought he died.

CORNELIUS.
By the Queen’s dram she swallow’d.

CYMBELINE.
O rare instinct!
When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgement
Hath to it circumstantial branches, which
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how liv’d you?
And when came you to serve our Roman captive?
How parted with your brothers? how first met them?
Why fled you from the court? and whither? These,
And your three motives to the battle, with
I know not how much more, should be demanded,
And all the other by-dependances,
From chance to chance; but nor the time nor place
Will serve our long interrogatories. See,
Posthumus anchors upon Imogen;
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting
Each object with a joy; the counterchange
Is severally in all. Let’s quit this ground,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
[_To Belarius._] Thou art my brother; so we’ll hold thee ever.

IMOGEN.
You are my father too, and did relieve me
To see this gracious season.

CYMBELINE.
All o’erjoy’d
Save these in bonds. Let them be joyful too,
For they shall taste our comfort.

IMOGEN.
My good master,
I will yet do you service.

LUCIUS.
Happy be you!

CYMBELINE.
The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought,
He would have well becom’d this place and grac’d
The thankings of a king.

POSTHUMUS.
I am, sir,
The soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming; ’twas a fitment for
The purpose I then follow’d. That I was he,
Speak, Iachimo. I had you down, and might
Have made you finish.

IACHIMO.
[_Kneeling._] I am down again;
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
Which I so often owe; but your ring first,
And here the bracelet of the truest princess
That ever swore her faith.

POSTHUMUS.
Kneel not to me.
The pow’r that I have on you is to spare you;
The malice towards you to forgive you. Live,
And deal with others better.

CYMBELINE.
Nobly doom’d!
We’ll learn our freeness of a son-in-law;
Pardon’s the word to all.

ARVIRAGUS.
You holp us, sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our brother;
Joy’d are we that you are.

POSTHUMUS.
Your servant, Princes. Good my lord of Rome,
Call forth your soothsayer. As I slept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back’d,
Appear’d to me, with other spritely shows
Of mine own kindred. When I wak’d, I found
This label on my bosom; whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness that I can
Make no collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction.

LUCIUS.
Philarmonus!

SOOTHSAYER.
Here, my good lord.

LUCIUS.
Read, and declare the meaning.

SOOTHSAYER.
[_Reads._] _When as a lion’s whelp shall, to himself unknown, without
seeking find, and be embrac’d by a piece of tender air; and when from a
stately cedar shall be lopp’d branches which, being dead many years,
shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow; then
shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish in
peace and plenty._
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion’s whelp;
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
Being Leo-natus, doth import so much.
[_To Cymbeline_] The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter,
Which we call _mollis aer_, and _mollis aer_
We term it _mulier_; which _mulier_ I divine
Is this most constant wife, who even now
Answering the letter of the oracle,
Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp’d about
With this most tender air.

CYMBELINE.
This hath some seeming.

SOOTHSAYER.
The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
Personates thee; and thy lopp’d branches point
Thy two sons forth, who, by Belarius stol’n,
For many years thought dead, are now reviv’d,
To the majestic cedar join’d, whose issue
Promises Britain peace and plenty.

CYMBELINE.
Well,
My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, we submit to Cæsar
And to the Roman empire, promising
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen,
Whom heavens in justice, both on her and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.

SOOTHSAYER.
The fingers of the pow’rs above do tune
The harmony of this peace. The vision
Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
Of yet this scarce-cold battle, at this instant
Is full accomplish’d; for the Roman eagle,
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
Lessen’d herself and in the beams o’ th’ sun
So vanish’d; which foreshow’d our princely eagle,
Th’ imperial Cæsar, should again unite
His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the west.

CYMBELINE.
Laud we the gods;
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
From our bless’d altars. Publish we this peace
To all our subjects. Set we forward; let
A Roman and a British ensign wave
Friendly together. So through Lud’s Town march;
And in the temple of great Jupiter
Our peace we’ll ratify; seal it with feasts.
Set on there! Never was a war did cease,
Ere bloody hands were wash’d, with such a peace.

 [_Exeunt._]




THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle
 Scene II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle
 Scene III. A room in Polonius’s house
 Scene IV. The platform
 Scene V. A more remote part of the Castle

 ACT II
 Scene I. A room in Polonius’s house
 Scene II. A room in the Castle

 ACT III
 Scene I. A room in the Castle
 Scene II. A hall in the Castle
 Scene III. A room in the Castle
 Scene IV. Another room in the Castle

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A room in the Castle
 Scene II. Another room in the Castle
 Scene III. Another room in the Castle
 Scene IV. A plain in Denmark
 Scene V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle
 Scene VI. Another room in the Castle
 Scene VII. Another room in the Castle

 ACT V
 Scene I. A churchyard
 Scene II. A hall in the Castle




Dramatis Personæ

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark
CLAUDIUS, King of Denmark, Hamlet’s uncle
The GHOST of the late king, Hamlet’s father
GERTRUDE, the Queen, Hamlet’s mother, now wife of Claudius
POLONIUS, Lord Chamberlain
LAERTES, Son to Polonius
OPHELIA, Daughter to Polonius
HORATIO, Friend to Hamlet
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
VOLTEMAND, Courtier
CORNELIUS, Courtier
ROSENCRANTZ, Courtier
GUILDENSTERN, Courtier
MARCELLUS, Officer
BARNARDO, Officer
FRANCISCO, a Soldier
OSRIC, Courtier
REYNALDO, Servant to Polonius
Players
A Gentleman, Courtier
A Priest
Two Clowns, Grave-diggers
A Captain
English Ambassadors.
Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, and Attendants

SCENE. Elsinore.




ACT I

SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.


Enter Francisco and Barnardo, two sentinels.

BARNARDO.
Who’s there?

FRANCISCO.
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO.
Long live the King!

FRANCISCO.
Barnardo?

BARNARDO.
He.

FRANCISCO.
You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO.
’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO.
For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

BARNARDO.
Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO.
Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO.
Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

FRANCISCO.
I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?

HORATIO.
Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS.
And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO.
Give you good night.

MARCELLUS.
O, farewell, honest soldier, who hath reliev’d you?

FRANCISCO.
Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.

[_Exit._]

MARCELLUS.
Holla, Barnardo!

BARNARDO.
Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO.
A piece of him.

BARNARDO.
Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.

MARCELLUS.
What, has this thing appear’d again tonight?

BARNARDO.
I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS.
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy,
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That if again this apparition come
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

HORATIO.
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.

BARNARDO.
Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we two nights have seen.

HORATIO.
Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO.
Last night of all,
When yond same star that’s westward from the pole,
Had made his course t’illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one—

MARCELLUS.
Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.

Enter Ghost.

BARNARDO.
In the same figure, like the King that’s dead.

MARCELLUS.
Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO.
Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO.
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS.
Question it, Horatio.

HORATIO.
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak.

MARCELLUS.
It is offended.

BARNARDO.
See, it stalks away.

HORATIO.
Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee speak!

[_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS.
’Tis gone, and will not answer.

BARNARDO.
How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on’t?

HORATIO.
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS.
Is it not like the King?

HORATIO.
As thou art to thyself:
Such was the very armour he had on
When he th’ambitious Norway combated;
So frown’d he once, when in an angry parle
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
’Tis strange.

MARCELLUS.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO.
In what particular thought to work I know not;
But in the gross and scope of my opinion,
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

MARCELLUS.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war;
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:
Who is’t that can inform me?

HORATIO.
That can I;
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,
Whose image even but now appear’d to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride,
Dar’d to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet,
For so this side of our known world esteem’d him,
Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seiz’d of, to the conqueror;
Against the which, a moiety competent
Was gaged by our King; which had return’d
To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
Had he been vanquisher; as by the same cov’nant
And carriage of the article design’d,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle, hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes,
For food and diet, to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other,
As it doth well appear unto our state,
But to recover of us by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this post-haste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO.
I think it be no other but e’en so:
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO.
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

Re-enter Ghost.

But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I’ll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done,
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,
Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid,
O speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it. Stay, and speak!

[_The cock crows._]

Stop it, Marcellus!

MARCELLUS.
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

HORATIO.
Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO.
’Tis here!

HORATIO.
’Tis here!

[_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS.
’Tis gone!
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO.
It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

HORATIO.
And then it started, like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th’extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine. And of the truth herein
This present object made probation.

MARCELLUS.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm;
So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.

HORATIO.
So have I heard, and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad,
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice,
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS.
Let’s do’t, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most conveniently.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.

Enter Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet, Polonius,
Laertes, Voltemand,
Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.

KING.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe;
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th’imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy,
With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole,
Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr’d
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein; in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King, more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
Farewell; and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS and VOLTEMAND.
In that, and all things, will we show our duty.

KING.
We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.

[_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is’t, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES.
Dread my lord,
Your leave and favour to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation;
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France,
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

KING.
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS.
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laboursome petition; and at last
Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

KING.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—

HAMLET.
[_Aside._] A little more than kin, and less than kind.

KING.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET.
Not so, my lord, I am too much i’ the sun.

QUEEN.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know’st ’tis common, all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET.
Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN.
If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET.
Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not seems.
’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forc’d breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected haviour of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shows of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passeth show;
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING.
’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father;
But you must know, your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation, for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief,
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschool’d;
For what we know must be, and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
‘This must be so.’ We pray you throw to earth
This unprevailing woe, and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire:
And we beseech you bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING.
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;
This gentle and unforc’d accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.

[_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

HAMLET.
O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter. O God! O God!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on’t! Oh fie! ’tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two:
So excellent a king; that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother,
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on; and yet, within a month—
Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father’s body
Like Niobe, all tears.—Why she, even she—
O God! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn’d longer,—married with mine uncle,
My father’s brother; but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

Enter Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo.

HORATIO.
Hail to your lordship!

HAMLET.
I am glad to see you well:
Horatio, or I do forget myself.

HORATIO.
The same, my lord,
And your poor servant ever.

HAMLET.
Sir, my good friend;
I’ll change that name with you:
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—
Marcellus?

MARCELLUS.
My good lord.

HAMLET.
I am very glad to see you.—Good even, sir.—
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO.
A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET.
I would not hear your enemy say so;
Nor shall you do my ear that violence,
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO.
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

HAMLET.
I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student.
I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.

HORATIO.
Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.

HAMLET.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak’d meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio.
My father,—methinks I see my father.

HORATIO.
Where, my lord?

HAMLET.
In my mind’s eye, Horatio.

HORATIO.
I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

HAMLET.
He was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HORATIO.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET.
Saw? Who?

HORATIO.
My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET.
The King my father!

HORATIO.
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.

HAMLET.
For God’s love let me hear.

HORATIO.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,
Appears before them, and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d
By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes,
Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time,
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.

HAMLET.
But where was this?

MARCELLUS.
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET.
Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO.
My lord, I did;
But answer made it none: yet once methought
It lifted up it head, and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak.
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,
And vanish’d from our sight.

HAMLET.
’Tis very strange.

HORATIO.
As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true;
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAMLET.
Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

MARCELLUS and BARNARDO.
We do, my lord.

HAMLET.
Arm’d, say you?

Both.
Arm’d, my lord.

HAMLET.
From top to toe?

BOTH.
My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET.
Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO.
O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET.
What, look’d he frowningly?

HORATIO.
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET.
Pale, or red?

HORATIO.
Nay, very pale.

HAMLET.
And fix’d his eyes upon you?

HORATIO.
Most constantly.

HAMLET.
I would I had been there.

HORATIO.
It would have much amaz’d you.

HAMLET.
Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?

HORATIO.
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

MARCELLUS and BARNARDO.
Longer, longer.

HORATIO.
Not when I saw’t.

HAMLET.
His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO.
It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silver’d.

HAMLET.
I will watch tonight;
Perchance ’twill walk again.

HORATIO.
I warrant you it will.

HAMLET.
If it assume my noble father’s person,
I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsoever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding, but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So, fare ye well.
Upon the platform ’twixt eleven and twelve,
I’ll visit you.

ALL.
Our duty to your honour.

HAMLET.
Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.

[_Exeunt Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo._]

My father’s spirit in arms! All is not well;
I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!
Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

[_Exit._]

 SCENE III. A room in Polonius’s house.

Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

LAERTES.
My necessaries are embark’d. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

OPHELIA.
Do you doubt that?

LAERTES.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood;
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting;
The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.

OPHELIA.
No more but so?

LAERTES.
Think it no more.
For nature crescent does not grow alone
In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own;
For he himself is subject to his birth:
He may not, as unvalu’d persons do,
Carve for himself; for on his choice depends
The sanctity and health of this whole state;
And therefore must his choice be circumscrib’d
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed; which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs,
Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
To his unmaster’d importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister;
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes:
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclos’d,
And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary then, best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

OPHELIA.
I shall th’effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But good my brother,
Do not as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;
Whilst like a puff’d and reckless libertine
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
And recks not his own rede.

LAERTES.
O, fear me not.
I stay too long. But here my father comes.

Enter Polonius.

A double blessing is a double grace;
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

POLONIUS.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame.
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stay’d for. There, my blessing with you.

[_Laying his hand on Laertes’s head._]

And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportion’d thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
Bear’t that th’opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice:
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgement.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy:
For the apparel oft proclaims the man;
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be:
For loan oft loses both itself and friend;
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true;
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell: my blessing season this in thee.

LAERTES.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS.
The time invites you; go, your servants tend.

LAERTES.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

OPHELIA.
’Tis in my memory lock’d,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

LAERTES.
Farewell.

[_Exit._]

POLONIUS.
What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA.
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

POLONIUS.
Marry, well bethought:
’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
If it be so,—as so ’tis put on me,
And that in way of caution,—I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behoves my daughter and your honour.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

POLONIUS.
Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?

OPHELIA.
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS.
Marry, I’ll teach you; think yourself a baby;
That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;
Or,—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus,—you’ll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA.
My lord, he hath importun’d me with love
In honourable fashion.

POLONIUS.
Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

OPHELIA.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,
Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence;
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young;
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to’t, I charge you; come your ways.

OPHELIA.
I shall obey, my lord.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE IV. The platform.

Enter Hamlet, Horatio and Marcellus.

HAMLET.
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO.
It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET.
What hour now?

HORATIO.
I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS.
No, it is struck.

HORATIO.
Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

[_A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off within._]

What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET.
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swaggering upspring reels;
And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.

HORATIO.
Is it a custom?

HAMLET.
Ay marry is’t;
And to my mind, though I am native here,
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honour’d in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduc’d and tax’d of other nations:
They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
From our achievements, though perform’d at height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin,
By their o’ergrowth of some complexion,
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason;
Or by some habit, that too much o’erleavens
The form of plausive manners;—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being Nature’s livery or Fortune’s star,—
His virtues else,—be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

HORATIO.
Look, my lord, it comes!

Enter Ghost.

HAMLET.
Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com’st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell
Why thy canoniz’d bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,
Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d,
Hath op’d his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again! What may this mean,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

[_Ghost beckons Hamlet._]

HORATIO.
It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

MARCELLUS.
Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.

HORATIO.
No, by no means.

HAMLET.
It will not speak; then will I follow it.

HORATIO.
Do not, my lord.

HAMLET.
Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin’s fee;
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.

HORATIO.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason,
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET.
It waves me still.
Go on, I’ll follow thee.

MARCELLUS.
You shall not go, my lord.

HAMLET.
Hold off your hands.

HORATIO.
Be rul’d; you shall not go.

HAMLET.
My fate cries out,
And makes each petty artery in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.

[_Ghost beckons._]

Still am I call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.

[_Breaking free from them._]

By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me.
I say, away!—Go on, I’ll follow thee.

[_Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet._]

HORATIO.
He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS.
Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO.
Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS.
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO.
Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS.
Nay, let’s follow him.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE V. A more remote part of the Castle.

Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I’ll go no further.

GHOST.
Mark me.

HAMLET.
I will.

GHOST.
My hour is almost come,
When I to sulph’rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.

HAMLET.
Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST.
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

HAMLET.
Speak, I am bound to hear.

GHOST.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET.
What?

GHOST.
I am thy father’s spirit,
Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night,
And for the day confin’d to fast in fires,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purg’d away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand on end
Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love—

HAMLET.
O God!

GHOST.
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET.
Murder!

GHOST.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET.
Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love
May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST.
I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abus’d; but know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father’s life
Now wears his crown.

HAMLET.
O my prophetic soul!
Mine uncle!

GHOST.
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,—
O wicked wit, and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage; and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will be mov’d,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven;
So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft! methinks I scent the morning air;
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leperous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body;
And with a sudden vigour it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
And a most instant tetter bark’d about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand,
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch’d:
Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhous’led, disappointed, unanel’d;
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible! O horrible! most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But howsoever thou pursu’st this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught; leave her to heaven,
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!
The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.

[_Exit._]

HAMLET.
O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, my heart;
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there;
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmix’d with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling damned villain!
My tables. Meet it is I set it down,
That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain!
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

[_Writing._]

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;
It is ‘Adieu, adieu, remember me.’
I have sworn’t.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS.
[_Within._] My lord, my lord.

MARCELLUS.
[_Within._] Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO.
[_Within._] Heaven secure him.

HAMLET.
So be it!

MARCELLUS.
[_Within._] Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET.
Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.

Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

MARCELLUS.
How is’t, my noble lord?

HORATIO.
What news, my lord?

HAMLET.
O, wonderful!

HORATIO.
Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET.
No, you’ll reveal it.

HORATIO.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS.
Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET.
How say you then, would heart of man once think it?—
But you’ll be secret?

HORATIO and MARCELLUS.
Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET.
There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he’s an arrant knave.

HORATIO.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.

HAMLET.
Why, right; you are i’ the right;
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:
You, as your business and desire shall point you,—
For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is;—and for my own poor part,
Look you, I’ll go pray.

HORATIO.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET.
I’m sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes faith, heartily.

HORATIO.
There’s no offence, my lord.

HAMLET.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O’ermaster’t as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO.
What is’t, my lord? We will.

HAMLET.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS.
My lord, we will not.

HAMLET.
Nay, but swear’t.

HORATIO.
In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS.
Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET.
Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS.
We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET.
Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST.
[_Cries under the stage._] Swear.

HAMLET.
Ha, ha boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.

HORATIO.
Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET.
Never to speak of this that you have seen.
Swear by my sword.

GHOST.
[_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET.
_Hic et ubique?_ Then we’ll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Swear by my sword.

GHOST.
[_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET.
Well said, old mole! Canst work i’ th’earth so fast?
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET.
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come,
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself,—
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on—
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumber’d thus, or this head-shake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As ‘Well, we know’, or ‘We could and if we would’,
Or ‘If we list to speak’; or ‘There be and if they might’,
Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
That you know aught of me:—this not to do.
So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
Swear.

GHOST.
[_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you;
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t’express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite,
That ever I was born to set it right.
Nay, come, let’s go together.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A room in Polonius’s house.


Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.

POLONIUS.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO.
I will, my lord.

POLONIUS.
You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquiry
Of his behaviour.

REYNALDO.
My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS.
Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir,
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question,
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you as ’twere some distant knowledge of him,
As thus, ‘I know his father and his friends,
And in part him’—do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO.
Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS.
‘And in part him, but,’ you may say, ‘not well;
But if’t be he I mean, he’s very wild;
Addicted so and so;’ and there put on him
What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
As may dishonour him; take heed of that;
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO.
As gaming, my lord?

POLONIUS.
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarrelling, drabbing. You may go so far.

REYNALDO.
My lord, that would dishonour him.

POLONIUS.
Faith no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him,
That he is open to incontinency;
That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty;
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO.
But my good lord—

POLONIUS.
Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO.
Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS.
Marry, sir, here’s my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
You laying these slight sullies on my son,
As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ th’ working,
Mark you,
Your party in converse, him you would sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur’d
He closes with you in this consequence;
‘Good sir,’ or so; or ‘friend,’ or ‘gentleman’—
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country.

REYNALDO.
Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS.
And then, sir, does he this,—
He does—What was I about to say?
By the mass, I was about to say something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO.
At ‘closes in the consequence.’
At ‘friend or so,’ and ‘gentleman.’

POLONIUS.
At ‘closes in the consequence’ ay, marry!
He closes with you thus: ‘I know the gentleman,
I saw him yesterday, or t’other day,
Or then, or then, with such and such; and, as you say,
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in’s rouse,
There falling out at tennis’: or perchance,
‘I saw him enter such a house of sale’—
_Videlicet_, a brothel, or so forth. See you now;
Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses, and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO.
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS.
God b’ wi’ you, fare you well.

REYNALDO.
Good my lord.

POLONIUS.
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO.
I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS.
And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO.
Well, my lord.

POLONIUS.
Farewell.

[_Exit Reynaldo._]

Enter Ophelia.

How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?

OPHELIA.
Alas, my lord, I have been so affrighted.

POLONIUS.
With what, in the name of God?

OPHELIA.
My lord, as I was sewing in my chamber,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac’d,
No hat upon his head, his stockings foul’d,
Ungart’red, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors, he comes before me.

POLONIUS.
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA.
My lord, I do not know, but truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS.
What said he?

OPHELIA.
He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
And with his other hand thus o’er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so,
At last,—a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He rais’d a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And with his head over his shoulder turn’d
He seem’d to find his way without his eyes,
For out o’ doors he went without their help,
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself,
And leads the will to desperate undertakings,
As oft as any passion under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry,—
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA.
No, my good lord; but as you did command,
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS.
That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgement
I had not quoted him. I fear’d he did but trifle,
And meant to wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
It seems it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE II. A room in the Castle.

Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and Attendants.

KING.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet’s transformation; so I call it,
Since nor th’exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
So much from th’understanding of himself,
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him,
And since so neighbour’d to his youth and humour,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures and to gather,
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, open’d, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you,
And sure I am, two men there are not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and good will
As to expend your time with us awhile,
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king’s remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Both your majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN.
We both obey,
And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
To lay our service freely at your feet
To be commanded.

KING.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son. Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN.
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him.

QUEEN.
Ay, amen.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and some Attendants._]

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS.
Th’ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully return’d.

KING.
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS.
Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
I hold my duty, as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious King:
And I do think,—or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath us’d to do—that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.

KING.
O speak of that, that do I long to hear.

POLONIUS.
Give first admittance to th’ambassadors;
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING.
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.

[_Exit Polonius._]

He tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found
The head and source of all your son’s distemper.

QUEEN.
I doubt it is no other but the main,
His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.

KING.
Well, we shall sift him.

Enter Polonius with Voltemand and Cornelius.

Welcome, my good friends!
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND.
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew’s levies, which to him appear’d
To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack;
But better look’d into, he truly found
It was against your Highness; whereat griev’d,
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway; and in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th’assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,
And his commission to employ those soldiers
So levied as before, against the Polack:
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[_Gives a paper._]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING.
It likes us well;
And at our more consider’d time we’ll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
Go to your rest, at night we’ll feast together:.
Most welcome home.

[_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

POLONIUS.
This business is well ended.
My liege and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
Mad call I it; for to define true madness,
What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN.
More matter, with less art.

POLONIUS.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity;
And pity ’tis ’tis true. A foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
I have a daughter—have whilst she is mine—
Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
[_Reads._]
_To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia_—
That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; ‘beautified’ is a vile
phrase: but you shall hear.
[_Reads._]
_these; in her excellent white bosom, these, &c._

QUEEN.
Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS.
Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful.
[_Reads._]
  _Doubt thou the stars are fire,
     Doubt that the sun doth move,
   Doubt truth to be a liar,
     But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not art to reckon my
groans. But that I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.
  Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
     HAMLET._
This in obedience hath my daughter show’d me;
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING.
But how hath she receiv’d his love?

POLONIUS.
What do you think of me?

KING.
As of a man faithful and honourable.

POLONIUS.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing,
As I perceiv’d it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me, what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had play’d the desk or table-book,
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or look’d upon this love with idle sight,
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
‘Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be.’ And then I precepts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repulsed,—a short tale to make—
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves,
And all we wail for.

KING.
Do you think ’tis this?

QUEEN.
It may be, very likely.

POLONIUS.
Hath there been such a time, I’d fain know that,
That I have positively said ‘’Tis so,’
When it prov’d otherwise?

KING.
Not that I know.

POLONIUS.
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
[_Points to his head and shoulder._]
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
Within the centre.

KING.
How may we try it further?

POLONIUS.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN.
So he does indeed.

POLONIUS.
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
Be you and I behind an arras then,
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING.
We will try it.

Enter Hamlet, reading.

QUEEN.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

POLONIUS.
Away, I do beseech you, both away
I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.

[_Exeunt King, Queen and Attendants._]

How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET.
Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS.
Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET.
Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS.
Not I, my lord.

HAMLET.
Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS.
Honest, my lord?

HAMLET.
Ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out
of ten thousand.

POLONIUS.
That’s very true, my lord.

HAMLET.
For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing
carrion,—
Have you a daughter?

POLONIUS.
I have, my lord.

HAMLET.
Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a blessing, but not as your
daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.

POLONIUS.
How say you by that? [_Aside._] Still harping on my daughter. Yet he
knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger. He is far gone, far
gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very
near this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my lord?

HAMLET.
Words, words, words.

POLONIUS.
What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET.
Between who?

POLONIUS.
I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET.
Slanders, sir. For the satirical slave says here that old men have grey
beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber
and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together
with most weak hams. All which, sir, though I most powerfully and
potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down.
For you yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could
go backward.

POLONIUS.
[_Aside._] Though this be madness, yet there is method in’t.—
Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET.
Into my grave?

POLONIUS.
Indeed, that is out o’ the air. [_Aside._] How pregnant sometimes his
replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will leave him and
suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.
My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.

HAMLET.
You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more willingly part
withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS.
Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET.
These tedious old fools.

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

POLONIUS.
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.

ROSENCRANTZ.
[_To Polonius._] God save you, sir.

[_Exit Polonius._]

GUILDENSTERN.
My honoured lord!

ROSENCRANTZ.
My most dear lord!

HAMLET.
My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
Rosencrantz. Good lads, how do ye both?

ROSENCRANTZ.
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN.
Happy in that we are not over-happy;
On Fortune’s cap we are not the very button.

HAMLET.
Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Neither, my lord.

HAMLET.
Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?

GUILDENSTERN.
Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET.
In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true; she is a strumpet. What’s
the news?

ROSENCRANTZ.
None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.

HAMLET.
Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me question more
in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN.
Prison, my lord?

HAMLET.
Denmark’s a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Then is the world one.

HAMLET.
A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons,
Denmark being one o’ th’ worst.

ROSENCRANTZ.
We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET.
Why, then ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad but
thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Why, then your ambition makes it one; ’tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET.
O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of
infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN.
Which dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very substance of the
ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET.
A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is
but a shadow’s shadow.

HAMLET.
Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch’d heroes
the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN.
We’ll wait upon you.

HAMLET.
No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my servants; for,
to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ.
To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you. And sure,
dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent
for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal
justly with me. Come, come; nay, speak.

GUILDENSTERN.
What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET.
Why, anything. But to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a
kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not craft
enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for you.

ROSENCRANTZ.
To what end, my lord?

HAMLET.
That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of our
fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our
ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent
for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ.
[_To Guildenstern._] What say you?

HAMLET.
[_Aside._] Nay, then I have an eye of you. If you love me, hold not
off.

GUILDENSTERN.
My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET.
I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery,
and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I have of
late, but wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom
of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition that
this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this
most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of
vapours. What a piece of work is man, how noble in reason, how infinite
in faculties, in form and moving, how express and admirable; in action
how like an angel, in apprehension, how like a god: the beauty of the
world, the paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this
quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither,
though by your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ.
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

HAMLET.
Why did you laugh then, when I said ‘Man delights not me’?

ROSENCRANTZ.
To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten entertainment
the players shall receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET.
He that plays the king shall be welcome,—his Majesty shall have tribute
of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover
shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace;
the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sere;
and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt
for’t. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Even those you were wont to take such delight in—the tragedians of the
city.

HAMLET.
How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation and
profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ.
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.

HAMLET.
Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city? Are
they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ.
No, indeed, they are not.

HAMLET.
How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is, sir, an
aerie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question,
and are most tyrannically clapped for’t. These are now the fashion, and
so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing
rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET.
What, are they children? Who maintains ’em? How are they escoted? Will
they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players—as it is
most like, if their means are no better—their writers do them wrong to
make them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it
no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was for a while, no money
bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the
question.

HAMLET.
Is’t possible?

GUILDENSTERN.
O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

HAMLET.
Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.

HAMLET.
It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and those that
would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty,
fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. ’Sblood,
there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find
it out.

[_Flourish of trumpets within._]

GUILDENSTERN.
There are the players.

HAMLET.
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come. The
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you
in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which I tell you must show
fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You
are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

GUILDENSTERN.
In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET.
I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I know a
hawk from a handsaw.

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS.
Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET.
Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. That great
baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they say an old man is
twice a child.

HAMLET.
I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.—You say
right, sir: for a Monday morning ’twas so indeed.

POLONIUS.
My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET.
My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in Rome—

POLONIUS.
The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET.
Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS.
Upon my honour.

HAMLET.
Then came each actor on his ass—

POLONIUS.
The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history,
pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem
unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light, for the
law of writ and the liberty. These are the only men.

HAMLET.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!

POLONIUS.
What treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET.
Why—
   ’One fair daughter, and no more,
   The which he loved passing well.’

POLONIUS.
[_Aside._] Still on my daughter.

HAMLET.
Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS.
If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing
well.

HAMLET.
Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS.
What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET.
Why,
   As by lot, God wot,
and then, you know,
   It came to pass, as most like it was.
The first row of the pious chanson will show you more. For look where
my abridgement comes.

Enter four or five Players.

You are welcome, masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well.
Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! Thy face is valanc’d since I
saw thee last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady
and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I
saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you
are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at anything
we see. We’ll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER.
What speech, my lord?

HAMLET.
I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or if it
was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the million,
’twas caviare to the general. But it was—as I received it, and others,
whose judgements in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent
play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as
cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the lines to make
the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indite the
author of affectation, but called it an honest method, as wholesome as
sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it, I
chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your
memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see:
   _The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast,—_
It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus—
   _The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
   Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
   When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
   Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d
   With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
   Now is he total gules, horridly trick’d
   With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
   Bak’d and impasted with the parching streets,
   That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
   To their vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire,
   And thus o’ersized with coagulate gore,
   With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
   Old grandsire Priam seeks._
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS.
’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.

FIRST PLAYER.
   _Anon he finds him,
   Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
   Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
   Repugnant to command. Unequal match’d,
   Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
   But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
   Th’unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
   Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
   Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
   Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,
   Which was declining on the milky head
   Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ th’air to stick.
   So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
   And like a neutral to his will and matter,
   Did nothing.
   But as we often see against some storm,
   A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
   The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
   As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
   Doth rend the region; so after Pyrrhus’ pause,
   Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
   And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall
   On Mars’s armour, forg’d for proof eterne,
   With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
   Now falls on Priam.
   Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,
   In general synod, take away her power;
   Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
   And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
   As low as to the fiends._

POLONIUS.
This is too long.

HAMLET.
It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prithee say on.
He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps.
Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER.
   _But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen,—_

HAMLET.
‘The mobled queen’?

POLONIUS.
That’s good! ‘Mobled queen’ is good.

FIRST PLAYER.
   _Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames
   With bisson rheum. A clout upon that head
   Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
   About her lank and all o’erteemed loins,
   A blanket, in th’alarm of fear caught up—
   Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d,
   ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounc’d.
   But if the gods themselves did see her then,
   When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
   In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,
   The instant burst of clamour that she made,—
   Unless things mortal move them not at all,—
   Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,
   And passion in the gods._

POLONIUS.
Look, where he has not turn’d his colour, and has tears in’s eyes. Pray
you, no more.

HAMLET.
’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.—Good my
lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be
well used; for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time.
After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill
report while you live.

POLONIUS.
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

HAMLET.
God’s bodikin, man, much better. Use every man after his desert, and who
should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity. The
less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS.
Come, sirs.

HAMLET.
Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow.

[_Exeunt Polonius with all the Players but the First._]

Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?

FIRST PLAYER.
Ay, my lord.

HAMLET.
We’ll ha’t tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some
dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could
you not?

FIRST PLAYER.
Ay, my lord.

HAMLET.
Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.

[_Exit First Player._]

[_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern_] My good friends, I’ll leave you
till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Good my lord.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET.
Ay, so, God b’ wi’ ye. Now I am alone.
O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wan’d;
Tears in his eyes, distraction in’s aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
For Hecuba?
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do,
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
Make mad the guilty, and appal the free,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing. No, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me villain, breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i’ th’ throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be
But I am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
Oh vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murder’d,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A scullion! Fie upon’t! Foh!
About, my brain! I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play,
Have by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaim’d their malefactions.
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks;
I’ll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be the devil, and the devil hath power
T’assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds
More relative than this. The play’s the thing
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A room in the Castle.


Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING.
And can you by no drift of circumstance
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ.
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN.
Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN.
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Niggard of question, but of our demands,
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN.
Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o’er-raught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS.
’Tis most true;
And he beseech’d me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING.
With all my heart; and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclin’d.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,
And drive his purpose on to these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ.
We shall, my lord.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

KING.
Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as ’twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge,
And gather by him, as he is behav’d,
If’t be th’affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN.
I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honours.

OPHELIA.
Madam, I wish it may.

[_Exit Queen._]

POLONIUS.
Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves.—[_To Ophelia._] Read on this book,
That show of such an exercise may colour
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this,
’Tis too much prov’d, that with devotion’s visage
And pious action we do sugar o’er
The devil himself.

KING.
[_Aside._] O ’tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS.
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.

[_Exeunt King and Polonius._]

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET.
To be, or not to be, that is the question:
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them? To die—to sleep,
No more; and by a sleep to say we end
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to: ’tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep.
To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there’s the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There’s the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
The pangs of dispriz’d love, the law’s delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscover’d country, from whose bourn
No traveller returns, puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action. Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remember’d.

OPHELIA.
Good my lord,
How does your honour for this many a day?

HAMLET.
I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

OPHELIA.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to re-deliver.
I pray you, now receive them.

HAMLET.
No, not I.
I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA.
My honour’d lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath compos’d
As made the things more rich; their perfume lost,
Take these again; for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET.
Ha, ha! Are you honest?

OPHELIA.
My lord?

HAMLET.
Are you fair?

OPHELIA.
What means your lordship?

HAMLET.
That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse
to your beauty.

OPHELIA.
Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?

HAMLET.
Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from
what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty
into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives
it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA.
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET.
You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate our old
stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA.
I was the more deceived.

HAMLET.
Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? I am
myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things
that it were better my mother had not borne me. I am very proud,
revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have
thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and
heaven? We are arrant knaves all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a
nunnery. Where’s your father?

OPHELIA.
At home, my lord.

HAMLET.
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but
in’s own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA.
O help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET.
If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry. Be thou
as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get
thee to a nunnery, go: farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry, marry a
fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. To
a nunnery, go; and quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA.
O heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET.
I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath given you one
face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you amble, and you
lisp, and nickname God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your
ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t, it hath made me mad. I say, we
will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but
one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.

[_Exit._]

OPHELIA.
O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!
The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword,
Th’expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
Th’observ’d of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That suck’d the honey of his music vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled out of tune and harsh,
That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O woe is me,
T’have seen what I have seen, see what I see.

Enter King and Polonius.

KING.
Love? His affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little,
Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul
O’er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger, which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute:
Haply the seas and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?

POLONIUS.
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said,
We heard it all. My lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit, after the play,
Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief, let her be round with him,
And I’ll be plac’d, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him; or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING.
It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE II. A hall in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet and certain Players.

HAMLET.
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on
the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as
lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much
with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent,
tempest, and, as I may say, whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who, for
the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and
noise. I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It
out-Herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.

FIRST PLAYER.
I warrant your honour.

HAMLET.
Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your tutor.
Suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature; for anything
so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the
first and now, was and is, to hold as ’twere the mirror up to nature;
to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age
and body of the time his form and pressure. Now, this overdone, or come
tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the
judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have
seen play—and heard others praise, and that highly—not to speak it
profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians, nor the gait
of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have
thought some of Nature’s journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

FIRST PLAYER.
I hope we have reform’d that indifferently with us, sir.

HAMLET.
O reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no
more than is set down for them. For there be of them that will
themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh
too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then
to be considered. That’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

[_Exeunt Players._]

Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

How now, my lord?
Will the King hear this piece of work?

POLONIUS.
And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET.
Bid the players make haste.

[_Exit Polonius._]

Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN.
We will, my lord.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET.
What ho, Horatio!

Enter Horatio.

HORATIO.
Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET.
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man
As e’er my conversation cop’d withal.

HORATIO.
O my dear lord.

HAMLET.
Nay, do not think I flatter;
For what advancement may I hope from thee,
That no revenue hast, but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter’d?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath seal’d thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
Hast ta’en with equal thanks. And blessed are those
Whose blood and judgement are so well co-mingled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him
In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee, of my father’s death.
I prithee, when thou see’st that act a-foot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe mine uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen;
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note;
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face;
And after we will both our judgements join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO.
Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

HAMLET.
They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

Danish march. A flourish. Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia,
Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and others.

KING.
How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET.
Excellent, i’ faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air,
promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.

KING.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.

HAMLET.
No, nor mine now. [_To Polonius._] My lord, you play’d once i’
th’university, you say?

POLONIUS.
That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.

HAMLET.
What did you enact?

POLONIUS.
I did enact Julius Caesar. I was kill’d i’ th’ Capitol. Brutus killed
me.

HAMLET.
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be the
players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.

QUEEN.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET.
No, good mother, here’s metal more attractive.

POLONIUS.
[_To the King._] O ho! do you mark that?

HAMLET.
Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

[_Lying down at Ophelia’s feet._]

OPHELIA.
No, my lord.

HAMLET.
I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA.
Ay, my lord.

HAMLET.
Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA.
I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET.
That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.

OPHELIA.
What is, my lord?

HAMLET.
Nothing.

OPHELIA.
You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET.
Who, I?

OPHELIA.
Ay, my lord.

HAMLET.
O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry? For look
you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within’s two
hours.

OPHELIA.
Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET.
So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I’ll have a suit of
sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then
there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year. But
by’r lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he suffer not
thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is ‘For, O, for O, the
hobby-horse is forgot!’

Trumpets sound. The dumb show enters.

_Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing him and he
her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. He takes her
up, and declines his head upon her neck. Lays him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow,
takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the King’s ears, and
exits. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes passionate
action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes, comes in again,
seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The Poisoner
woos the Queen with gifts. She seems loth and unwilling awhile, but in
the end accepts his love._

[_Exeunt._]

OPHELIA.
What means this, my lord?

HAMLET.
Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.

OPHELIA.
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

Enter Prologue.

HAMLET.
We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel; they’ll
tell all.

OPHELIA.
Will they tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET.
Ay, or any show that you’ll show him. Be not you ashamed to show, he’ll
not shame to tell you what it means.

OPHELIA.
You are naught, you are naught: I’ll mark the play.

PROLOGUE.
   _For us, and for our tragedy,
   Here stooping to your clemency,
   We beg your hearing patiently._

HAMLET.
Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA.
’Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET.
As woman’s love.

Enter a King and a Queen.

PLAYER KING.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER QUEEN.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o’er ere love be done.
But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:
For women’s fear and love holds quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And as my love is siz’d, my fear is so.
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too:
My operant powers their functions leave to do:
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honour’d, belov’d, and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou—

PLAYER QUEEN.
O confound the rest.
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst!
None wed the second but who kill’d the first.

HAMLET.
[_Aside._] Wormwood, wormwood.

PLAYER QUEEN.
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead,
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING.
I do believe you think what now you speak;
But what we do determine, oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity:
Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary ’tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye; nor ’tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change,
For ’tis a question left us yet to prove,
Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
The poor advanc’d makes friends of enemies;
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend:
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But orderly to end where I begun,
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown.
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope,
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy,
Meet what I would have well, and it destroy!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET.
[_To Ophelia._] If she should break it now.

PLAYER KING.
’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.
[_Sleeps._]

PLAYER QUEEN.
Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.

[_Exit._]

HAMLET.
Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN.
The lady protests too much, methinks.

HAMLET.
O, but she’ll keep her word.

KING.
Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in’t?

HAMLET.
No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i’ th’ world.

KING.
What do you call the play?

HAMLET.
_The Mousetrap._ Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the image of a
murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the Duke’s name, his wife Baptista:
you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that?
Your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let the
gall’d jade wince; our withers are unwrung.

Enter Lucianus.

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.

OPHELIA.
You are a good chorus, my lord.

HAMLET.
I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets
dallying.

OPHELIA.
You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET.
It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

OPHELIA.
Still better, and worse.

HAMLET.
So you mistake your husbands.—Begin, murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable
faces, and begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.

LUCIANUS.
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.

[_Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears._]

HAMLET.
He poisons him i’ th’garden for’s estate. His name’s Gonzago. The story
is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You shall see anon how
the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.

OPHELIA.
The King rises.

HAMLET.
What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN.
How fares my lord?

POLONIUS.
Give o’er the play.

KING.
Give me some light. Away.

All.
Lights, lights, lights.

[_Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio._]

HAMLET.
   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
     The hart ungalled play;
   For some must watch, while some must sleep,
     So runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my
fortunes turn Turk with me; with two Provincial roses on my razed
shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?

HORATIO.
Half a share.

HAMLET.
A whole one, I.
   For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
     This realm dismantled was
   Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
     A very, very—pajock.

HORATIO.
You might have rhymed.

HAMLET.
O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound. Didst
perceive?

HORATIO.
Very well, my lord.

HAMLET.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO.
I did very well note him.

HAMLET.
Ah, ha! Come, some music. Come, the recorders.
   For if the king like not the comedy,
   Why then, belike he likes it not, perdie.
Come, some music.

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

GUILDENSTERN.
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.

HAMLET.
Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN.
The King, sir—

HAMLET.
Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN.
Is in his retirement, marvellous distempered.

HAMLET.
With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN.
No, my lord; rather with choler.

HAMLET.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the
doctor, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him
into far more choler.

GUILDENSTERN.
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so
wildly from my affair.

HAMLET.
I am tame, sir, pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN.
The Queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me
to you.

HAMLET.
You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN.
Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall
please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s
commandment; if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my
business.

HAMLET.
Sir, I cannot.

GUILDENSTERN.
What, my lord?

HAMLET.
Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s diseased. But, sir, such answer
as I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more, but to the matter. My mother, you say,—

ROSENCRANTZ.
Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into amazement and
admiration.

HAMLET.
O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no sequel
at the heels of this mother’s admiration?

ROSENCRANTZ.
She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET.
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any further
trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ.
My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET.
And so I do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely bar the
door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET.
Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself for your
succession in Denmark?

HAMLET.
Ay, sir, but while the grass grows—the proverb is something musty.

Re-enter the Players with recorders.

O, the recorders. Let me see one.—To withdraw with you, why do you go
about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN.
O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET.
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN.
My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET.
I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN.
Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET.
I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN.
I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET.
’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your finger and
thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most
eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony. I have not the
skill.

HAMLET.
Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play
upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart
of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my
compass; and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little
organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood, do you think I am easier
to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though
you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.

Enter Polonius.

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS.
My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.

HAMLET.
Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a camel?

POLONIUS.
By the mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET.
Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS.
It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET.
Or like a whale.

POLONIUS.
Very like a whale.

HAMLET.
Then will I come to my mother by and by.—They fool me to the top of my
bent.—I will come by and by.

POLONIUS.
I will say so.

[_Exit._]

HAMLET.
By and by is easily said. Leave me, friends.

[_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

’Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft now, to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none;
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites.
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.

[_Exit._]

 SCENE III. A room in the Castle.

Enter King, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING.
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you,
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
Out of his lunacies.

GUILDENSTERN.
We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ.
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armour of the mind,
To keep itself from ’noyance; but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest
The lives of many. The cease of majesty
Dies not alone; but like a gulf doth draw
What’s near it with it. It is a massy wheel
Fix’d on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortis’d and adjoin’d; which when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone
Did the King sigh, but with a general groan.

KING.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;
For we will fetters put upon this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN.
We will haste us.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS.
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.
Behind the arras I’ll convey myself
To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege,
I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know.

KING.
Thanks, dear my lord.

[_Exit Polonius._]

O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t,—
A brother’s murder! Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will:
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offence?
And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardon’d being down? Then I’ll look up.
My fault is past. But O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul murder!
That cannot be; since I am still possess’d
Of those effects for which I did the murder,—
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardon’d and retain th’offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world
Offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above;
There is no shuffling, there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compell’d
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that struggling to be free,
Art more engag’d! Help, angels! Make assay:
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe.
All may be well.

[_Retires and kneels._]

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Now might I do it pat, now he is praying.
And now I’ll do’t. And so he goes to heaven;
And so am I reveng’d. That would be scann’d:
A villain kills my father, and for that
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven. O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
’Tis heavy with him. And am I then reveng’d,
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and season’d for his passage? No.
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent:
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage,
Or in th’incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At gaming, swearing; or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in’t,
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damn’d and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

[_Exit._]

The King rises and advances.

KING.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

[_Exit._]

 SCENE IV. Another room in the Castle.

Enter Queen and Polonius.

POLONIUS.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him,
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
And that your Grace hath screen’d and stood between
Much heat and him. I’ll silence me e’en here.
Pray you be round with him.

HAMLET.
[_Within._] Mother, mother, mother.

QUEEN.
I’ll warrant you, Fear me not.
Withdraw, I hear him coming.

[_Polonius goes behind the arras._]

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Now, mother, what’s the matter?

QUEEN.
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET.
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN.
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET.
What’s the matter now?

QUEEN.
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET.
No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,
And, would it were not so. You are my mother.

QUEEN.
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET.
Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, help, ho!

POLONIUS.
[_Behind._] What, ho! help, help, help!

HAMLET.
How now? A rat? [_Draws._]
Dead for a ducat, dead!

[_Makes a pass through the arras._]

POLONIUS.
[_Behind._] O, I am slain!

[_Falls and dies._]

QUEEN.
O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET.
Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

[_Draws forth Polonius._]

QUEEN.
O what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET.
A bloody deed. Almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN.
As kill a king?

HAMLET.
Ay, lady, ’twas my word.—
[_To Polonius._] Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune,
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.—
Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit you down,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall,
If it be made of penetrable stuff;
If damned custom have not braz’d it so,
That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN.
What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET.
Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
And sets a blister there. Makes marriage vows
As false as dicers’ oaths. O such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words. Heaven’s face doth glow,
Yea this solidity and compound mass,
With tristful visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN.
Ay me, what act,
That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?

HAMLET.
Look here upon this picture, and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
A combination and a form indeed,
Where every god did seem to set his seal,
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildew’d ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?
You cannot call it love; for at your age
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it’s humble,
And waits upon the judgement: and what judgement
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplex’d, for madness would not err
Nor sense to ecstacy was ne’er so thrall’d
But it reserv’d some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was’t
That thus hath cozen’d you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame! where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN.
O Hamlet, speak no more.
Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET.
Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stew’d in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty.

QUEEN.
O speak to me no more;
These words like daggers enter in mine ears;
No more, sweet Hamlet.

HAMLET.
A murderer and a villain;
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord. A vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket!

QUEEN.
No more.

HAMLET.
A king of shreds and patches!—

Enter Ghost.

Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?

QUEEN.
Alas, he’s mad.

HAMLET.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, laps’d in time and passion, lets go by
The important acting of your dread command?
O say!

GHOST.
Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET.
How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN.
Alas, how is’t with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,
Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?

HAMLET.
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares,
His form and cause conjoin’d, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable.—Do not look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN.
To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET.
Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN.
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET.
Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN.
No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET.
Why, look you there! look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he liv’d!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal.

[_Exit Ghost._]

QUEEN.
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET.
Ecstasy!
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have utter’d. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will re-word; which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come;
And do not spread the compost on the weeds,
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
For in the fatness of these pursy times
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

HAMLET.
O throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half.
Good night. But go not to mine uncle’s bed.
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
That monster custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence. The next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
And either curb the devil, or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And when you are desirous to be bles’d,
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[_Pointing to Polonius._]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleas’d it so,
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gave him. So again, good night.
I must be cruel, only to be kind:
Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN.
What shall I do?

HAMLET.
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
Or paddling in your neck with his damn’d fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,
For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN.
Be thou assur’d, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET.
I must to England, you know that?

QUEEN.
Alack,
I had forgot. ’Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET.
There’s letters seal’d: and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fang’d,—
They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
For ’tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard, and ’t shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, ’tis most sweet,
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I’ll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
Mother, good night. Indeed, this counsellor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night, mother.

[_Exit Hamlet dragging out Polonius._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. A room in the Castle.


Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING.
There’s matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?

QUEEN.
Bestow this place on us a little while.

[_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, who go out._]

Ah, my good lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING.
What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN.
Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries ‘A rat, a rat!’
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.

KING.
O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all;
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer’d?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrain’d, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love
We would not understand what was most fit,
But like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN.
To draw apart the body he hath kill’d,
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.

KING.
O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence, and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!

Re-enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Friends both, go join you with some further aid:
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother’s closet hath he dragg’d him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends,
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what’s untimely done, so haply slander,
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank,
Transports his poison’d shot, may miss our name,
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE II. Another room in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Safely stowed.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN.
[_Within._] Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET.
What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

ROSENCRANTZ.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET.
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence,
And bear it to the chapel.

HAMLET.
Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Believe what?

HAMLET.
That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded
of a sponge—what replication should be made by the son of a king?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET.
Ay, sir; that soaks up the King’s countenance, his rewards, his
authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the end: he
keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be
last swallowed: when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but
squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ.
I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET.
I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ.
My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the King.

HAMLET.
The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King
is a thing—

GUILDENSTERN.
A thing, my lord!

HAMLET.
Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE III. Another room in the Castle.

Enter King, attended.

KING.
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him:
He’s lov’d of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgement, but their eyes;
And where ’tis so, th’offender’s scourge is weigh’d,
But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are reliev’d,
Or not at all.

Enter Rosencrantz.

How now? What hath befall’n?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Where the dead body is bestow’d, my lord,
We cannot get from him.

KING.
But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ.
Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING.
Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ.
Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.

Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern.

KING.
Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?

HAMLET.
At supper.

KING.
At supper? Where?

HAMLET.
Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain convocation of
politic worms are e’en at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet.
We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots.
Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service,—two dishes,
but to one table. That’s the end.

KING.
Alas, alas!

HAMLET.
A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the
fish that hath fed of that worm.

KING.
What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET.
Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts
of a beggar.

KING.
Where is Polonius?

HAMLET.
In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not there,
seek him i’ th’other place yourself. But indeed, if you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the
lobby.

KING.
[_To some Attendants._] Go seek him there.

HAMLET.
He will stay till you come.

[_Exeunt Attendants._]

KING.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,—
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done,—must send thee hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself;
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th’associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET.
For England?

KING.
Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Good.

KING.
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.

HAMLET.
I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England! Farewell, dear
mother.

KING.
Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one
flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England.

[_Exit._]

KING.
Follow him at foot. Tempt him with speed aboard;
Delay it not; I’ll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is seal’d and done
That else leans on th’affair. Pray you make haste.

[_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught,—
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us,—thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters conjuring to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done,
Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun.

[_Exit._]

 SCENE IV. A plain in Denmark.

Enter Fortinbras and Forces marching.

FORTINBRAS.
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promis’d march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.

CAPTAIN.
I will do’t, my lord.

FORTINBRAS.
Go softly on.

[_Exeunt all but the Captain._]

Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern &c.

HAMLET.
Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN.
They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET.
How purpos’d, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN.
Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET.
Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN.
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN.
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET.
Why, then the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN.
Yes, it is already garrison’d.

HAMLET.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw!
This is th’imposthume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN.
God b’ wi’ you, sir.

[_Exit._]

ROSENCRANTZ.
Will’t please you go, my lord?

HAMLET.
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.

[_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

How all occasions do inform against me,
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unus’d. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th’event,—
A thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom
And ever three parts coward,—I do not know
Why yet I live to say this thing’s to do,
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do’t. Examples gross as earth exhort me,
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff’d,
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honour’s at the stake. How stand I then,
That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth.

[_Exit._]

 SCENE V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Enter Queen, Horatio and a Gentleman.

QUEEN.
I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN.
She is importunate, indeed distract.
Her mood will needs be pitied.

QUEEN.
What would she have?

GENTLEMAN.
She speaks much of her father; says she hears
There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,
Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN.
Let her come in.

[_Exit Gentleman._]

To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

Enter Ophelia.

OPHELIA.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN.
How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA.
[_Sings._]
   How should I your true love know
     From another one?
   By his cockle hat and staff
     And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN.
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA.
Say you? Nay, pray you mark.
[_Sings._]
   He is dead and gone, lady,
     He is dead and gone,
   At his head a grass green turf,
     At his heels a stone.

QUEEN.
Nay, but Ophelia—

OPHELIA.
Pray you mark.
[_Sings._]
   White his shroud as the mountain snow.

Enter King.

QUEEN.
Alas, look here, my lord!

OPHELIA.
[_Sings._]
     Larded all with sweet flowers;
   Which bewept to the grave did not go
     With true-love showers.

KING.
How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA.
Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker’s daughter. Lord, we
know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your table!

KING.
Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA.
Pray you, let’s have no words of this; but when they ask you what it
means, say you this:
[_Sings._]
   Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,
     All in the morning betime,
   And I a maid at your window,
     To be your Valentine.

   Then up he rose and donn’d his clothes,
     And dupp’d the chamber door,
   Let in the maid, that out a maid
     Never departed more.

KING.
Pretty Ophelia!

OPHELIA.
Indeed la, without an oath, I’ll make an end on’t.
[_Sings._]
   By Gis and by Saint Charity,
     Alack, and fie for shame!
   Young men will do’t if they come to’t;
     By Cock, they are to blame.

   Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
     You promis’d me to wed.
   So would I ha’ done, by yonder sun,
     An thou hadst not come to my bed.

KING.
How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA.
I hope all will be well. We must be patient. But I cannot choose but
weep, to think they would lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall
know of it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach!
Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good night, good night.

[_Exit._]

KING.
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.

[_Exit Horatio._]

O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
All from her father’s death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions. First, her father slain;
Next, your son gone; and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
For good Polonius’ death; and we have done but greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him. Poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgement,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggar’d,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.

[_A noise within._]

QUEEN.
Alack, what noise is this?

KING.
Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

Enter a Gentleman.

What is the matter?

GENTLEMAN.
Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O’erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord,
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry ‘Choose we! Laertes shall be king!’
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
‘Laertes shall be king, Laertes king.’

QUEEN.
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs.

[_A noise within._]

KING.
The doors are broke.

Enter Laertes, armed; Danes following.

LAERTES.
Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.

Danes.
No, let’s come in.

LAERTES.
I pray you, give me leave.

DANES.
We will, we will.

[_They retire without the door._]

LAERTES.
I thank you. Keep the door. O thou vile king,
Give me my father.

QUEEN.
Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES.
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard;
Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.

KING.
What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incens’d.—Let him go, Gertrude:—
Speak, man.

LAERTES.
Where is my father?

KING.
Dead.

QUEEN.
But not by him.

KING.
Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES.
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds, I give to negligence,
Let come what comes; only I’ll be reveng’d
Most throughly for my father.

KING.
Who shall stay you?

LAERTES.
My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I’ll husband them so well,
They shall go far with little.

KING.
Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father’s death, is’t writ in your revenge
That, sweepstake, you will draw both friend and foe,
Winner and loser?

LAERTES.
None but his enemies.

KING.
Will you know them then?

LAERTES.
To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms;
And, like the kind life-rendering pelican,
Repast them with my blood.

KING.
Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father’s death,
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgement ’pear
As day does to your eye.

DANES.
[_Within._] Let her come in.

LAERTES.
How now! What noise is that?

Re-enter Ophelia, fantastically dressed with straws and flowers.

O heat, dry up my brains. Tears seven times salt,
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye.
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,
Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is’t possible a young maid’s wits
Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?
Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.

OPHELIA.
[_Sings._]
   They bore him barefac’d on the bier,
   Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny
   And on his grave rain’d many a tear.—
   Fare you well, my dove!

LAERTES.
Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.

OPHELIA.
You must sing ‘Down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.’ O, how the
wheel becomes it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
daughter.

LAERTES.
This nothing’s more than matter.

OPHELIA.
There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray love, remember. And
there is pansies, that’s for thoughts.

LAERTES.
A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.

OPHELIA.
There’s fennel for you, and columbines. There’s rue for you; and here’s
some for me. We may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. O you must wear
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would give you some
violets, but they wither’d all when my father died. They say he made a
good end.
[_Sings._]
   For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES.
Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself
She turns to favour and to prettiness.

OPHELIA.
[_Sings._]
   And will he not come again?
   And will he not come again?
     No, no, he is dead,
     Go to thy death-bed,
   He never will come again.

   His beard was as white as snow,
   All flaxen was his poll.
     He is gone, he is gone,
     And we cast away moan.
   God ha’ mercy on his soul.

And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b’ wi’ ye.

[_Exit._]

LAERTES.
Do you see this, O God?

KING.
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touch’d, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labour with your soul
To give it due content.

LAERTES.
Let this be so;
His means of death, his obscure burial,—
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,
No noble rite, nor formal ostentation,—
Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call’t in question.

KING.
So you shall.
And where th’offence is let the great axe fall.
I pray you go with me.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE VI. Another room in the Castle.

Enter Horatio and a Servant.

HORATIO.
What are they that would speak with me?

SERVANT.
Sailors, sir. They say they have letters for you.

HORATIO.
Let them come in.

[_Exit Servant._]

I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

Enter Sailors.

FIRST SAILOR.
God bless you, sir.

HORATIO.
Let him bless thee too.

FIRST SAILOR.
He shall, sir, and’t please him. There’s a letter for you, sir. It
comes from th’ambassador that was bound for England; if your name be
Horatio, as I am let to know it is.

HORATIO.
[_Reads._] ‘Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these
fellows some means to the King. They have letters for him. Ere we were
two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us
chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled
valour, and in the grapple I boarded them. On the instant they got
clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt
with me like thieves of mercy. But they knew what they did; I am to do
a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and
repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldst fly death. I have
words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring thee
where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for England:
of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
     He that thou knowest thine,
     HAMLET.’

Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
And do’t the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE VII. Another room in the Castle.

Enter King and Laertes.

KING.
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursu’d my life.

LAERTES.
It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So crimeful and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirr’d up.

KING.
O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew’d,
But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,—
My virtue or my plague, be it either which,—
She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive,
Why to a public count I might not go,
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Would like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,
Too slightly timber’d for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
And not where I had aim’d them.

LAERTES.
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desperate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

KING.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger,
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I lov’d your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—

Enter a Messenger.

How now? What news?

MESSENGER.
Letters, my lord, from Hamlet.
This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.

KING.
From Hamlet! Who brought them?

MESSENGER.
Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He receiv’d them
Of him that brought them.

KING.
Laertes, you shall hear them.
Leave us.

[_Exit Messenger._]

[_Reads._] ‘High and mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes. When I
shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasions of my
sudden and more strange return.
     HAMLET.’

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?

LAERTES.
Know you the hand?

KING.
’Tis Hamlet’s character. ‘Naked!’
And in a postscript here he says ‘alone.’
Can you advise me?

LAERTES.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come,
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
‘Thus diest thou.’

KING.
If it be so, Laertes,—
As how should it be so? How otherwise?—
Will you be rul’d by me?

LAERTES.
Ay, my lord;
So you will not o’errule me to a peace.

KING.
To thine own peace. If he be now return’d,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.

LAERTES.
My lord, I will be rul’d;
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING.
It falls right.
You have been talk’d of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES.
What part is that, my lord?

KING.
A very riband in the cap of youth,
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy,—
I’ve seen myself, and serv’d against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in’t. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,
As had he been incorps’d and demi-natur’d
With the brave beast. So far he topp’d my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks,
Come short of what he did.

LAERTES.
A Norman was’t?

KING.
A Norman.

LAERTES.
Upon my life, Lamord.

KING.
The very same.

LAERTES.
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.

KING.
He made confession of you,
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defence,
And for your rapier most especially,
That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you oppos’d them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming o’er to play with him.
Now, out of this,—

LAERTES.
What out of this, my lord?

KING.
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

LAERTES.
Why ask you this?

KING.
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time,
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
And nothing is at a like goodness still,
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too much. That we would do,
We should do when we would; for this ‘would’ changes,
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this ‘should’ is like a spendthrift sigh
That hurts by easing. But to the quick o’ th’ulcer:
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake
To show yourself your father’s son in deed,
More than in words?

LAERTES.
To cut his throat i’ th’ church.

KING.
No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But good Laertes,
Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home:
We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice,
Requite him for your father.

LAERTES.
I will do’t.
And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
This is but scratch’d withal. I’ll touch my point
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

KING.
Let’s further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad performance.
’Twere better not assay’d. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second, that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings,—
I ha’t! When in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bouts more violent to that end,
And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepar’d him
A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venom’d stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.

Enter Queen.

How now, sweet Queen?

QUEEN.
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.

LAERTES.
Drown’d! O, where?

QUEEN.
There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
That shows his hoary leaves in the glassy stream.
There with fantastic garlands did she make
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her own distress,
Or like a creature native and indued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.

LAERTES.
Alas, then she is drown’d?

QUEEN.
Drown’d, drown’d.

LAERTES.
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord,
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,
But that this folly douts it.

[_Exit._]

KING.
Let’s follow, Gertrude;
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again;
Therefore let’s follow.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A churchyard.


Enter two Clowns with spades, &c.

FIRST CLOWN.
Is she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully seeks her
own salvation?

SECOND CLOWN.
I tell thee she is, and therefore make her grave straight. The crowner
hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.

FIRST CLOWN.
How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence?

SECOND CLOWN.
Why, ’tis found so.

FIRST CLOWN.
It must be _se offendendo_, it cannot be else. For here lies the point:
if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three
branches. It is to act, to do, and to perform: argal, she drowned
herself wittingly.

SECOND CLOWN.
Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,—

FIRST CLOWN.
Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the man; good. If
the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he
goes,—mark you that. But if the water come to him and drown him, he
drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his own death
shortens not his own life.

SECOND CLOWN.
But is this law?

FIRST CLOWN.
Ay, marry, is’t, crowner’s quest law.

SECOND CLOWN.
Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she
should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.

FIRST CLOWN.
Why, there thou say’st. And the more pity that great folk should have
countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their
even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient gentlemen but
gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.

SECOND CLOWN.
Was he a gentleman?

FIRST CLOWN.
He was the first that ever bore arms.

SECOND CLOWN.
Why, he had none.

FIRST CLOWN.
What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture? The
Scripture says Adam digg’d. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess
thyself—

SECOND CLOWN.
Go to.

FIRST CLOWN.
What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright,
or the carpenter?

SECOND CLOWN.
The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.

FIRST CLOWN.
I like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well. But how does
it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say
the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may
do well to thee. To’t again, come.

SECOND CLOWN.
Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?

FIRST CLOWN.
Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

SECOND CLOWN.
Marry, now I can tell.

FIRST CLOWN.
To’t.

SECOND CLOWN.
Mass, I cannot tell.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio, at a distance.

FIRST CLOWN.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his
pace with beating; and when you are asked this question next, say ‘a
grave-maker’. The houses he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee to
Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor.

[_Exit Second Clown._]

[_Digs and sings._]

   In youth when I did love, did love,
     Methought it was very sweet;
   To contract, O, the time for, a, my behove,
     O methought there was nothing meet.

HAMLET.
Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
grave-making?

HORATIO.
Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

HAMLET.
’Tis e’en so; the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.

FIRST CLOWN.
[_Sings._]
   But age with his stealing steps
     Hath claw’d me in his clutch,
   And hath shipp’d me into the land,
     As if I had never been such.

[_Throws up a skull._]

HAMLET.
That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the knave jowls
it to th’ ground, as if ’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first
murder! This might be the pate of a politician which this ass now
o’er-offices, one that would circumvent God, might it not?

HORATIO.
It might, my lord.

HAMLET.
Or of a courtier, which could say ‘Good morrow, sweet lord! How dost
thou, good lord?’ This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised my
lord such-a-one’s horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?

HORATIO.
Ay, my lord.

HAMLET.
Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked about the
mazard with a sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had the
trick to see’t. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play
at loggets with ’em? Mine ache to think on’t.

FIRST CLOWN.
[_Sings._]
   A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
     For and a shrouding-sheet;
   O, a pit of clay for to be made
     For such a guest is meet.

[_Throws up another skull._]

HAMLET.
There’s another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be
his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks?
Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce
with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery?
Hum. This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his
statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his
recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his
recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers
vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his
lands will scarcely lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself
have no more, ha?

HORATIO.
Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET.
Is not parchment made of sheep-skins?

HORATIO.
Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

HAMLET.
They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I will
speak to this fellow.—Whose grave’s this, sir?

FIRST CLOWN.
Mine, sir.
[_Sings._]
   O, a pit of clay for to be made
     For such a guest is meet.

HAMLET.
I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in’t.

FIRST CLOWN.
You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore ’tis not yours.
For my part, I do not lie in’t, yet it is mine.

HAMLET.
Thou dost lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine. ’Tis for the dead,
not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

FIRST CLOWN.
’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’t will away again from me to you.

HAMLET.
What man dost thou dig it for?

FIRST CLOWN.
For no man, sir.

HAMLET.
What woman then?

FIRST CLOWN.
For none neither.

HAMLET.
Who is to be buried in’t?

FIRST CLOWN.
One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.

HAMLET.
How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or equivocation
will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have taken note
of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so
near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe.—How long hast thou
been a grave-maker?

FIRST CLOWN.
Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to’t that day that our last King
Hamlet o’ercame Fortinbras.

HAMLET.
How long is that since?

FIRST CLOWN.
Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the very day
that young Hamlet was born,—he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET.
Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

FIRST CLOWN.
Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there; or if he do
not, it’s no great matter there.

HAMLET.
Why?

FIRST CLOWN.
’Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad as he.

HAMLET.
How came he mad?

FIRST CLOWN.
Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET.
How strangely?

FIRST CLOWN.
Faith, e’en with losing his wits.

HAMLET.
Upon what ground?

FIRST CLOWN.
Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty
years.

HAMLET.
How long will a man lie i’ th’earth ere he rot?

FIRST CLOWN.
Faith, if he be not rotten before he die,—as we have many pocky corses
nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in,—he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine year.

HAMLET.
Why he more than another?

FIRST CLOWN.
Why, sir, his hide is so tann’d with his trade that he will keep out
water a great while. And your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson
dead body. Here’s a skull now; this skull hath lain in the earth
three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET.
Whose was it?

FIRST CLOWN.
A whoreson, mad fellow’s it was. Whose do you think it was?

HAMLET.
Nay, I know not.

FIRST CLOWN.
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! A pour’d a flagon of Rhenish on my
head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the King’s jester.

HAMLET.
This?

FIRST CLOWN.
E’en that.

HAMLET.
Let me see. [_Takes the skull._] Alas, poor Yorick. I knew him,
Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath
borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how abhorred in my
imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I
have kiss’d I know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your gambols?
your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table
on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? Quite chop-fallen?
Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh at that.—Prithee,
Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO.
What’s that, my lord?

HAMLET.
Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this fashion i’ th’earth?

HORATIO.
E’en so.

HAMLET.
And smelt so? Pah!

[_Throws down the skull._]

HORATIO.
E’en so, my lord.

HAMLET.
To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace
the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping a bung-hole?

HORATIO.
’Twere to consider too curiously to consider so.

HAMLET.
No, faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough,
and likelihood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died, Alexander was
buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we
make loam; and why of that loam whereto he was converted might they not
stop a beer-barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t’expel the winter’s flaw.
But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King.

Enter priests, &c, in procession; the corpse of Ophelia, Laertes and
Mourners following; King, Queen, their Trains, &c.

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is that they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desperate hand
Fordo it own life. ’Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.

[_Retiring with Horatio._]

LAERTES.
What ceremony else?

HAMLET.
That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES.
What ceremony else?

PRIEST.
Her obsequies have been as far enlarg’d
As we have warranties. Her death was doubtful;
And but that great command o’ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified have lodg’d
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin rites,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.

LAERTES.
Must there no more be done?

PRIEST.
No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing sage requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES.
Lay her i’ th’earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring. I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist’ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.

HAMLET.
What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN.
[_Scattering flowers._] Sweets to the sweet. Farewell.
I hop’d thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid,
And not have strew’d thy grave.

LAERTES.
O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Depriv’d thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
[_Leaps into the grave._]
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made,
To o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET.
[_Advancing._]
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand’ring stars, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.
[_Leaps into the grave._]

LAERTES.
[_Grappling with him._] The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET.
Thou pray’st not well.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
For though I am not splenative and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wiseness fear. Away thy hand!

KING.
Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN.
Hamlet! Hamlet!

All.
Gentlemen!

HORATIO.
Good my lord, be quiet.

[_The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave._]

HAMLET.
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag.

QUEEN.
O my son, what theme?

HAMLET.
I lov’d Ophelia; forty thousand brothers
Could not, with all their quantity of love,
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING.
O, he is mad, Laertes.

QUEEN.
For love of God forbear him!

HAMLET.
’Swounds, show me what thou’lt do:
Woul’t weep? woul’t fight? woul’t fast? woul’t tear thyself?
Woul’t drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?
I’ll do’t. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou’lt mouth,
I’ll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN.
This is mere madness:
And thus awhile the fit will work on him;
Anon, as patient as the female dove,
When that her golden couplets are disclos’d,
His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET.
Hear you, sir;
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I lov’d you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

[_Exit._]

KING.
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

[_Exit Horatio._]

[_To Laertes_]
Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech;
We’ll put the matter to the present push.—
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then in patience our proceeding be.

[_Exeunt._]

 SCENE II. A hall in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio.

HAMLET.
So much for this, sir. Now let me see the other;
You do remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO.
Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET.
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly,
And prais’d be rashness for it,—let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well,
When our deep plots do pall; and that should teach us
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.

HORATIO.
That is most certain.

HAMLET.
Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark
Grop’d I to find out them; had my desire,
Finger’d their packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold,
My fears forgetting manners, to unseal
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
Oh royal knavery! an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
Importing Denmark’s health, and England’s too,
With ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,
My head should be struck off.

HORATIO.
Is’t possible?

HAMLET.
Here’s the commission, read it at more leisure.
But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?

HORATIO.
I beseech you.

HAMLET.
Being thus benetted round with villanies,—
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play,—I sat me down,
Devis’d a new commission, wrote it fair:
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labour’d much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know
The effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO.
Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma ’tween their amities,
And many such-like ‘as’es of great charge,
That on the view and know of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should the bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving-time allow’d.

HORATIO.
How was this seal’d?

HAMLET.
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father’s signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal:
Folded the writ up in the form of the other,
Subscrib’d it: gave’t th’impression; plac’d it safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent
Thou know’st already.

HORATIO.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to’t.

HAMLET.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience; their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO.
Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET.
Does it not, thinks’t thee, stand me now upon,—
He that hath kill’d my king, and whor’d my mother,
Popp’d in between th’election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is’t not to be damn’d
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HORATIO.
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

HAMLET.
It will be short. The interim is mine;
And a man’s life’s no more than to say ‘One’.
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself;
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favours.
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow’ring passion.

HORATIO.
Peace, who comes here?

Enter Osric.

OSRIC.
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

HAMLET.
I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO.
No, my good lord.

HAMLET.
Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath
much land, and fertile; let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib
shall stand at the king’s mess; ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious
in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC.
Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a thing
to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET.
I will receive it with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his
right use; ’tis for the head.

OSRIC.
I thank your lordship, ’tis very hot.

HAMLET.
No, believe me, ’tis very cold, the wind is northerly.

OSRIC.
It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET.
Methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.

OSRIC.
Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,—as ’twere—I cannot tell how.
But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a
great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter,—

HAMLET.
I beseech you, remember,—

[_Hamlet moves him to put on his hat._]

OSRIC.
Nay, in good faith; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly
come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most
excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing. Indeed,
to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry; for
you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HAMLET.
Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though I know, to
divide him inventorially would dizzy th’arithmetic of memory, and yet
but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of
extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article and his infusion of
such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable
is his mirror and who else would trace him his umbrage, nothing more.

OSRIC.
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET.
The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer
breath?

OSRIC.
Sir?

HORATIO.
Is’t not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do’t, sir,
really.

HAMLET.
What imports the nomination of this gentleman?

OSRIC.
Of Laertes?

HORATIO.
His purse is empty already, all’s golden words are spent.

HAMLET.
Of him, sir.

OSRIC.
I know you are not ignorant,—

HAMLET.
I would you did, sir; yet in faith if you did, it would not much
approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC.
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is,—

HAMLET.
I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in excellence;
but to know a man well were to know himself.

OSRIC.
I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him, by them
in his meed he’s unfellowed.

HAMLET.
What’s his weapon?

OSRIC.
Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET.
That’s two of his weapons. But well.

OSRIC.
The King, sir, hath wager’d with him six Barbary horses, against the
which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards,
with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the carriages,
in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most
delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET.
What call you the carriages?

HORATIO.
I knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.

OSRIC.
The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET.
The phrase would be more german to the matter if we could carry cannon
by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three
liberal conceited carriages: that’s the French bet against the Danish.
Why is this all imponed, as you call it?

OSRIC.
The King, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between you and him, he
shall not exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for nine. And
it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would vouchsafe the
answer.

HAMLET.
How if I answer no?

OSRIC.
I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

HAMLET.
Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty, it is the
breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be brought, the gentleman
willing, and the King hold his purpose, I will win for him if I can; if
not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

OSRIC.
Shall I re-deliver you e’en so?

HAMLET.
To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.

OSRIC.
I commend my duty to your lordship.

HAMLET.
Yours, yours.

[_Exit Osric._]

He does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else for’s
turn.

HORATIO.
This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.

HAMLET.
He did comply with his dug before he suck’d it. Thus has he,—and many
more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on,— only got
the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yeasty
collection, which carries them through and through the most fanned and
winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are
out.

Enter a Lord.

LORD.
My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings
back to him that you attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes or that you will take longer time.

HAMLET.
I am constant to my purposes, they follow the King’s pleasure. If his
fitness speaks, mine is ready. Now or whensoever, provided I be so able
as now.

LORD.
The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET.
In happy time.

LORD.
The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes
before you fall to play.

HAMLET.
She well instructs me.

[_Exit Lord._]

HORATIO.
You will lose this wager, my lord.

HAMLET.
I do not think so. Since he went into France, I have been in continual
practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill
all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.

HORATIO.
Nay, good my lord.

HAMLET.
It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving as would
perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO.
If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their repair
hither, and say you are not fit.

HAMLET.
Not a whit, we defy augury. There’s a special providence in the fall of
a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it
will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The readiness is all.
Since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?

Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords, Osric and Attendants with foils &c.

KING.
Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.

[_The King puts Laertes’s hand into Hamlet’s._]

HAMLET.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon’t as you are a gentleman.
This presence knows, and you must needs have heard,
How I am punish’d with sore distraction.
What I have done
That might your nature, honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,
And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If’t be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;
His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.
Sir, in this audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos’d evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o’er the house
And hurt my brother.

LAERTES.
I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge. But in my terms of honour
I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honour
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungor’d. But till that time
I do receive your offer’d love like love,
And will not wrong it.

HAMLET.
I embrace it freely,
And will this brother’s wager frankly play.—
Give us the foils; come on.

LAERTES.
Come, one for me.

HAMLET.
I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall like a star i’ th’ darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES.
You mock me, sir.

HAMLET.
No, by this hand.

KING.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?

HAMLET.
Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o’ the weaker side.

KING.
I do not fear it. I have seen you both;
But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.

LAERTES.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

[_They prepare to play._]

OSRIC.
Ay, my good lord.

KING.
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups;
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,
‘Now the King drinks to Hamlet.’ Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

HAMLET.
Come on, sir.

LAERTES.
Come, my lord.

[_They play._]

HAMLET.
One.

LAERTES.
No.

HAMLET.
Judgement.

OSRIC.
A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES.
Well; again.

KING.
Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
Here’s to thy health.

[_Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within._]

Give him the cup.

HAMLET.
I’ll play this bout first; set it by awhile.

[_They play._]

Come. Another hit; what say you?

LAERTES.
A touch, a touch, I do confess.

KING.
Our son shall win.

QUEEN.
He’s fat, and scant of breath.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

HAMLET.
Good madam.

KING.
Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN.
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.

KING.
[_Aside._] It is the poison’d cup; it is too late.

HAMLET.
I dare not drink yet, madam. By and by.

QUEEN.
Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES.
My lord, I’ll hit him now.

KING.
I do not think’t.

LAERTES.
[_Aside._] And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.

HAMLET.
Come for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES.
Say you so? Come on.

[_They play._]

OSRIC.
Nothing neither way.

LAERTES.
Have at you now.

[_Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and
Hamlet wounds Laertes._]

KING.
Part them; they are incens’d.

HAMLET.
Nay, come again!

[_The Queen falls._]

OSRIC.
Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO.
They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?

OSRIC.
How is’t, Laertes?

LAERTES.
Why, as a woodcock to my own springe, Osric.
I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.

HAMLET.
How does the Queen?

KING.
She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN.
No, no, the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poison’d.

[_Dies._]

HAMLET.
O villany! Ho! Let the door be lock’d:
Treachery! Seek it out.

[_Laertes falls._]

LAERTES.
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour of life;
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenom’d. The foul practice
Hath turn’d itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poison’d.
I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.

HAMLET.
The point envenom’d too!
Then, venom, to thy work.

[_Stabs the King._]

OSRIC and LORDS.
Treason! treason!

KING.
O yet defend me, friends. I am but hurt.

HAMLET.
Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Follow my mother.

[_King dies._]

LAERTES.
He is justly serv’d.
It is a poison temper’d by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.

[_Dies._]

HAMLET.
Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
I am dead, Horatio. Wretched Queen, adieu.
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time,—as this fell sergeant, death,
Is strict in his arrest,—O, I could tell you,—
But let it be. Horatio, I am dead,
Thou liv’st; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO.
Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here’s yet some liquor left.

HAMLET.
As th’art a man,
Give me the cup. Let go; by Heaven, I’ll have’t.
O good Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me.
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
To tell my story.

[_March afar off, and shot within._]

What warlike noise is this?

OSRIC.
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To the ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.

HAMLET.
O, I die, Horatio.
The potent poison quite o’er-crows my spirit:
I cannot live to hear the news from England,
But I do prophesy th’election lights
On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
So tell him, with the occurrents more and less,
Which have solicited. The rest is silence.

[_Dies._]

HORATIO.
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
Why does the drum come hither?

[_March within._]

Enter Fortinbras, the English Ambassadors and others.

FORTINBRAS.
Where is this sight?

HORATIO.
What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

FORTINBRAS.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?

FIRST AMBASSADOR.
The sight is dismal;
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,
To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO.
Not from his mouth,
Had it th’ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England
Are here arriv’d, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgements, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forc’d cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall’n on the inventors’ heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS.
Let us haste to hear it,
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HORATIO.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
But let this same be presently perform’d,
Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more mischance
On plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS.
Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have prov’d most royally; and for his passage,
The soldiers’ music and the rites of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

[_A dead march._]

[_Exeunt, bearing off the bodies, after which a peal of ordnance is
shot off._]




THE FIRST PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. London. A Room in the Palace.
Scene II. The same. An Apartment of Prince Henry’s.
Scene III. The Same. A Room in the Palace.

ACT II
Scene I. Rochester. An Inn-Yard.
Scene II. The Road by Gads-hill.
Scene III. Warkworth. A Room in the Castle.
Scene IV. Eastcheap. A Room in the Boar’s Head Tavern.

ACT III
Scene I. Bangor. A Room in the Archdeacon’s House.
Scene II. London. A Room in the Palace.
Scene III. Eastcheap. A Room in the Boar’s Head Tavern.

ACT IV
Scene I. The Rebel Camp near Shrewsbury.
Scene II. A public Road near Coventry.
Scene III. The Rebel Camp near Shrewsbury.
Scene IV. York. A Room in the Archbishop’s Palace.

ACT V
Scene I. The King’s Camp near Shrewsbury.
Scene II. The Rebel Camp.
Scene III. Plain between the Camps.
Scene IV. Another Part of the Field.
Scene V. Another Part of the Field.




Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY the Fourth.
HENRY, PRINCE of Wales, son to the King.
Prince John of LANCASTER, son to the King.
Earl of WESTMORELAND.
Sir Walter BLUNT.
Thomas Percy, Earl of WORCESTER.
Henry Percy, Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND.
Henry Percy, surnamed HOTSPUR, his son.
Edmund MORTIMER, Earl of March.
Scroop, ARCHBISHOP of York.
SIR MICHAEL, a friend to the archbishop of York.
Archibald, Earl of DOUGLAS.
Owen GLENDOWER.
Sir Richard VERNON.
Sir John FALSTAFF.
POINS.
GADSHILL.
PETO.
BARDOLPH.
LADY PERCY, Wife to Hotspur.
Lady Mortimer, Daughter to Glendower.
Mrs. Quickly, Hostess in Eastcheap.
Lords, Officers, Sheriff, Vintner, Chamberlain, Drawers, Carriers,
Ostler, Messengers, Servant, Travellers and Attendants.

SCENE. England and Wales.




ACT I


SCENE I. London. A Room in the Palace.

Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmoreland with
others.

KING.
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children’s blood,
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow’rets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way, and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ—
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight—
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were molded in their mothers’ womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless ’tis to tell you we will go;
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our Council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.

WESTMORELAND.
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.

KING.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

WESTMORELAND.
This, matched with other did, my gracious lord,
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the North, and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That ever-valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour;
As by discharge of their artillery,
And shape of likelihood, the news was told;
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.

KING.
Here is a dear and true-industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited;
Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights,
Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon’s plains; of prisoners Hotspur took
Mordake, Earl of Fife and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honourable spoil,
A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?

WESTMORELAND.
In faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.

KING.
Yea, there thou mak’st me sad, and mak’st me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son,
A son who is the theme of honour’s tongue,
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet Fortune’s minion and her pride;
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonour stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O, that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy’s pride? The prisoners,
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake, Earl of Fife.

WESTMORELAND.
This is his uncle’s teaching, this is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects,
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.

KING.
But I have sent for him to answer this;
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our Council we
Will hold at Windsor, so inform the lords:
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.

WESTMORELAND.
I will, my liege.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. An Apartment of Prince Henry’s.

Enter Prince Henry and Sir John Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?

PRINCE.
Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack, and unbuttoning thee
after supper, and sleeping upon benches after noon, that thou hast
forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know. What a
devil hast thou to do with the time of the day? Unless hours were cups
of sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues of bawds, and dials
the signs of leaping-houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot
wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no reason why thou shouldst be
so superfluous to demand the time of the day.

FALSTAFF.
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that take purses go by the
moon and the seven stars, and not by Phœbus, he, that wand’ring knight
so fair. And I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as God save thy
Grace—Majesty I should say, for grace thou wilt have none—

PRINCE.
What, none?

FALSTAFF.
No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg and
butter.

PRINCE.
Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.

FALSTAFF.
Marry then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us that are squires
of the night’s body be called thieves of the day’s beauty: let us be
Diana’s foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon; and let
men say we be men of good government, being governed, as the sea is, by
our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we
steal.

PRINCE.
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the fortune of us that are
the moon’s men doth ebb and flow like the sea, being governed, as the
sea is, by the moon. As for proof now: a purse of gold most resolutely
snatched on Monday night, and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday
morning, got with swearing “Lay by” and spent with crying “Bring in”;
now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder, and by and by in as
high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, thou say’st true, lad. And is not my hostess of the tavern
a most sweet wench?

PRINCE.
As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And is not a buff
jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?

FALSTAFF.
How now, how now, mad wag? What, in thy quips and thy quiddities? What
a plague have I to do with a buff jerkin?

PRINCE.
Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?

FALSTAFF.
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a time and oft.

PRINCE.
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?

FALSTAFF.
No, I’ll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.

PRINCE.
Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would
not, I have used my credit.

FALSTAFF.
Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent that thou art heir
apparent—But I prithee sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in
England when thou art king? And resolution thus fubbed as it is with
the rusty curb of old father Antic the law? Do not thou, when thou art
king, hang a thief.

PRINCE.
No, thou shalt.

FALSTAFF.
Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I’ll be a brave judge.

PRINCE.
Thou judgest false already, I mean thou shalt have the hanging of the
thieves, and so become a rare hangman.

FALSTAFF.
Well, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my humour, as well as
waiting in the court, I can tell you.

PRINCE.
For obtaining of suits?

FALSTAFF.
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe.
’Sblood, I am as melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.

PRINCE.
Or an old lion, or a lover’s lute.

FALSTAFF.
Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.

PRINCE.
What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of Moor-ditch?

FALSTAFF.
Thou hast the most unsavoury similes, and art indeed the most
comparative, rascalliest, sweet young prince. But, Hal, I prithee
trouble me no more with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a
commodity of good names were to be bought. An old lord of the Council
rated me the other day in the street about you, sir, but I marked him
not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and yet he
talked wisely, and in the street too.

PRINCE.
Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the streets and no man regards
it.

FALSTAFF.
O, thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a
saint. Thou hast done much harm upon me, Hal, God forgive thee for it.
Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man should
speak truly, little better than one of the wicked. I must give over
this life, and I will give it over. By the Lord, an I do not, I am a
villain. I’ll be damned for never a king’s son in Christendom.

PRINCE.
Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?

FALSTAFF.
Zounds, where thou wilt, lad, I’ll make one. An I do not, call me
villain and baffle me.

PRINCE.
I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying to purse-taking.

FALSTAFF.
Why, Hal, ’tis my vocation, Hal, ’tis no sin for a man to labour in his
vocation.

Enter Poins.

Poins!—Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match. O, if men were
to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? This
is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried “Stand!” to a true man.

PRINCE.
Good morrow, Ned.

POINS.
Good morrow, sweet Hal.—What says Monsieur Remorse? What says Sir John
Sack-and-sugar? Jack, how agrees the devil and thee about thy soul,
that thou soldest him on Good Friday last for a cup of Madeira and a
cold capon’s leg?

PRINCE.
Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain, for he
was never yet a breaker of proverbs. He will give the devil his due.

POINS.
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.

PRINCE.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.

POINS.
But, my lads, my lads, tomorrow morning, by four o’clock early at Gad’s
Hill, there are pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich offerings, and
traders riding to London with fat purses. I have visards for you all;
you have horses for yourselves. Gadshill lies tonight in Rochester. I
have bespoke supper tomorrow night in Eastcheap. We may do it as secure
as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff your purses full of crowns. If
you will not, tarry at home and be hanged.

FALSTAFF.
Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not, I’ll hang you for
going.

POINS.
You will, chops?

FALSTAFF.
Hal, wilt thou make one?

PRINCE.
Who, I rob? I a thief? Not I, by my faith.

FALSTAFF.
There’s neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou
cam’st not of the blood royal, if thou darest not stand for ten
shillings.

PRINCE.
Well then, once in my days I’ll be a madcap.

FALSTAFF.
Why, that’s well said.

PRINCE.
Well, come what will, I’ll tarry at home.

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, I’ll be a traitor then, when thou art king.

PRINCE.
I care not.

POINS.
Sir John, I prithee, leave the Prince and me alone. I will lay him down
such reasons for this adventure, that he shall go.

FALSTAFF.
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion, and him the ears of
profiting, that what thou speakest may move, and what he hears may be
believed, that the true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false
thief, for the poor abuses of the time want countenance. Farewell, you
shall find me in Eastcheap.

PRINCE.
Farewell, thou latter spring! Farewell, All-hallown summer!

[_Exit Falstaff._]

POINS.
Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us tomorrow. I have a jest to
execute that I cannot manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto, and
Gadshill shall rob those men that we have already waylaid. Yourself and
I will not be there. And when they have the booty, if you and I do not
rob them, cut this head off from my shoulders.

PRINCE.
But how shall we part with them in setting forth?

POINS.
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place
of meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they
adventure upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner
achieved but we’ll set upon them.

PRINCE.
Yea, but ’tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits,
and by every other appointment, to be ourselves.

POINS.
Tut, our horses they shall not see, I’ll tie them in the wood; our
visards we will change after we leave them; and, sirrah, I have cases
of buckram for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.

PRINCE.
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.

POINS.
Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever
turned back; and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees reason,
I’ll forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be the
incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will tell us when we
meet at supper: how thirty at least he fought with, what wards, what
blows, what extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this lives
the jest.

PRINCE.
Well, I’ll go with thee. Provide us all things necessary and meet me
tomorrow night in Eastcheap; there I’ll sup. Farewell.

POINS.
Farewell, my lord.

[_Exit._]

PRINCE.
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The unyok’d humour of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wonder’d at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But, when they seldom come, they wish’d-for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behaviour I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men’s hopes;
And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glitt’ring o’er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I’ll so offend, to make offence a skill,
Redeeming time, when men think least I will.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. The Same. A Room in the Palace.

Enter King Henry, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur, Sir Walter Blunt
and others.

KING.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience: but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be fear’d, than my condition,
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne’er pays but to the proud.

WORCESTER.
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
My lord,—

KING.
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye:
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.

[_Exit Worcester._]

[_To Northumberland._]

You were about to speak.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Yea, my good lord.
Those prisoners in your Highness’ name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is deliver’d to your Majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprision
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.

HOTSPUR.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord, neat and trimly dress’d,
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reap’d
Show’d like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And ’twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose, and took’t away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk’d.
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He call’d them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He question’d me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty’s behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
Out of my grief and my impatience
To be so pester’d with a popinjay,
Answer’d neglectingly, I know not what,
He should, or he should not; for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Of guns and drums and wounds, God save the mark!
And telling me the sovereignest thing on Earth
Was parmacety for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpetre should be digg’d
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroy’d
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns,
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answered indirectly, as I said,
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.

BLUNT.
The circumstance consider’d, good my lord,
Whatever Harry Percy then had said
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.

KING.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
But with proviso and exception,
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray’d
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damn’d Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason and indent with fears
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.

HOTSPUR.
Revolted Mortimer!
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war. To prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Severn’s sedgy bank,
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower.
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn’s flood,
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.
Never did bare and rotten policy
Colour her working with such deadly wounds,
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly.
Then let not him be slander’d with revolt.

KING.
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him,
He never did encounter with Glendower.
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you.—My Lord Northumberland,
We license your departure with your son.—
Send us your prisoners, or you’ll hear of it.

[_Exit King Henry, Blunt and train._]

HOTSPUR.
An if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
What, drunk with choler? Stay, and pause awhile.
Here comes your uncle.

Enter Worcester.

HOTSPUR.
Speak of Mortimer?
Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part I’ll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful King,
As this ingrate and canker’d Bolingbroke.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
[_To Worcester._]
Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.

WORCESTER.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?

HOTSPUR.
He will forsooth have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wife’s brother, then his cheek look’d pale,
And on my face he turn’d an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

WORCESTER.
I cannot blame him. Was not he proclaim’d
By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?

NORTHUMBERLAND.
He was; I heard the proclamation.
And then it was when the unhappy King—
Whose wrongs in us God pardon!—did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition;
From whence he, intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.

WORCESTER.
And for whose death we in the world’s wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.

HOTSPUR.
But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?

NORTHUMBERLAND.
He did; myself did hear it.

HOTSPUR.
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin King,
That wish’d him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation—shall it be,
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents, or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me, that I descend so low,
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle King.
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fool’d, discarded, and shook off
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banish’d honours, and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again:
Revenge the jeering and disdain’d contempt
Of this proud King, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
Therefore, I say—

WORCESTER.
Peace, cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
I’ll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
As to o’er-walk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

HOTSPUR.
If we fall in, good night, or sink or swim!
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honour cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.

HOTSPUR.
By Heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities.
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!

WORCESTER.
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.—
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.

HOTSPUR.
I cry you mercy.

WORCESTER.
Those same noble Scots
That are your prisoners—

HOTSPUR.
I’ll keep them all;
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them,
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not.
I’ll keep them, by this hand!

WORCESTER.
You start away,
And lend no ear unto my purposes:
Those prisoners you shall keep—

HOTSPUR.
Nay, I will: that’s flat.
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I’ll holla “Mortimer!”
Nay, I’ll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but “Mortimer”, and give it him,
To keep his anger still in motion.

WORCESTER.
Hear you, cousin, a word.

HOTSPUR.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some mischance—
I would have him poison’d with a pot of ale.

WORCESTER.
Farewell, kinsman. I will talk to you
When you are better temper’d to attend.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
Art thou to break into this woman’s mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!

HOTSPUR.
Why, look you, I am whipp’d and scourged with rods,
Nettled, and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard’s time—what do you call the place?
A plague upon’t! It is in Gloucestershire.
’Twas where the madcap Duke his uncle kept,
His uncle York, where I first bow’d my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,
’Sblood, when you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
At Berkeley castle.

HOTSPUR.
You say true.
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
“Look, when his infant fortune came to age,”
And, “Gentle Harry Percy,” and “kind cousin.”
O, the devil take such cozeners!—God forgive me!
Good uncle, tell your tale. I have done.

WORCESTER.
Nay, if you have not, to it again,
We will stay your leisure.

HOTSPUR.
I have done, i’faith.

WORCESTER.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners;
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas’ son your only mean
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted.—[_To Northumberland._] You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employ’d,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well beloved,
The Archbishop.

HOTSPUR.
Of York, is it not?

WORCESTER.
True, who bears hard
His brother’s death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

HOTSPUR.
I smell it. Upon my life it will do well.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Before the game is afoot thou still let’st slip.

HOTSPUR.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot;
And then the power of Scotland and of York
To join with Mortimer, ha?

WORCESTER.
And so they shall.

HOTSPUR.
In faith, it is exceedingly well aim’d.

WORCESTER.
And ’tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head;
For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home:
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.

HOTSPUR.
He does, he does, we’ll be revenged on him.

WORCESTER.
Cousin, farewell. No further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I’ll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas, and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Farewell, good brother; we shall thrive, I trust.

HOTSPUR.
Uncle, adieu. O, let the hours be short,
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II


SCENE I. Rochester. An Inn-Yard.

Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand.

FIRST CARRIER.
Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I’ll be hang’d. Charles’ wain
is over the new chimney, and yet our horse not pack’d.—What, ostler!

OSTLER.
[_within._] Anon, anon.

FIRST CARRIER.
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut’s saddle, put a few flocks in the point; poor
jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.

Enter another Carrier.

SECOND CARRIER.
Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to
give poor jades the bots. This house is turned upside down since Robin
ostler died.

FIRST CARRIER.
Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose, it was the death
of him.

SECOND CARRIER.
I think this be the most villainous house in all London road for fleas.
I am stung like a tench.

FIRST CARRIER.
Like a tench! By the Mass, there is ne’er a king christen could be
better bit than I have been since the first cock.

SECOND CARRIER.
Why, they will allow us ne’er a jordan, and then we leak in your
chimney, and your chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.

FIRST CARRIER.
What, ostler! Come away and be hanged, come away.

SECOND CARRIER.
I have a gammon of bacon and two razes of ginger, to be delivered as
far as Charing Cross.

FIRST CARRIER.
God’s body! The turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.—What, ostler!
A plague on thee! Hast thou never an eye in thy head? Canst not hear?
An ’twere not as good deed as drink to break the pate on thee, I am a
very villain. Come, and be hanged. Hast no faith in thee?

Enter Gadshill.

GADSHILL.
Good morrow, carriers. What’s o’clock?

FIRST CARRIER.
I think it be two o’clock.

GADSHILL.
I prithee, lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding in the stable.

FIRST CARRIER.
Nay, by God, soft! I know a trick worth two of that, i’faith.

GADSHILL.
I pray thee, lend me thine.

SECOND CARRIER.
Ay, when? Canst tell? “Lend me thy lantern,” quoth he! Marry, I’ll see
thee hanged first.

GADSHILL.
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?

SECOND CARRIER.
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee. Come, neighbour
Mugs, we’ll call up the gentlemen. They will along with company, for
they have great charge.

[_Exeunt Carriers._]

GADSHILL.
What, ho! Chamberlain!

Enter Chamberlain.

CHAMBERLAIN.
At hand, quoth pick-purse.

GADSHILL.
That’s even as fair as “at hand, quoth the chamberlain,” for thou
variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction doth from
labouring; thou layest the plot how.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that I told you
yesternight: there’s a franklin in the Wild of Kent hath brought three
hundred marks with him in gold. I heard him tell it to one of his
company last night at supper; a kind of auditor, one that hath
abundance of charge too, God knows what. They are up already, and call
for eggs and butter. They will away presently.

GADSHILL.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas’ clerks, I’ll give thee
this neck.

CHAMBERLAIN.
No, I’ll none of it. I pray thee, keep that for the hangman, for I know
thou worshippest Saint Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.

GADSHILL.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If I hang, I’ll make a fat pair
of gallows; for, if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me, and thou
knowest he is no starveling. Tut, there are other Troyans that thou
dream’st not of, the which for sport sake are content to do the
profession some grace, that would, if matters should be looked into,
for their own credit sake make all whole. I am joined with no
foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers, none of these mad
mustachio purple-hued malt-worms, but with nobility and tranquillity,
burgomasters and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will
strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner
than pray: and yet, zounds, I lie, for they pray continually to their
saint the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her, but prey on her, for
they ride up and down on her, and make her their boots.

CHAMBERLAIN.
What, the commonwealth their boots? Will she hold out water in foul
way?

GADSHILL.
She will, she will; justice hath liquored her. We steal as in a castle,
cock-sure; we have the receipt of fern-seed, we walk invisible.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to the night than to
fern-seed for your walking invisible.

GADSHILL.
Give me thy hand. Thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as I am a
true man.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.

GADSHILL.
Go to; _homo_ is a common name to all men. Bid the ostler bring my
gelding out of the stable. Farewell, you muddy knave.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Road by Gads-hill.

Enter Prince Henry and Poins; Bardolph and Peto at some distance.

POINS.
Come, shelter, shelter! I have removed Falstaff’s horse, and he frets
like a gummed velvet.

PRINCE.
Stand close.

[_They retire._]

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!

PRINCE.
[_Coming forward._]
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! What a brawling dost thou keep!

FALSTAFF.
Where’s Poins, Hal?

PRINCE.
He is walked up to the top of the hill. I’ll go seek him.

[_Retires._]

FALSTAFF.
I am accursed to rob in that thief’s company. The rascal hath removed
my horse and tied him I know not where. If I travel but four foot by
the square further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but
to die a fair death for all this, if I ’scape hanging for killing that
rogue. I have forsworn his company hourly any time this two-and-twenty
years, and yet I am bewitched with the rogue’s company. If the rascal
have not given me medicines to make me love him, I’ll be hanged. It
could not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins! Hal! A plague upon
you both! Bardolph! Peto! I’ll starve ere I’ll rob a foot further. An
’twere not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man, and to leave
these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth.
Eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me,
and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough. A plague upon it
when thieves cannot be true one to another! [_They whistle._] Whew! A
plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you rogues, give me my horse and
be hanged!

PRINCE.
[_Coming forward._] Peace, you fat guts, lie down, lay thine ear close
to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the tread of travellers.

FALSTAFF.
Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down? ’Sblood, I’ll not
bear my own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin in thy father’s
exchequer. What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?

PRINCE.
Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.

FALSTAFF.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good king’s son.

PRINCE.
Out, ye rogue! Shall I be your ostler?

FALSTAFF.
Hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent garters! If I be ta’en, I’ll
peach for this. An I have not ballads made on you all, and sung to
filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison—when a jest is so forward,
and afoot too! I hate it.

Enter Gadshill.

GADSHILL.
Stand!

FALSTAFF.
So I do, against my will.

POINS.
O, ’tis our setter. I know his voice.

Comes forward with Bardolph and Peto.

BARDOLPH.
What news?

GADSHILL.
Case ye, case ye, on with your visards. There’s money of the King’s
coming down the hill, ’tis going to the King’s exchequer.

FALSTAFF.
You lie, ye rogue, ’tis going to the King’s tavern.

GADSHILL.
There’s enough to make us all.

FALSTAFF.
To be hanged.

PRINCE.
Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane. Ned Poins and I
will walk lower; if they ’scape from your encounter, then they light on
us.

PETO.
How many be there of them?

GADSHILL.
Some eight or ten.

FALSTAFF.
Zounds, will they not rob us?

PRINCE.
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?

FALSTAFF.
Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather, but yet no coward,
Hal.

PRINCE.
Well, we leave that to the proof.

POINS.
Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge. When thou need’st him,
there thou shalt find him. Farewell, and stand fast.

FALSTAFF.
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.

PRINCE.
[_aside to Poins._] Ned, where are our disguises?

POINS.
[_aside to Prince Henry._] Here, hard by. Stand close.

[_Exeunt Prince and Poins._]

FALSTAFF.
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I. Every man to his
business.

Enter the Travellers.

FIRST TRAVELLER.
Come, neighbour, the boy shall lead our horses down the hill; we’ll
walk afoot awhile and ease our legs.

THIEVES.
Stand!

SECOND TRAVELLER.
Jesu bless us!

FALSTAFF.
Strike, down with them, cut the villains’ throats! Ah, whoreson
caterpillars, bacon-fed knaves, they hate us youth. Down with them,
fleece them!

FIRST TRAVELLER.
O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!

FALSTAFF.
Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye fat chuffs, I would
your store were here! On, bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must
live. You are grandjurors, are ye? We’ll jure ye, faith.

[_Here they rob them and bind them. Exeunt_]

Enter Prince Henry and Poins in buckram suits.

PRINCE.
The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou and I rob the
thieves, and go merrily to London, it would be argument for a week,
laughter for a month, and a good jest for ever.

POINS.
Stand close, I hear them coming.

[_They retire._]

Enter the Thieves again.

FALSTAFF.
Come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse before day. An the
Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards, there’s no equity stirring.
There’s no more valour in that Poins than in a wild duck.

[_As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon them._]

PRINCE.
Your money!

POINS.
Villains!

[_Falstaff after a blow or two, and the others run away, leaving the
booty behind them._]

PRINCE.
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
The thieves are all scatter’d, and possess’d with fear
So strongly that they dare not meet each other;
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were’t not for laughing, I should pity him.

POINS.
How the fat rogue roared!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Warkworth. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Hotspur, reading a letter.

HOTSPUR.
“But, for mine own part, my lord, I could be well contented to be
there, in respect of the love I bear your house.” He could be
contented; why is he not, then? In respect of the love he bears our
house—he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our
house. Let me see some more. “The purpose you undertake is
dangerous”—Why, that’s certain. ’Tis dangerous to take a cold, to
sleep, to drink; but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle,
danger, we pluck this flower, safety. “The purpose you undertake is
dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain, the time itself
unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so
great an opposition.” Say you so, say you so? I say unto you again, you
are a shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie. What a lack-brain is this!
By the Lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid, our friends true
and constant: a good plot, good friends, and full of expectation; an
excellent plot, very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is
this! Why, my Lord of York commends the plot and the general course of
the action. Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him
with his lady’s fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself? Lord
Edmund Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower? Is there not
besides the Douglas? Have I not all their letters to meet me in arms by
the ninth of the next month, and are they not some of them set forward
already? What a pagan rascal is this, an infidel! Ha! You shall see
now, in very sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the King, and
lay open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself, and go to
buffets, for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an
action! Hang him, let him tell the King, we are prepared. I will set
forward tonight.—

Enter Lady Percy.

How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.

LADY PERCY.
O my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offence have I this fortnight been
A banish’d woman from my Harry’s bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is’t that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
And start so often when thou sit’st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch’d,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry “Courage! To the field!” And thou hast talk’d
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
Of prisoners’ ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
And thus hath so bestirr’d thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
And in thy face strange motions have appear’d,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.

HOTSPUR.
What, ho!

Enter a Servant.

Is Gilliams with the packet gone?

SERVANT.
He is, my lord, an hour ago.

HOTSPUR.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?

SERVANT.
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.

HOTSPUR.
What horse? A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?

SERVANT.
It is, my lord.

HOTSPUR.
That roan shall be my throne.
Well, I will back him straight. O Esperance!
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.

[_Exit Servant._]

LADY PERCY.
But hear you, my lord.

HOTSPUR.
What say’st thou, my lady?

LADY PERCY.
What is it carries you away?

HOTSPUR.
Why, my horse, my love, my horse.

LADY PERCY.
Out, you mad-headed ape!
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
As you are toss’d with. In faith,
I’ll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise. But if you go—

HOTSPUR.
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.

LADY PERCY.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I’ll break thy little finger, Harry,
If thou wilt not tell me all things true.

HOTSPUR.
Away,
Away, you trifler! Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and crack’d crowns,
And pass them current too.—Gods me, my horse!—
What say’st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have with me?

LADY PERCY.
Do you not love me? Do you not indeed?
Well, do not, then, for since you love me not,
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.

HOTSPUR.
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am a-horseback I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude,
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy’s wife; constant you are,
But yet a woman; and for secrecy,
No lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know;
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.

LADY PERCY.
How? So far?

HOTSPUR.
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too.
Today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?

LADY PERCY.
It must, of force.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Eastcheap. A Room in the Boar’s Head Tavern.

Enter Prince Henry.

PRINCE.
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me thy hand to laugh
a little.

Enter Poins.

POINS.
Where hast been, Hal?

PRINCE.
With three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. I
have sounded the very base-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn
brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their Christian
names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis. They take it already upon their
salvation, that though I be but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of
courtesy, and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack, like Falstaff, but a
Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy,—by the Lord, so they call
me—and when I am King of England, I shall command all the good lads in
Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, “dyeing scarlet,” and when you
breathe in your watering, they cry “Hem!” and bid you “Play it off!” To
conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, that I
can drink with any tinker in his own language during my life. I tell
thee, Ned, thou hast lost much honour that thou wert not with me in
this action; but, sweet Ned—to sweeten which name of Ned, I give thee
this pennyworth of sugar, clapped even now into my hand by an
underskinker, one that never spake other English in his life than
“Eight shillings and sixpence,” and “You are welcome,” with this shrill
addition, “Anon, anon, sir! Score a pint of bastard in the Half-moon,”
or so. But, Ned, to drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,
do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my puny drawer to what
end he gave me the sugar, and do thou never leave calling “Francis,”
that his tale to me may be nothing but “Anon.” Step aside, and I’ll
show thee a precedent.

[_Exit Poins._]

POINS.
[_Within_] Francis!

PRINCE.
Thou art perfect.

POINS.
[_Within_] Francis!

Enter Francis.

FRANCIS.
Anon, anon, sir.—Look down into the Pomegarnet, Ralph.

PRINCE.
Come hither, Francis.

FRANCIS.
My lord?

PRINCE.
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?

FRANCIS.
Forsooth, five years, and as much as to—

POINS.
[_within._] Francis!

FRANCIS.
Anon, anon, sir.

PRINCE.
Five year! By’r Lady, a long lease for the clinking of pewter! But,
Francis, darest thou be so valiant as to play the coward with thy
indenture, and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?

FRANCIS.
O Lord, sir, I’ll be sworn upon all the books in England, I could find
in my heart—

POINS.
[_within._] Francis!

FRANCIS.
Anon, sir.

PRINCE.
How old art thou, Francis?

FRANCIS.
Let me see, about Michaelmas next I shall be—

POINS.
[_within._] Francis!

FRANCIS.
Anon, sir.—Pray, stay a little, my lord.

PRINCE.
Nay, but hark you, Francis, for the sugar thou gavest me, ’twas a
pennyworth, was’t not?

FRANCIS.
O Lord, I would it had been two!

PRINCE.
I will give thee for it a thousand pound. Ask me when thou wilt, and
thou shalt have it.

POINS.
[_within._] Francis!

FRANCIS.
Anon, anon.

PRINCE.
Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but tomorrow, Francis; or, Francis, a
Thursday; or indeed, Francis, when thou wilt. But, Francis,—

FRANCIS.
My lord?

PRINCE.
Wilt thou rob this leathern-jerkin, crystal-button, not-pated,
agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter, smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch—

FRANCIS.
O Lord, sir, who do you mean?

PRINCE.
Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink, for look you,
Francis, your white canvas doublet will sully. In Barbary, sir, it
cannot come to so much.

FRANCIS.
What, sir?

POINS.
[_within._] Francis!

PRINCE.
Away, you rogue! Dost thou not hear them call?

[_Here they both call him; the Drawer stands amazed, not knowing which
way to go._]

Enter Vintner.

VINTNER.
What, stand’st thou still, and hear’st such a calling? Look to the
guests within.

[_Exit Francis._]

My lord, old Sir John with half-a-dozen more are at the door. Shall I
let them in?

PRINCE.
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.

[_Exit Vintner._]

Poins!

Enter Poins.

POINS.
Anon, anon, sir.

PRINCE.
Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the door; shall we
be merry?

POINS.
As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye, what cunning match have you
made with this jest of the drawer? Come, what’s the issue?

PRINCE.
I am now of all humours that have showed themselves humours since the
old days of goodman Adam to the pupil age of this present twelve
o’clock at midnight.

Enter Francis.

What’s o’clock, Francis?

FRANCIS.
Anon, anon, sir.

[_Exit Francis._]

PRINCE.
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a parrot, and yet
the son of a woman! His industry is upstairs and downstairs; his
eloquence the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy’s mind, the
Hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots
at a breakfast, washes his hands, and says to his wife, “Fie upon this
quiet life! I want work.” “O my sweet Harry,” says she, “how many hast
thou killed today?” “Give my roan horse a drench,” says he; and
answers, “Some fourteen,” an hour after; “a trifle, a trifle.” I
prithee, call in Falstaff. I’ll play Percy, and that damned brawn shall
play Dame Mortimer his wife. _Rivo!_ says the drunkard. Call in Ribs,
call in Tallow.

Enter Falstaff, Gadshill, Bardolph and Peto; followed by Francis with
wine.

POINS.
Welcome, Jack. Where hast thou been?

FALSTAFF.
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too! Marry, and amen!
Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere I lead this life long, I’ll sew
nether-stocks, and mend them and foot them too. A plague of all
cowards! Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?

[_Drinks._]

PRINCE.
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter (pitiful-hearted
Titan!), that melted at the sweet tale of the sun’s? If thou didst,
then behold that compound.

FALSTAFF.
You rogue, here’s lime in this sack too: there is nothing but roguery
to be found in villainous man, yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack
with lime in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack. Die when
thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the
Earth, then am I a shotten herring. There lives not three good men
unhanged in England, and one of them is fat, and grows old, God help
the while, a bad world, I say. I would I were a weaver; I could sing
psalms or anything. A plague of all cowards, I say still.

PRINCE.
How now, wool-sack, what mutter you?

FALSTAFF.
A king’s son! If I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger of
lath, and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,
I’ll never wear hair on my face more. You, Prince of Wales!

PRINCE.
Why, you whoreson round man, what’s the matter?

FALSTAFF.
Are not you a coward? Answer me to that—and Poins there?

POINS.
Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the Lord, I’ll stab
thee.

FALSTAFF.
I call thee coward? I’ll see thee damned ere I call thee coward, but I
would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou canst. You are
straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back. Call
you that backing of your friends? A plague upon such backing! Give me
them that will face me.—Give me a cup of sack. I am a rogue if I drunk
today.

PRINCE.
O villain! Thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunk’st last.

FALSTAFF.
All is one for that. A plague of all cowards, still say I.

[_Drinks._]

PRINCE.
What’s the matter?

FALSTAFF.
What’s the matter? There be four of us here have ta’en a thousand pound
this day morning.

PRINCE.
Where is it, Jack, where is it?

FALSTAFF.
Where is it? Taken from us it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.

PRINCE.
What, a hundred, man?

FALSTAFF.
I am a rogue if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two hours
together. I have ’scaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through
the doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut through and through,
my sword hacked like a handsaw. _Ecce signum!_ I never dealt better
since I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all cowards! Let them
speak. If they speak more or less than truth, they are villains, and
the sons of darkness.

PRINCE.
Speak, sirs, how was it?

GADSHILL.
We four set upon some dozen.

FALSTAFF.
Sixteen at least, my lord.

GADSHILL.
And bound them.

PETO.
No, no, they were not bound.

FALSTAFF.
You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an
Ebrew Jew.

GADSHILL.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.

FALSTAFF.
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.

PRINCE.
What, fought you with them all?

FALSTAFF.
All? I know not what you call all, but if I fought not with fifty of
them I am a bunch of radish. If there were not two or three and fifty
upon poor old Jack, then am I no two-legged creature.

PRINCE.
Pray God you have not murdered some of them.

FALSTAFF.
Nay, that’s past praying for. I have peppered two of them. Two I am
sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal,
if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou knowest my
old ward. Here I lay, and thus I bore my point. Four rogues in buckram
let drive at me.

PRINCE.
What, four? Thou saidst but two even now.

FALSTAFF.
Four, Hal, I told thee four.

POINS.
Ay, ay, he said four.

FALSTAFF.
These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me. I made me no more
ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.

PRINCE.
Seven? Why, there were but four even now.

FALSTAFF.
In buckram?

POINS.
Ay, four, in buckram suits.

FALSTAFF.
Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.

PRINCE.
[_aside to Poins._] Prithee let him alone, we shall have more anon.

FALSTAFF.
Dost thou hear me, Hal?

PRINCE.
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.

FALSTAFF.
Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine in buckram that I
told thee of—

PRINCE.
So, two more already.

FALSTAFF.
Their points being broken—

POINS.
Down fell their hose.

FALSTAFF.
Began to give me ground; but I followed me close, came in foot and
hand, and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.

PRINCE.
O monstrous! Eleven buckram men grown out of two!

FALSTAFF.
But as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in Kendal
green came at my back and let drive at me, for it was so dark, Hal,
that thou couldst not see thy hand.

PRINCE.
These lies are like the father that begets them, gross as a mountain,
open, palpable. Why, thou clay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool,
thou whoreson, obscene greasy tallow-catch—

FALSTAFF.
What, art thou mad? Art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?

PRINCE.
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green, when it was so
dark thou couldst not see thy hand? Come, tell us your reason. What
sayest thou to this?

POINS.
Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.

FALSTAFF.
What, upon compulsion? Zounds, an I were at the strappado, or all the
racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a
reason on compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I
would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.

PRINCE.
I’ll be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine coward, this
bed-presser, this horse-back-breaker, this huge hill of flesh—

FALSTAFF.
’Sblood, you starveling, you eel-skin, you dried neat’s-tongue, you
bull’s pizzle, you stock-fish—O, for breath to utter what is like thee!
You tailor’s-yard, you sheath, you bow-case, you vile standing tuck—

PRINCE.
Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again, and when thou hast tired
thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.

POINS.
Mark, Jack.

PRINCE.
We two saw you four set on four, and bound them and were masters of
their wealth. Mark now how a plain tale shall put you down. Then did we
two set on you four, and, with a word, outfaced you from your prize,
and have it, yea, and can show it you here in the house. And, Falstaff,
you carried your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and
roared for mercy, and still ran and roared, as ever I heard bull-calf.
What a slave art thou to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say
it was in fight! What trick, what device, what starting-hole canst thou
now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?

POINS.
Come, let’s hear, Jack, what trick hast thou now?

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why, hear you, my
masters, was it for me to kill the heir-apparent? Should I turn upon
the true prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but
beware instinct. The lion will not touch the true prince. Instinct is a
great matter. I was now a coward on instinct. I shall think the better
of myself, and thee, during my life—I for a valiant lion, and thou for
a true prince. But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the
money.—Hostess, clap to the doors. Watch tonight, pray tomorrow.
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship
come to you! What, shall we be merry? Shall we have a play extempore?

PRINCE.
Content; and the argument shall be thy running away.

FALSTAFF.
Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!

Enter the Hostess.

HOSTESS.
O Jesu, my lord the Prince—

PRINCE.
How now, my lady the hostess! What say’st thou to me?

HOSTESS.
Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at door would speak
with you: he says he comes from your father.

PRINCE.
Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and send him back again
to my mother.

FALSTAFF.
What manner of man is he?

HOSTESS.
An old man.

FALSTAFF.
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall I give him his
answer?

PRINCE.
Prithee do, Jack.

FALSTAFF.
Faith, and I’ll send him packing.

[_Exit._]

PRINCE.
Now, sirs: by’r Lady, you fought fair, so did you, Peto. So did you,
Bardolph. You are lions, too, you ran away upon instinct, you will not
touch the true prince, no, fie!

BARDOLPH.
Faith, I ran when I saw others run.

PRINCE.
Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff’s sword so hacked?

PETO.
Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would swear truth out of
England but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and
persuaded us to do the like.

BARDOLPH.
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to make them bleed, and
then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of
true men. I did that I did not this seven year before: I blushed to
hear his monstrous devices.

PRINCE.
O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago, and wert
taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blushed extempore. Thou
hadst fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou ran’st away. What
instinct hadst thou for it?

BARDOLPH.
My lord, do you see these meteors? Do you behold these exhalations?

PRINCE.
I do.

BARDOLPH.
What think you they portend?

PRINCE.
Hot livers and cold purses.

BARDOLPH.
Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.

PRINCE.
No, if rightly taken, halter.

Enter Falstaff.

Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone. How now, my sweet creature
of bombast? How long is’t ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?

FALSTAFF.
My own knee? When I was about thy years, Hal, I was not an eagle’s
talon in the waist. I could have crept into any alderman’s thumb-ring:
a plague of sighing and grief! It blows a man up like a bladder.
There’s villanous news abroad: here was Sir John Bracy from your
father; you must to the court in the morning. That same mad fellow of
the north, Percy, and he of Wales that gave Amamon the bastinado, and
made Lucifer cuckold, and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the
cross of a Welsh hook—what a plague call you him?

POINS.
O, Glendower.

FALSTAFF.
Owen, Owen, the same; and his son-in-law Mortimer, and old
Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs
a-horseback up a hill perpendicular—

PRINCE.
He that rides at high speed, and with his pistol kills a sparrow
flying.

FALSTAFF.
You have hit it.

PRINCE.
So did he never the sparrow.

FALSTAFF.
Well, that rascal hath good metal in him, he will not run.

PRINCE.
Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running!

FALSTAFF.
A-horseback, ye cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.

PRINCE.
Yes, Jack, upon instinct.

FALSTAFF.
I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too, and one Mordake, and
a thousand blue-caps more. Worcester is stolen away tonight; thy
father’s beard is turned white with the news. You may buy land now as
cheap as stinking mackerel.

PRINCE.
Why then, it is like if there come a hot June, and this civil buffeting
hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hobnails, by the hundreds.

FALSTAFF.
By the mass, lad, thou sayest true. It is like we shall have good
trading that way. But tell me, Hal, art not thou horrible afeard? Thou
being heir-apparent, could the world pick thee out three such enemies
again as that fiend Douglas, that spirit Percy, and that devil
Glendower? Art thou not horribly afraid? Doth not thy blood thrill at
it?

PRINCE.
Not a whit, i’faith. I lack some of thy instinct.

FALSTAFF.
Well, thou wilt be horribly chid tomorrow when thou comest to thy
father. If thou love me practise an answer.

PRINCE.
Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the particulars of my
life.

FALSTAFF.
Shall I? Content! This chair shall be my state, this dagger my sceptre,
and this cushion my crown.

PRINCE.
Thy state is taken for a joint-stool, thy golden sceptre for a leaden
dagger, and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful bald crown.

FALSTAFF.
Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt thou be
moved. Give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be
thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in
King Cambyses’ vein.

PRINCE.
Well, here is my leg.

FALSTAFF.
And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.

HOSTESS.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i faith!

FALSTAFF.
Weep not, sweet Queen, for trickling tears are vain.

HOSTESS.
O, the Father, how he holds his countenance!

FALSTAFF.
For God’s sake, lords, convey my tristful Queen,
For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.

HOSTESS.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as ever I see!

FALSTAFF.
Peace, good pint-pot; peace, good tickle-brain.—Harry, I do not only
marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou art accompanied.
For though the camomile, the more it is trodden on, the faster it
grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. That thou
art my son I have partly thy mother’s word, partly my own opinion, but
chiefly a villainous trick of thine eye, and a foolish hanging of thy
nether lip, that doth warrant me. If then thou be son to me, here lies
the point: why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the
blessed sun of heaven prove a micher, and eat blackberries? A question
not to be asked. Shall the son of England prove a thief, and take
purses? A question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry, which thou
hast often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name of
pitch. This pitch, as ancient writers do report, doth defile; so doth
the company thou keepest. For, Harry, now I do not speak to thee in
drink, but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion; not in words
only, but in woes also. And yet there is a virtuous man whom I have
often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.

PRINCE.
What manner of man, an it like your Majesty?

FALSTAFF.
A goodly portly man, i’faith, and a corpulent; of a cheerful look, a
pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage; and, as I think, his age some
fifty, or, by’r Lady, inclining to threescore; and now I remember me,
his name is Falstaff. If that man should be lewdly given, he deceiveth
me; for, Harry, I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be
known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then peremptorily I speak
it, there is virtue in that Falstaff; him keep with, the rest banish.
And tell me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me where hast thou been this
month?

PRINCE.
Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me, and I’ll play my
father.

FALSTAFF.
Depose me? If thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in
word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a
poulter’s hare.

PRINCE.
Well, here I am set.

FALSTAFF.
And here I stand. Judge, my masters.

PRINCE.
Now, Harry, whence come you?

FALSTAFF.
My noble lord, from Eastcheap.

PRINCE.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.

FALSTAFF.
’Sblood, my lord, they are false.—Nay, I’ll tickle ye for a young
prince, i’faith.

PRINCE.
Swearest thou, ungracious boy? Henceforth ne’er look on me. Thou art
violently carried away from grace. There is a devil haunts thee in the
likeness of an old fat man. A tun of man is thy companion. Why dost
thou converse with that trunk of humours, that bolting-hutch of
beastliness, that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of
sack, that stuffed cloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with
the pudding in his belly, that reverend Vice, that grey iniquity, that
father ruffian, that vanity in years? Wherein is he good, but to taste
sack and drink it? Wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and
eat it? Wherein cunning, but in craft? Wherein crafty, but in villany?
Wherein villainous, but in all things? Wherein worthy, but in nothing?

FALSTAFF.
I would your Grace would take me with you. Whom means your Grace?

PRINCE.
That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff, that old
white-bearded Satan.

FALSTAFF.
My lord, the man I know.

PRINCE.
I know thou dost.

FALSTAFF.
But to say I know more harm in him than in myself were to say more than
I know. That he is old, the more the pity, his white hairs do witness
it. But that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that I
utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked! If to
be old and merry be a sin, then many an old host that I know is damned.
If to be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh’s lean kine are to be loved.
No, my good lord, banish Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poins, but for
sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, valiant
Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant, being as he is old Jack
Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry’s company, banish not him thy
Harry’s company. Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.

PRINCE.
I do, I will.

[_A knocking heard._]

[_Exeunt Hostess, Francis and Bardolph._]

Enter Bardolph, running.

BARDOLPH.
O, my lord, my lord, the sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the
door.

FALSTAFF.
Out, ye rogue! Play out the play. I have much to say in the behalf of
that Falstaff.

Enter the Hostess, hastily.

HOSTESS.
O Jesu, my lord, my lord—

PRINCE.
Heigh, heigh, the devil rides upon a fiddlestick. What’s the matter?

HOSTESS.
The sheriff and all the watch are at the door. They are come to search
the house. Shall I let them in?

FALSTAFF.
Dost thou hear, Hal? Never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit:
thou art essentially made without seeming so.

PRINCE.
And thou a natural coward without instinct.

FALSTAFF.
I deny your major. If you will deny the sheriff, so; if not, let him
enter. If I become not a cart as well as another man, a plague on my
bringing up! I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as
another.

PRINCE.
Go hide thee behind the arras. The rest walk up above. Now, my masters,
for a true face and good conscience.

FALSTAFF.
Both which I have had, but their date is out, and therefore I’ll hide
me.

PRINCE.
Call in the sheriff.

[_Exeunt all but the Prince and Peto._]

Enter Sheriff and the Carrier.

Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?

SHERIFF.
First, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry
Hath followed certain men unto this house.

PRINCE.
What men?

SHERIFF.
One of them is well known, my gracious lord,
A gross fat man.

CARRIER.
As fat as butter.

PRINCE.
The man I do assure you is not here,
For I myself at this time have employ’d him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by tomorrow dinner-time,
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For anything he shall be charged withal.
And so let me entreat you leave the house.

SHERIFF.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.

PRINCE.
It may be so. If he have robb’d these men,
He shall be answerable; and so, farewell.

SHERIFF.
Good night, my noble lord.

PRINCE.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?

SHERIFF.
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o’clock.

[_Exit Sheriff with the Carrier._]

PRINCE.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul’s. Go, call him forth.

PETO.
Falstaff!—Fast asleep behind the arras, and snorting like a horse.

PRINCE.
Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.

[_He searcheth his pocket, and findeth certain papers._]

What hast thou found?

PETO.
Nothing but papers, my lord.

PRINCE.
Let’s see what they be. Read them.

PETO.
[_reads_]
Item, a capon, . . . . . . . . . . . 2s. 2d.
Item, sauce, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4d.
Item, sack, two gallons, . . . 5s. 8d.
Item, anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.
Item, bread, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ob.

PRINCE.
O monstrous! But one halfpennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal
of sack! What there is else, keep close. We’ll read it at more
advantage. There let him sleep till day. I’ll to the court in the
morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place shall be honourable.
I’ll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot, and I know his death will
be a march of twelve score. The money shall be paid back again with
advantage. Be with me betimes in the morning; and so, good morrow,
Peto.

PETO.
Good morrow, good my lord.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III


SCENE I. Bangor. A Room in the Archdeacon’s House.

Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Mortimer and Glendower.

MORTIMER.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.

HOTSPUR.
Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down? And uncle Worcester,
A plague upon it! I have forgot the map.

GLENDOWER.
No, here it is.
Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur;
For by that name as oft as Lancaster doth speak of you
His cheek looks pale, and with a rising sigh
He wisheth you in heaven.

HOTSPUR.
And you in hell,
As oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.

GLENDOWER.
I cannot blame him. At my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the Earth
Shaked like a coward.

HOTSPUR.
Why, so it would have done
At the same season, if your mother’s cat
Had but kitten’d, though yourself had never been born.

GLENDOWER.
I say the Earth did shake when I was born.

HOTSPUR.
And I say the Earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.

GLENDOWER.
The heavens were all on fire, the Earth did tremble.

HOTSPUR.
O, then th’ Earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of colic pinch’d and vex’d
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb, which for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldam Earth, and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam Earth, having this distemp’rature,
In passion shook.

GLENDOWER.
Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have mark’d me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipp’d in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman’s son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.

HOTSPUR.
I think there is no man speaks better Welsh.
I’ll to dinner.

MORTIMER.
Peace, cousin Percy, you will make him mad.

GLENDOWER.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.

HOTSPUR.
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?

GLENDOWER.
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.

HOTSPUR.
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth; tell truth, and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I’ll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.
O, while you live, tell truth, and shame the devil!

MORTIMER.
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.

GLENDOWER.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottom’d Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.

HOTSPUR.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How ’scapes he agues, in the devil’s name!

GLENDOWER.
Come, here’s the map, shall we divide our right
According to our threefold order ta’en?

MORTIMER.
The archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assign’d:
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably,
A business that this night may execute,
Tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I,
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
[_To Glendower._] Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighbouring gentlemen.

GLENDOWER.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords,
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
From whom you now must steal, and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.

HOTSPUR.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.
I’ll have the current in this place dammed up,
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly.
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.

GLENDOWER.
Not wind? It shall, it must. You see it doth.

MORTIMER.
Yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.

WORCESTER.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here,
And on this north side win this cape of land,
And then he runs straight and even.

HOTSPUR.
I’ll have it so, a little charge will do it.

GLENDOWER.
I’ll not have it altered.

HOTSPUR.
Will not you?

GLENDOWER.
No, nor you shall not.

HOTSPUR.
Who shall say me nay?

GLENDOWER.
Why, that will I.

HOTSPUR.
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.

GLENDOWER.
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
For I was train’d up in the English Court,
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well,
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament—
A virtue that was never seen in you.

HOTSPUR.
Marry, and I am glad of it with all my heart.
I had rather be a kitten, and cry “mew”
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers;
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn’d,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree,
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry.
’Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.

GLENDOWER.
Come, you shall have Trent turn’d.

HOTSPUR.
I do not care. I’ll give thrice so much land
To any well-deserving friend;
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I’ll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?

GLENDOWER.
The moon shines fair, you may away by night.
I’ll haste the writer, and withal
Break with your wives of your departure hence.
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.

[_Exit._]

MORTIMER.
Fie, cousin Percy, how you cross my father!

HOTSPUR.
I cannot choose. Sometimes he angers me
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-wing’d griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what—
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils’ names
That were his lackeys: I cried “Hum,” and “Well, go to,”
But mark’d him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer house in Christendom.

MORTIMER.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read, and profited
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable, and as bountiful
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come cross his humour, faith, he does.
I warrant you that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done
Without the taste of danger and reproof:
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.

WORCESTER.
In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame,
And since your coming hither have done enough
To put him quite besides his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault.
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood—
And that’s the dearest grace it renders you—
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which haunting a nobleman
Loseth men’s hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.

HOTSPUR.
Well, I am school’d. Good manners be your speed!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.

Enter Glendower with Lady Mortimer and Lady Percy.

MORTIMER.
This is the deadly spite that angers me,
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

GLENDOWER.
My daughter weeps, she’ll not part with you,
She’ll be a soldier too, she’ll to the wars.

MORTIMER.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.

[_Glendower speaks to Lady Mortimer in Welsh, and she answers him in
the same._]

GLENDOWER.
She is desperate here, a peevish self-willed harlotry,
One that no persuasion can do good upon.

[_Lady Mortimer speaks to Mortimer in Welsh._]

MORTIMER.
I understand thy looks, that pretty Welsh
Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens
I am too perfect in, and but for shame
In such a parley should I answer thee.

[_Lady Mortimer speaks to him again in Welsh._]

I understand thy kisses, and thou mine,
And that’s a feeling disputation,
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learnt thy language; for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn’d,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer’s bower,
With ravishing division, to her lute.

GLENDOWER.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.

[_Lady Mortimer speaks to Mortimer again in Welsh._]

MORTIMER.
O, I am ignorance itself in this!

GLENDOWER.
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down,
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference ’twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night,
The hour before the heavenly-harness’d team
Begins his golden progress in the east.

MORTIMER.
With all my heart I’ll sit and hear her sing,
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.

GLENDOWER.
Do so, and those musicians that shall play to you
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.

HOTSPUR.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.
Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.

LADY PERCY.
Go, ye giddy goose.

[_The music plays._]

HOTSPUR.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And ’tis no marvel he’s so humorous.
By’r Lady, he’s a good musician.

LADY PERCY.
Then should you be nothing but musical,
For you are altogether governed by humours.
Lie still, ye thief, and hear the lady sing in Welsh.

HOTSPUR.
I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.

LADY PERCY.
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?

HOTSPUR.
No.

LADY PERCY.
Then be still.

HOTSPUR.
Neither; ’tis a woman’s fault.

LADY PERCY.
Now God help thee!

HOTSPUR.
To the Welsh lady’s bed.

LADY PERCY.
What’s that?

HOTSPUR.
Peace, she sings.

[_Here the lady sings a Welsh song._]

Come, Kate, I’ll have your song too.

LADY PERCY.
Not mine, in good sooth.

HOTSPUR.
Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like a comfit-maker’s wife!
“Not you, in good sooth,” and “As true as I live,” and “As God shall
mend me,” and “As sure as day”
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
As if thou never walk’dst further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave “In sooth,”
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,
To velvet-guards and Sunday citizens.
Come, sing.

LADY PERCY.
I will not sing.

HOTSPUR.
’Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be redbreast-teacher. An the
indentures be drawn, I’ll away within these two hours; and so come in
when ye will.

[_Exit._]

GLENDOWER.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn. We’ll but seal,
And then to horse immediately.

MORTIMER.
With all my heart.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. London. A Room in the Palace.

Enter King Henry, Prince Henry and Lords.

KING.
Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I
Must have some private conference: but be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.

[_Exeunt Lords._]

I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That, in His secret doom, out of my blood
He’ll breed revengement and a scourge for me;
But thou dost in thy passages of life
Make me believe that thou art only mark’d
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art match’d withal, and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?

PRINCE.
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offences with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal.
Yet such extenuation let me beg
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
By smiling pickthanks and base newsmongers,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wander’d and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.

KING.
God pardon thee! Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in Council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruin’d, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackney’d in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wonder’d at,
That men would tell their children, “This is he.”
Others would say, “Where, which is Bolingbroke?”
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dress’d myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men’s hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned King.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne’er seen but wonder’d at, and so my state,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast,
And won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping King, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state,
Mingled his royalty, with cap’ring fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys, and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative;
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoff’d himself to popularity,
That, being daily swallow’d by men’s eyes,
They surfeited with honey, and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So, when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze,
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes,
But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face, and render’d such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.

PRINCE.
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
Be more myself.

KING.
For all the world
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my sceptre, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou, the shadow of succession.
For of no right, nor colour like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lion’s armed jaws,
And, being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honour hath he got
Against renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathing clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta’en him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishop’s Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
To fight against me under Percy’s pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.

PRINCE.
Do not think so, you shall not find it so.
And God forgive them that so much have sway’d
Your Majesty’s good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy’s head,
And, in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favours in a bloody mask,
Which, wash’d away, shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, whene’er it lights,
That this same child of honour and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honour sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! For the time will come,
That I shall make this northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf,
And I will call him to so strict account
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your Majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.

KING.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this.
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.

Enter Sir Walter Blunt.

How now, good Blunt? Thy looks are full of speed.

BLUNT.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury.
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offer’d foul play in a state.

KING.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth today,
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next you, Harry, shall set forward,
On Thursday we ourselves will march.
Our meeting is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you
Shall march through Gloustershire; by which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business. Let’s away,
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Eastcheap. A Room in the Boar’s Head Tavern.

Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last action? Do I not
bate? Do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs about me like an old lady’s
loose gown. I am withered like an old apple-john. Well, I’ll repent,
and that suddenly, while I am in some liking. I shall be out of heart
shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent. An I have not
forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I am a peppercorn, a
brewer’s horse. The inside of a church! Company, villainous company,
hath been the spoil of me.

BARDOLPH.
Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.

FALSTAFF.
Why, there is it. Come, sing me a song, make me merry. I was as
virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous enough; swore
little; diced not above seven times—a week; went to a bawdy house not
above once in a quarter—in an hour; paid money that I borrowed—three or
four times; lived well and in good compass; and now I live out of all
order, out of all compass.

BARDOLPH.
Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out of all
compass, out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.

FALSTAFF.
Do thou amend thy face, and I’ll amend my life. Thou art our admiral,
thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but ’tis in the nose of thee.
Thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp.

BARDOLPH.
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.

FALSTAFF.
No, I’ll be sworn, I make as good use of it as many a man doth of a
death’s-head or a _memento mori_. I never see thy face but I think upon
hell-fire, and Dives that lived in purple, for there he is in his
robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way given to virtue, I would
swear by thy face. My oath should be, “By this fire, that’s God’s
angel.” But thou art altogether given over; and wert indeed, but for
the light in thy face, the son of utter darkness. When thou ran’st up
Gad’s Hill in the night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou
hadst been an _ignis fatuus_ or a ball of wildfire, there’s no purchase
in money. O, thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting
bonfire-light! Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and
torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt tavern and tavern: but
the sack that thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as good
cheap at the dearest chandler’s in Europe. I have maintained that
salamander of yours with fire any time this two-and-thirty years, God
reward me for it!

BARDOLPH.
’Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!

FALSTAFF.
God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heartburnt.

Enter the Hostess.

How now, Dame Partlet the hen, have you enquired yet who picked my
pocket?

HOSTESS.
Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John, do you think I keep thieves
in my house? I have searched, I have enquired, so has my husband, man
by man, boy by boy, servant by servant. The tithe of a hair was never
lost in my house before.

FALSTAFF.
Ye lie, hostess. Bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair, and I’ll be
sworn my pocket was picked. Go to, you are a woman, go.

HOSTESS.
Who, I? No; I defy thee: God’s light, I was never called so in mine own
house before.

FALSTAFF.
Go to, I know you well enough.

HOSTESS.
No, Sir John, you do not know me, Sir John. I know you, Sir John, you
owe me money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it.
I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.

FALSTAFF.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas. I have given them away to bakers’ wives; and
they have made bolters of them.

HOSTESS.
Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight shillings an ell. You owe
money here besides, Sir John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money
lent you, four-and-twenty pound.

FALSTAFF.
He had his part of it, let him pay.

HOSTESS.
He? Alas, he is poor, he hath nothing.

FALSTAFF.
How? Poor? Look upon his face. What call you rich? Let them coin his
nose, let them coin his cheeks. I’ll not pay a denier. What, will you
make a younker of me? Shall I not take mine ease in mine inn but I
shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a seal-ring of my
grandfather’s worth forty mark.

HOSTESS.
O Jesu, I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how oft, that that
ring was copper.

FALSTAFF.
How? The Prince is a Jack, a sneak-up. ’Sblood, an he were here, I
would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so.

Enter Prince Henry with Peto, marching. Falstaff meets him, playing on
his truncheon like a fife.

How now, lad? Is the wind in that door, i’faith? Must we all march?

BARDOLPH.
Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.

HOSTESS.
My lord, I pray you, hear me.

PRINCE.
What say’st thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy husband? I love him
well; he is an honest man.

HOSTESS.
Good my lord, hear me.

FALSTAFF.
Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.

PRINCE.
What say’st thou, Jack?

FALSTAFF.
The other night I fell asleep here, behind the arras, and had my pocket
picked. This house is turned bawdy-house; they pick pockets.

PRINCE.
What didst thou lose, Jack?

FALSTAFF.
Wilt thou believe me, Hal, three or four bonds of forty pound apiece
and a seal-ring of my grandfather’s.

PRINCE.
A trifle, some eightpenny matter.

HOSTESS.
So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard your Grace say so. And, my
lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is,
and said he would cudgel you.

PRINCE.
What! he did not?

HOSTESS.
There’s neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.

FALSTAFF.
There’s no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no more truth
in thee than in a drawn fox; and, for woman-hood, Maid Marian may be
the deputy’s wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing, go.

HOSTESS.
Say, what thing, what thing?

FALSTAFF.
What thing? Why, a thing to thank God on.

HOSTESS.
I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou shouldst know it! I am an
honest man’s wife, and, setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave
to call me so.

FALSTAFF.
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.

HOSTESS.
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?

FALSTAFF.
What beast? Why, an otter.

PRINCE.
An otter, Sir John? Why an otter?

FALSTAFF.
Why, she’s neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to have her.

HOSTESS.
Thou art an unjust man in saying so, thou or any man knows where to
have me, thou knave, thou.

PRINCE.
Thou say’st true, hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.

HOSTESS.
So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you ought him a
thousand pound.

PRINCE.
Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?

FALSTAFF.


A thousand pound, Hal? A million. Thy love is worth a million; thou
owest me thy love.

HOSTESS.
Nay, my lord, he call’d you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.

FALSTAFF.
Did I, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH.
Indeed, Sir John, you said so.

FALSTAFF.
Yea, if he said my ring was copper.

PRINCE.
I say ’tis copper. Darest thou be as good as thy word now?

FALSTAFF.
Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare, but as thou art
prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the lion’s whelp.

PRINCE.
And why not as the lion?

FALSTAFF.
The King himself is to be feared as the lion. Dost thou think I’ll fear
thee as I fear thy father? Nay, an I do, I pray God my girdle break.

PRINCE.
O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees! But, sirrah,
there’s no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine;
it is all filled up with midriff. Charge an honest woman with picking
thy pocket! Why, thou whoreson, impudent, embossed rascal, if there
were anything in thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of bawdy
houses, and one poor pennyworth of sugar-candy to make thee
long-winded, if thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but
these, I am a villain. And yet you will stand to it, you will not
pocket up wrong. Art thou not ashamed!

FALSTAFF.
Dost thou hear, Hal? Thou knowest in the state of innocency Adam fell,
and what should poor Jack Falstaff do in the days of villainy? Thou
seest I have more flesh than another man and therefore more frailty.
You confess, then, you picked my pocket?

PRINCE.
It appears so by the story.

FALSTAFF.
Hostess, I forgive thee. Go make ready breakfast, love thy husband,
look to thy servants, cherish thy guests. Thou shalt find me tractable
to any honest reason. Thou seest I am pacified still. Nay, prithee, be
gone.

[_Exit Hostess._]

Now, Hal, to the news at court. For the robbery, lad, how is that
answered?

PRINCE.
O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee. The money is paid
back again.

FALSTAFF.
O, I do not like that paying back, ’tis a double labour.

PRINCE.
I am good friends with my father, and may do anything.

FALSTAFF.
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou dost, and do it with unwashed
hands too.

BARDOLPH.
Do, my lord.

PRINCE.
I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.

FALSTAFF.
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find one that can steal
well? O, for a fine thief, of the age of two-and-twenty or thereabouts!
I am heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these rebels; they
offend none but the virtuous. I laud them, I praise them.

PRINCE.
Bardolph!

BARDOLPH.
My lord?

PRINCE.
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
To my brother John; this to my Lord of Westmoreland.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner-time.

[_Exit Peto._]

Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple hall
At two o’clock in the afternoon;
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning, Percy stands on high,
And either we or they must lower lie.

[_Exit._]

FALSTAFF.
Rare words! Brave world!—Hostess, my breakfast, come.—
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV


SCENE I. The Rebel Camp near Shrewsbury.

Enter Hotspur, Worcester and Douglas.

HOTSPUR.
Well said, my noble Scot. If speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have
As not a soldier of this season’s stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy
The tongues of soothers, but a braver place
In my heart’s love hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.

DOUGLAS.
Thou art the king of honour.
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.

HOTSPUR.
Do so, and ’tis well.

Enter a Messenger with letters.

What letters hast thou there? I can but thank you.

MESSENGER.
These letters come from your father.

HOTSPUR.
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?

MESSENGER.
He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.

HOTSPUR.
Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?

MESSENGER.
His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.

WORCESTER.
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?

MESSENGER.
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
And at the time of my departure thence
He was much fear’d by his physicians.

WORCESTER.
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited.
His health was never better worth than now.

HOTSPUR.
Sick now? Droop now? This sickness doth infect
The very life-blood of our enterprise;
’Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
He writes me here, that inward sickness—
And that his friends by deputation could not
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us;
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possess’d
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?

WORCESTER.
Your father’s sickness is a maim to us.

HOTSPUR.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopp’d off—
And yet, in faith, it is not! His present want
Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? To set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good, for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.

DOUGLAS.
Faith, and so we should, where now remains
A sweet reversion. We may boldly spend
Upon the hope of what is to come in.
A comfort of retirement lives in this.

HOTSPUR.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto,
If that the devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.

WORCESTER.
But yet I would your father had been here.
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division. It will be thought
By some that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings, kept the Earl from hence.
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause.
For well you know we of the off’ring side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us.
This absence of your father’s draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.

HOTSPUR.
You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Than if the Earl were here; for men must think
If we without his help can make a head
To push against the kingdom, with his help
We shall o’erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.

DOUGLAS.
As heart can think. There is not such a word
Spoke in Scotland as this term of fear.

Enter Sir Richard Vernon.

HOTSPUR.
My cousin Vernon! Welcome, by my soul.

VERNON.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.

HOTSPUR.
No harm, what more?

VERNON.
And further, I have learn’d
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.

HOTSPUR.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daffed the world aside
And bid it pass?

VERNON.
All furnish’d, all in arms;
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
Bated like eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats, like images,
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm’d,
Rise from the ground like feather’d Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat
As if an angel dropp’d down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.

HOTSPUR.
No more, no more! Worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come!
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
Meet and ne’er part till one drop down a corse.
O, that Glendower were come!

VERNON.
There is more news.
I learn’d in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.

DOUGLAS.
That’s the worst tidings that I hear of yet.

WORCESTER.
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.

HOTSPUR.
What may the King’s whole battle reach unto?

VERNON.
To thirty thousand.

HOTSPUR.
Forty let it be.
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come, let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.

DOUGLAS.
Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
Of death or death’s hand for this one half year.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A public Road near Coventry.

Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a bottle of sack. Our
soldiers shall march through; we’ll to Sutton Co’fil’ tonight.

BARDOLPH.
Will you give me money, captain?

FALSTAFF.
Lay out, lay out.

BARDOLPH.
This bottle makes an angel.

FALSTAFF.
An if it do, take it for thy labour. An if it make twenty, take them
all, I’ll answer the coinage. Bid my lieutenant Peto meet me at town’s
end.

BARDOLPH.
I will, captain: farewell.

[_Exit._]

FALSTAFF.
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet. I have
misused the King’s press damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred
and fifty soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me none but
good householders, yeomen’s sons, inquire me out contracted bachelors,
such as had been asked twice on the banns, such a commodity of warm
slaves as had as lief hear the devil as a drum, such as fear the report
of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck. I pressed me
none but such toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no bigger
than pins’ heads, and they have bought out their services; and now my
whole charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of
companies—slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth, where the
glutton’s dogs licked his sores; and such as indeed were never
soldiers, but discarded unjust servingmen, younger sons to younger
brothers, revolted tapsters, and ostlers trade-fallen; the cankers of a
calm world and a long peace, ten times more dishonourable-ragged than
an old fazed ancient; and such have I to fill up the rooms of them that
have bought out their services, that you would think that I had a
hundred and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from swine-keeping,
from eating draff and husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and told
me I had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye
hath seen such scarecrows. I’ll not march through Coventry with them,
that’s flat. Nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs as if
they had gyves on, for indeed I had the most of them out of prison.
There’s not a shirt and a half in all my company, and the half shirt is
two napkins tacked together and thrown over the shoulders like a
herald’s coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth, stolen
from my host at Saint Albans, or the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry.
But that’s all one; they’ll find linen enough on every hedge.

Enter Prince Henry and the Lord of Westmoreland.

PRINCE.
How now, blown Jack? How now, quilt?

FALSTAFF.
What, Hal! How now, mad wag? What a devil dost thou in Warwickshire? My
good Lord of Westmoreland, I cry you mercy. I thought your honour had
already been at Shrewsbury.

WESTMORELAND.
Faith, Sir John, ’tis more than time that I were there, and you too,
but my powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us
all. We must away all night.

FALSTAFF.
Tut, never fear me. I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.

PRINCE.
I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee
butter. But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after?

FALSTAFF.
Mine, Hal, mine.

PRINCE.
I did never see such pitiful rascals.

FALSTAFF.
Tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder,
they’ll fill a pit as well as better. Tush, man, mortal men, mortal
men.

WESTMORELAND.
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too
beggarly.

FALSTAFF.
Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that; and for their
bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me.

PRINCE.
No, I’ll be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the ribs bare. But,
sirrah, make haste. Percy is already in the field.

[_Exit._]

FALSTAFF.
What, is the King encamped?

WESTMORELAND.
He is, Sir John. I fear we shall stay too long.

[_Exit._]

FALSTAFF.
Well,
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. The Rebel Camp near Shrewsbury.

Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Douglas and Vernon.

HOTSPUR.
We’ll fight with him tonight.

WORCESTER.
It may not be.

DOUGLAS.
You give him then advantage.

VERNON.
Not a whit.

HOTSPUR.
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?

VERNON.
So do we.

HOTSPUR.
His is certain, ours is doubtful.

WORCESTER.
Good cousin, be advised, stir not tonight.

VERNON.
Do not, my lord.

DOUGLAS.
You do not counsel well.
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.

VERNON.
Do me no slander, Douglas; by my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well-respected honour bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
Which of us fears.

DOUGLAS.
Yea, or tonight.

VERNON.
Content.

HOTSPUR.
Tonight, say I.

VERNON.
Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon’s are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester’s horse came but today,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half himself.

HOTSPUR.
So are the horses of the enemy
In general, journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.

WORCESTER.
The number of the King exceedeth ours.
For God’s sake, cousin, stay till all come in.

[_The trumpet sounds a parley._]

Enter Sir Walter Blunt.

BLUNT.
I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.

HOTSPUR.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God
You were of our determination!
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an enemy.

BLUNT.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The King hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.

HOTSPUR.
The King is kind, and well we know the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six-and-twenty strong,
Sick in the world’s regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery, and beg his peace
With tears of innocence and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now, when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffer’d him their oaths,
Give him their heirs as pages, follow’d him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father while his blood was poor
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh;
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth;
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his country’s wrongs; and by this face,
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for;
Proceeded further—cut me off the heads
Of all the favourites that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here
When he was personal in the Irish war.

BLUNT.
Tut, I came not to hear this.

HOTSPUR.
Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that deprived him of his life,
And, in the neck of that, task’d the whole state.
To make that worse, suffer’d his kinsman March
(Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited;
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the Council-board,
In rage dismiss’d my father from the court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Into his title, the which now we find
Too indirect for long continuance.

BLUNT.
Shall I return this answer to the King?

HOTSPUR.
Not so, Sir Walter. We’ll withdraw awhile.
Go to the King, and let there be impawn’d
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall my uncle
Bring him our purposes. And so, farewell.

BLUNT.
I would you would accept of grace and love.

HOTSPUR.
And maybe so we shall.

BLUNT.
Pray God you do.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. York. A Room in the Archbishop’s Palace.

Enter the Archbishop of York and Sir Michael.

ARCHBISHOP.
Hie, good Sir Michael; bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshal,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import, you would make haste.

SIR MICHAEL.
My good lord,
I guess their tenour.

ARCHBISHOP.
Like enough you do.
Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The King with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry. And, I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower’s absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too,
And comes not in, o’er-rul’d by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the King.

SIR MICHAEL.
Why, my good lord, you need not fear,
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.

ARCHBISHOP.
No, Mortimer is not there.

SIR MICHAEL.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.

ARCHBISHOP.
And so there is. But yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt,
And many more corrivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.

SIR MICHAEL.
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.

ARCHBISHOP.
I hope no less, yet needful ’tis to fear;
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed.
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And ’tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends; and so, farewell, Sir Michael.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V


SCENE I. The King’s Camp near Shrewsbury.

Enter King Henry, Prince Henry, Lancaster, Sir Walter Blunt and Sir
John Falstaff.

KING.
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon bulky hill! The day looks pale
At his distemp’rature.

PRINCE.
The southern wind
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blust’ring day.

KING.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.

[_The trumpet sounds_.]

Enter Worcester and Vernon.

How, now, my Lord of Worcester! ’Tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war,
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?

WORCESTER.
Hear me, my liege:
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. For I do protest
I have not sought the day of this dislike.

KING.
You have not sought it? How comes it, then?

FALSTAFF.
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.

PRINCE.
Peace, chewet, peace!

WORCESTER.
It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks
Of favour from myself and all our house;
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard’s time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son,
That brought you home, and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose ’gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall’n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rain’d down fortune show’ring on your head,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent King,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the King
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly woo’d
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster;
And, being fed by us, you used us so
As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo’s bird,
Useth the sparrow—did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced, for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself,
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.

KING.
These things, indeed, you have articulate,
Proclaim’d at market crosses, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine colour that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurlyburly innovation.
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water-colours to impaint his cause,
Nor moody beggars starving for a time
Of pellmell havoc and confusion.

PRINCE.
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More active-valiant or more valiant-young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to chivalry,
And so I hear he doth account me too.
Yet this before my father’s Majesty—
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.

KING.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it.—No, good Worcester, no.
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin’s part,
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he, and they, and you, yea, every man
Shall be my friend again, and I’ll be his.
So tell your cousin, and then bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their office. So, be gone;
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair, take it advisedly.

[_Exit Worcester with Vernon._]

PRINCE.
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms.

KING.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge;
For on their answer, will we set on them,
And God befriend us as our cause is just!

[_Exeunt the King, Blunt and Prince John._]

FALSTAFF.
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me, so; ’tis a
point of friendship.

PRINCE.
Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.

FALSTAFF.
I would ’twere bedtime, Hal, and all well.

PRINCE.
Why, thou owest God a death.

[_Exit._]

FALSTAFF.
’Tis not due yet, I would be loth to pay Him before His day. What need
I be so forward with Him that calls not on me? Well, ’tis no matter,
honour pricks me on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I come
on? How then? Can honor set to a leg? No. Or an arm? No. Or take away
the grief of a wound? No. Honour hath no skill in surgery then? No.
What is honour? A word. What is in that word, “honour”? What is that
“honour”? Air. A trim reckoning! Who hath it? He that died o’
Wednesday. Doth he feel it? No. Doth be hear it? No. ’Tis insensible,
then? Yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? No. Why?
Detraction will not suffer it. Therefore I’ll none of it. Honour is a
mere scutcheon. And so ends my catechism.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. The Rebel Camp.

Enter Worcester and Vernon.

WORCESTER.
O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the King.

VERNON.
’Twere best he did.

WORCESTER.
Then are we all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King should keep his word in loving us;
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offence in other faults.
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes,
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who, ne’er so tame, so cherish’d and lock’d up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherish’d still the nearer death.
My nephew’s trespass may be well forgot,
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege—
A hare-brain’d Hotspur, govern’d by a spleen.
All his offences live upon my head
And on his father’s. We did train him on,
And, his corruption being ta’en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know
In any case the offer of the King.

VERNON.
Deliver what you will, I’ll say ’tis so.
Here comes your cousin.

Enter Hotspur and Douglas; Officers and Soldiers behind.

HOTSPUR.
My uncle is return’d.
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.
Uncle, what news?

WORCESTER.
The King will bid you battle presently.

DOUGLAS.
Defy him by the Lord Of Westmoreland.

HOTSPUR.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.

DOUGLAS.
Marry, I shall, and very willingly.

[_Exit._]

WORCESTER.
There is no seeming mercy in the King.

HOTSPUR.
Did you beg any? God forbid!

WORCESTER.
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his oath-breaking; which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us rebels, traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.

Enter Douglas.

DOUGLAS.
Arm, gentlemen; to arms! For I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry’s teeth,
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.

WORCESTER.
The Prince of Wales stepp’d forth before the King,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.

HOTSPUR.
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How show’d his tasking? Seem’d it in contempt?

VERNON.
No, by my soul. I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man,
Trimm’d up your praises with a princely tongue,
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he master’d there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause: but let me tell the world,
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.

HOTSPUR.
Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
Upon his follies. Never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier’s arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed! And, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Than I that have not well the gift of tongue
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, here are letters for you.

HOTSPUR.
I cannot read them now.—
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial’s point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
And if we live, we live to tread on kings;
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.

Enter another Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, prepare. The King comes on apace.

HOTSPUR.
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking. Only this:
Let each man do his best. And here draw I
A sword whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance! Percy! And set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that music let us all embrace,
For, Heaven to Earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.

[_The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeunt._]

SCENE III. Plain between the Camps.

The King enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter
Douglas and Sir Walter Blunt.

BLUNT.
What is thy name that in the battle thus
Thou crossest me? What honour dost thou seek
Upon my head?

DOUGLAS.
Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.

BLUNT.
They tell thee true.

DOUGLAS.
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,
This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.

BLUNT.
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot,
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
Lord Stafford’s death.

[_They fight, and Blunt is slain._]

Enter Hotspur.

HOTSPUR.
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
I never had triumphed upon a Scot.

DOUGLAS.
All’s done, all’s won; here breathless lies the King.

HOTSPUR.
Where?

DOUGLAS.
Here.

HOTSPUR.
This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnish’d like the King himself.

DOUGLAS.
A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
A borrow’d title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?

HOTSPUR.
The King hath many marching in his coats.

DOUGLAS.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
I’ll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
Until I meet the King.

HOTSPUR.
Up, and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.

[_Exeunt._]

Alarums. Enter Falstaff solus.

FALSTAFF.
Though I could scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here. Here’s
no scoring but upon the pate.—Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt.
There’s honour for you. Here’s no vanity. I am as hot as molten lead,
and as heavy too. God keep lead out of me, I need no more weight than
mine own bowels. I have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered.
There’s not three of my hundred and fifty left alive, and they are for
the town’s end, to beg during life. But who comes here?

Enter Prince Henry.

PRINCE.
What, stand’st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword.
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged. I prithee
Lend me thy sword.

FALSTAFF.
O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breathe awhile. Turk Gregory never
did such deeds in arms as I have done this day. I have paid Percy, I
have made him sure.

PRINCE.
He is indeed, and living to kill thee.
I prithee, lend me thy sword.

FALSTAFF.
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou gett’st not my sword; but
take my pistol, if thou wilt.

PRINCE.
Give it me. What, is it in the case?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, Hal, ’tis hot, ’tis hot. There’s that will sack a city.

[_The Prince draws out a bottle of sack._]

PRINCE.
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?

[_Throws it at him, and exit._]

FALSTAFF.
Well, if Percy be alive, I’ll pierce him. If he do come in my way, so;
if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of
me. I like not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath. Give me life,
which if I can save, so: if not, honour comes unlooked for, and there’s
an end.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another Part of the Field.

Alarums. Excursions. Enter King Henry, Prince Henry, Lancaster and
Westmoreland.

KING.
I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself, thou bleedest too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.

LANCASTER.
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.

PRINCE.
I do beseech your Majesty, make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.

KING.
I will do so. My Lord of Westmoreland,
Lead him to his tent.

WESTMORELAND.
Come, my lord, I’ll lead you to your tent.

PRINCE.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stain’d nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels’ arms triumph in massacres!

LANCASTER.
We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland,
Our duty this way lies. For God’s sake, come.

[_Exeunt Lancaster and Westmoreland._]

PRINCE.
By Heaven, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster,
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.

KING.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Of such an ungrown warrior.

PRINCE.
O, this boy
Lends mettle to us all!

[_Exit._]

Enter Douglas.

DOUGLAS.
Another king! They grow like Hydra’s heads.
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colours on them. What art thou
That counterfeit’st the person of a king?

KING.
The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart
So many of his shadows thou hast met,
And not the very King. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But, seeing thou fall’st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee, and defend thyself.

DOUGLAS.
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe’er thou be,
And thus I win thee.

They fight; the King being in danger, enter Prince Henry.

PRINCE.
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again! The spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms.
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.

[_They fight. Douglas flies._]

Cheerly, my lord. How fares your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succour sent,
And so hath Clifton. I’ll to Clifton straight.

KING.
Stay and breathe awhile.
Thou hast redeem’d thy lost opinion,
And show’d thou mak’st some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.

PRINCE.
O God, they did me too much injury
That ever said I hearken’d for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.

KING.
Make up to Clifton. I’ll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.

[_Exit._]

Enter Hotspur.

HOTSPUR.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.

PRINCE.
Thou speak’st as if I would deny my name.

HOTSPUR.
My name is Harry Percy.

PRINCE.
Why then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign,
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.

HOTSPUR.
Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!

PRINCE.
I’ll make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honours on thy crest
I’ll crop to make a garland for my head.

HOTSPUR.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.

[_They fight._]

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
Well said, Hal! To it, Hal! Nay, you shall find no boy’s play here, I
can tell you.

Enter Douglas. He fights with Falstaff, who falls down as if he were
dead, and exit Douglas. The Prince kills Hotspur.

HOTSPUR.
O Harry, thou hast robb’d me of my youth!
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me;
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh.
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time’s fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
And food for—

[_Dies._]

PRINCE.
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound;
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal.
But let my favours hide thy mangled face;
And even in thy behalf I’ll thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remember’d in thy epitaph!

[_Sees Falstaff on the ground._]

What, old acquaintance, could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
If I were much in love with vanity.
Death hath not struck so fat a deer today,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowell’d will I see thee by and by,
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.

[_Exit._]

Falstaff rises up.

FALSTAFF.
Embowell’d! If thou embowel me today, I’ll give you leave to powder me
and eat me too tomorrow. ’Sblood, ’twas time to counterfeit, or that
hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I lie, I
am no counterfeit. To die, is to be a counterfeit, for he is but the
counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man: but to counterfeit
dying, when a man thereby liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true
and perfect image of life indeed. The better part of valour is
discretion, in the which better part I have saved my life. Zounds, I am
afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead. How if he should
counterfeit too, and rise? By my faith, I am afraid he would prove the
better counterfeit. Therefore I’ll make him sure, yea, and I’ll swear I
killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? Nothing confutes me but
eyes, and nobody sees me. Therefore, sirrah, with a new wound in your
thigh, come you along with me.

[_Takes Hotspur on his back._]

Enter Prince Henry and Lancaster.

PRINCE.
Come, brother John, full bravely hast thou flesh’d
Thy maiden sword.

LANCASTER.
But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?

PRINCE.
I did; I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground.—Art thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem’st.

FALSTAFF.
No, that’s certain, I am not a double man. But if I be not Jack
Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy! [_Throwing the body down._]
If your father will do me any honour, so; if not, let him kill the next
Percy himself. I look to be either earl or duke, I can assure you.

PRINCE.
Why, Percy I kill’d myself, and saw thee dead.

FALSTAFF.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying! I grant you I
was down and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an
instant, and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be
believed, so; if not, let them that should reward valour bear the sin
upon their own heads. I’ll take it upon my death, I gave him this wound
in the thigh. If the man were alive, and would deny it, zounds, I would
make him eat a piece of my sword.

LANCASTER.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.

PRINCE.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.—
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I’ll gild it with the happiest terms I have.

[_A retreat is sounded._]

The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.

[_Exeunt Prince Henry and Lancaster._]

FALSTAFF.
I’ll follow, as they say, for reward. He that rewards me, God reward
him! If I do grow great, I’ll grow less, for I’ll purge, and leave
sack, and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.

[_Exit, bearing off the body._]

SCENE V. Another Part of the Field.

The trumpets sound. Enter King Henry, Prince Henry, Lancaster,
Westmoreland and others, with Worcester and Vernon prisoners.

KING.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenour of thy kinsman’s trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
A noble earl, and many a creature else,
Had been alive this hour,
If, like a Christian, thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.

WORCESTER.
What I have done my safety urged me to;
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.

KING.
Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pause upon.

[_Exeunt Worcester and Vernon, guarded._]

How goes the field?

PRINCE.
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turn’d from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace
I may dispose of him.

KING.
With all my heart.

PRINCE.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honourable bounty shall belong.
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.
His valours shown upon our crests today
Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.

LANCASTER.
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.

KING.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland,
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day,
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.

[_Exeunt._]




THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH




Contents

 INDUCTION

 ACT I
 Scene I. The same.
 Scene II. London. A street.
 Scene III. York. The Archbishop’s palace.

 ACT II
 Scene I. London. A street.
 Scene II. London. Another street.
 Scene III. Warkworth. Before the castle.
 Scene IV. The Boar’s head Tavern in Eastcheap.

 ACT III
 Scene I. Westminster. The palace.
 Scene II. Gloucestershire. Before Justice Shallow’s house.

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Yorkshire. Gaultree Forest.
 Scene II. Another part of the forest.
 Scene III. Another part of the forest.
 Scene IV. Westminster. The Jerusalem Chamber.
 Scene V. Another chamber.

 ACT V
 Scene I. Gloucestershire. Shallow’s house.
 Scene II. Westminster. The palace.
 Scene III. Gloucestershire. Shallow’s orchard.
 Scene IV. London. A street.
 Scene V. A public place near Westminster Abbey.

 EPILOGUE




Dramatis Personæ

RUMOUR, the Presenter.
KING HENRY the Fourth.
HENRY, PRINCE OF WALES, afterwards King Henry the Fifth.
THOMAS, DUKE OF CLARENCE.
PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER.
PRINCE HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER.
EARL OF WARWICK.
EARL OF WESTMORELAND.
EARL OF SURREY.
GOWER.
HARCOURT.
SIR JOHN BLUNT.
Lord CHIEF JUSTICE of the King’s Bench.
A SERVANT of the Chief Justice.
Henry Percy, Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND.
Scroop, ARCHBISHOP of York.
Lord MOWBRAY.
Lord HASTINGS.
LORD BARDOLPH.
SIR JOHN COLEVILLE.
TRAVERS and MORTON, retainers of Northumberland.
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF.
His Page.
BARDOLPH.
PISTOL.
POINS.
PETO.
SHALLOW and SILENCE, country justices.
DAVY, Servant to Shallow.
MOULDY, SHADOW, WART, FEEBLE, and BULLCALF, recruits.
FANG and SNARE, sheriff’s officers.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
LADY PERCY.
MISTRESS QUICKLY, hostess of a tavern in Eastcheap.
DOLL TEARSHEET.

Lords and Attendants; Porter, Drawers, Musicians, Beadles, Grooms, etc.

A Dancer, speaker of the epilogue.

SCENE: England.




INDUCTION


Warkworth. Before the castle.

Enter Rumour, painted full of tongues.

RUMOUR.
Open your ears; for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing when loud Rumour speaks?
I, from the orient to the drooping west,
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth.
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
I speak of peace, while covert enmity
Under the smile of safety wounds the world.
And who but Rumour, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepared defence,
Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,
And of so easy and so plain a stop
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
The still-discordant wav’ring multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-known body to anatomize
Among my household? Why is Rumour here?
I run before King Harry’s victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
Even with the rebels’ blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My office is
To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspur’s sword,
And that the King before the Douglas’ rage
Stoop’d his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumour’d through the peasant towns
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,
Where Hotspur’s father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learnt of me. From Rumour’s tongues
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.

 [_Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. The same.

Enter Lord Bardolph.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Who keeps the gate here, ho?

The Porter opens the gate.

Where is the Earl?

PORTER.
What shall I say you are?

LORD BARDOLPH.
Tell thou the Earl
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.

PORTER.
His lordship is walk’d forth into the orchard.
Please it your honour knock but at the gate,
And he himself will answer.

Enter Northumberland.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Here comes the Earl.

 [_Exit Porter._]

NORTHUMBERLAND.
What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem.
The times are wild; contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose
And bears down all before him.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Noble earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Good, an God will!

LORD BARDOLPH.
As good as heart can wish.
The King is almost wounded to the death;
And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
Kill’d by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field;
And Harry Monmouth’s brawn, the hulk Sir John,
Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day,
So fought, so follow’d and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignify the times
Since Caesar’s fortunes!

NORTHUMBERLAND.
How is this derived?
Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?

LORD BARDOLPH.
I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence,
A gentleman well bred and of good name,
That freely render’d me these news for true.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Here comes my servant Travers, whom I sent
On Tuesday last to listen after news.

Enter Travers.

LORD BARDOLPH.
My lord, I over-rode him on the way,
And he is furnish’d with no certainties
More than he haply may retail from me.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?

TRAVERS.
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turn’d me back
With joyful tidings, and, being better horsed,
Out-rode me. After him came spurring hard
A gentleman, almost forspent with speed,
That stopp’d by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
He ask’d the way to Chester, and of him
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury.
He told me that rebellion had bad luck
And that young Harry Percy’s spur was cold.
With that he gave his able horse the head,
And bending forward struck his armed heels
Against the panting sides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so
He seem’d in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Ha? Again:
Said he young Harry Percy’s spur was cold?
Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion
Had met ill luck?

LORD BARDOLPH.
My lord, I’ll tell you what:
If my young lord your son have not the day,
Upon mine honour, for a silken point
I’ll give my barony, never talk of it.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of loss?

LORD BARDOLPH.
Who, he?
He was some hilding fellow that had stolen
The horse he rode on, and, upon my life,
Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news.

Enter Morton.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Yea, this man’s brow, like to a title-leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
Hath left a witness’d usurpation.
Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?

MORTON.
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord,
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask
To fright our party.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
How doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dread in look, so woe-begone,
Drew Priam’s curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy’s death ere thou report’st it.
This thou wouldst say: “Your son did thus and thus;
Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas”
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds:
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with “Brother, son, and all are dead.”

MORTON.
Douglas is living, and your brother, yet;
But, for my lord your son—

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Why, he is dead.
See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know
Hath by instinct knowledge from others’ eyes
That what he fear’d is chanced. Yet speak, Morton;
Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

MORTON.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Yet, for all this, say not that Percy’s dead.
I see a strange confession in thine eye.
Thou shakest thy head and hold’st it fear or sin
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so.
The tongue offends not that reports his death;
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive.
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell,
Remember’d tolling a departing friend.

LORD BARDOLPH.
I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.

MORTON.
I am sorry I should force you to believe
That which I would to God I had not seen;
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rend’ring faint quittance, wearied and outbreathed,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the best-temper’d courage in his troops;
For from his metal was his party steel’d,
Which once in him abated, all the rest
Turn’d on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that’s heavy in itself
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
So did our men, heavy in Hotspur’s loss,
Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester
Too soon ta’en prisoner; and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas, whose well-labouring sword
Had three times slain th’ appearance of the King,
Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turn’d their backs, and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all
Is that the King hath won, and hath sent out
A speedy power to encounter you, my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
For this I shall have time enough to mourn.
In poison there is physic; and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure made me well.
And as the wretch, whose fever-weaken’d joints,
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper’s arms, even so my limbs,
Weaken’d with grief, being now enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence, therefore, thou nice crutch!
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly coif!
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head
Which princes, flesh’d with conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my brows with iron, and approach
The ragged’st hour that time and spite dare bring
To frown upon th’ enraged Northumberland!
Let heaven kiss earth! Now let not Nature’s hand
Keep the wild flood confined! Let order die!
And let this world no longer be a stage
To feed contention in a lingering act;
But let one spirit of the first-born Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead!

LORD BARDOLPH.
This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.

MORTON.
Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honour.
The lives of all your loving complices
Lean on your health; the which, if you give o’er
To stormy passion, must perforce decay.
You cast th’ event of war, my noble lord,
And summ’d the account of chance, before you said
“Let us make head.” It was your presurmise
That in the dole of blows your son might drop.
You knew he walk’d o’er perils, on an edge,
More likely to fall in than to get o’er.
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit
Would lift him where most trade of danger ranged.
Yet did you say “Go forth;” and none of this,
Though strongly apprehended, could restrain
The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall’n,
Or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth,
More than that being which was like to be?

LORD BARDOLPH.
We all that are engaged to this loss
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas
That if we wrought out life ’twas ten to one;
And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed
Choked the respect of likely peril fear’d;
And since we are o’erset, venture again.
Come, we will put forth, body and goods.

MORTON.
’Tis more than time. And, my most noble lord,
I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth:
The gentle Archbishop of York is up
With well-appointed powers. He is a man
Who with a double surety binds his followers.
My lord your son had only but the corpse,
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
For that same word, “rebellion” did divide
The action of their bodies from their souls,
And they did fight with queasiness, constrain’d,
As men drink potions, that their weapons only
Seem’d on our side; but, for their spirits and souls,
This word, “rebellion,” it had froze them up,
As fish are in a pond. But now the bishop
Turns insurrection to religion.
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts,
He’s follow’d both with body and with mind,
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones;
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;
And more and less do flock to follow him.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
I knew of this before; but, to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me, and counsel every man
The aptest way for safety and revenge.
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed.
Never so few, and never yet more need.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. London. A street.

Enter Falstaff, with his Page bearing his sword and buckler.

FALSTAFF.
Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?

PAGE.
He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water; but, for the
party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than he knew for.

FALSTAFF.
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. The brain of this
foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything that tends
to laughter more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only
witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk
before thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed all her litter but one. If
the Prince put thee into my service for any other reason than to set me
off, why then I have no judgement. Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art
fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never
manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you neither in gold nor
silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your master,
for a jewel,—the juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not yet
fledge. I will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand than he
shall get one off his cheek; and yet he will not stick to say his face
is a face-royal. God may finish it when He will, ’tis not a hair amiss
yet. He may keep it still at a face-royal, for a barber shall never
earn sixpence out of it. And yet he’ll be crowing as if he had writ man
ever since his father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but
he’s almost out of mine, I can assure him. What said Master Dommelton
about the satin for my short cloak and my slops?

PAGE.
He said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than Bardolph. He
would not take his band and yours, he liked not the security.

FALSTAFF.
Let him be damned like the glutton! Pray God his tongue be hotter! A
whoreson Achitophel! A rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman
in hand, and then stand upon security! The whoreson smooth-pates do now
wear nothing but high shoes and bunches of keys at their girdles; and
if a man is through with them in honest taking up, then they must stand
upon security. I had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as
offer to stop it with security. I looked he should have sent me two and
twenty yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and he sends me
“security”. Well, he may sleep in security, for he hath the horn of
abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it; and yet
cannot he see, though he have his own lanthorn to light him. Where’s
Bardolph?

PAGE.
He’s gone into Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.

FALSTAFF.
I bought him in Paul’s, and he’ll buy me a horse in Smithfield. An I
could get me but a wife in the stews, I were manned, horsed, and wived.

Enter the Lord Chief Justice and Servant.

PAGE.
Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him
about Bardolph.

FALSTAFF.
Wait close, I will not see him.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What’s he that goes there?

SERVANT.
Falstaff, an ’t please your lordship.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
He that was in question for the robbery?

SERVANT.
He, my lord; but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury, and, as
I hear, is now going with some charge to the Lord John of Lancaster.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What, to York? Call him back again.

SERVANT.
Sir John Falstaff!

FALSTAFF.
Boy, tell him I am deaf.

PAGE.
You must speak louder, my master is deaf.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I am sure he is, to the hearing of anything good.
Go pluck him by the elbow, I must speak with him.

SERVANT.
Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
What! A young knave, and begging! Is there not wars? Is there not
employment? Doth not the King lack subjects? Do not the rebels need
soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse
shame to beg than to be on the worst side, were it worse than the name
of rebellion can tell how to make it.

SERVANT.
You mistake me, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Why, sir, did I say you were an honest man? Setting my knighthood and
my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so.

SERVANT.
I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and your soldiership aside,
and give me leave to tell you, you lie in your throat, if you say I am
any other than an honest man.

FALSTAFF.
I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that which grows to me? If
thou get’st any leave of me, hang me; if thou tak’st leave, thou wert
better be hanged. You hunt counter. Hence! Avaunt!

SERVANT.
Sir, my lord would speak with you.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.

FALSTAFF.
My good lord! God give your lordship good time of day. I am glad to see
your lordship abroad. I heard say your lordship was sick. I hope your
lordship goes abroad by advice. Your lordship, though not clean past
your youth, hath yet some smack of age in you, some relish of the
saltness of time; and I most humbly beseech your lordship to have a
reverend care of your health.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to Shrewsbury.

FALSTAFF.
An ’t please your lordship, I hear his Majesty is returned with some
discomfort from Wales.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I talk not of his Majesty. You would not come when I sent for you.

FALSTAFF.
And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fallen into this same whoreson
apoplexy.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, God mend him! I pray you let me speak with you.

FALSTAFF.
This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of lethargy, an ’t please your
lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.

FALSTAFF.
It hath it original from much grief, from study and perturbation of the
brain. I have read the cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of
deafness.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear not what I say to
you.

FALSTAFF.
Very well, my lord, very well. Rather, an ’t please you, it is the
disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that I am troubled
withal.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
To punish you by the heels would amend the attention of your ears, and
I care not if I do become your physician.

FALSTAFF.
I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient. Your lordship may
minister the potion of imprisonment to me in respect of poverty; but
how I should be your patient to follow your prescriptions, the wise may
make some dram of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I sent for you, when there were matters against you for your life, to
come speak with me.

FALSTAFF.
As I was then advised by my learned counsel in the laws of this
land-service, I did not come.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great infamy.

FALSTAFF.
He that buckles himself in my belt cannot live in less.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.

FALSTAFF.
I would it were otherwise, I would my means were greater and my waist
slenderer.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
You have misled the youthful prince.

FALSTAFF.
The young prince hath misled me. I am the fellow with the great belly,
and he my dog.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed wound. Your day’s service at
Shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your night’s exploit on Gad’s
Hill. You may thank th’ unquiet time for your quiet o’er-posting that
action.

FALSTAFF.
My lord!

CHIEF JUSTICE.
But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a sleeping wolf.

FALSTAFF.
To wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What! You are as a candle, the better part burnt out.

FALSTAFF.
A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. If I did say of wax, my growth
would approve the truth.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
There is not a white hair in your face but should have his effect of
gravity.

FALSTAFF.
His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
You follow the young prince up and down, like his ill angel.

FALSTAFF.
Not so, my lord, your ill angel is light, but I hope he that looks upon
me will take me without weighing. And yet in some respects, I grant, I
cannot go. I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these
costermongers’ times that true valour is turned bearherd; pregnancy is
made a tapster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. All
the other gifts appertinent to man, as the malice of this age shapes
them, are not worth a gooseberry. You that are old consider not the
capacities of us that are young; you do measure the heat of our livers
with the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the vaward of our
youth, I must confess, are wags too.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down
old with all the characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry
hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing
belly? Is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double,
your wit single, and every part about you blasted with antiquity? And
will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a
white head and something a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it
with halloing and singing of anthems. To approve my youth further, I
will not. The truth is, I am only old in judgement and understanding;
and he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me
the money, and have at him! For the box of the ear that the Prince gave
you, he gave it like a rude prince, and you took it like a sensible
lord. I have checked him for it, and the young lion repents. Marry, not
in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, God send the Prince a better companion!

FALSTAFF.
God send the companion a better prince! I cannot rid my hands of him.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, the King hath severed you and Prince Harry. I hear you are going
with Lord John of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of
Northumberland.

FALSTAFF.
Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But look you pray, all you
that kiss my lady Peace at home, that our armies join not in a hot day;
for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to
sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day, and I brandish anything but
a bottle, I would I might never spit white again. There is not a
dangerous action can peep out his head but I am thrust upon it. Well, I
cannot last ever. But it was alway yet the trick of our English nation,
if they have a good thing, to make it too common. If ye will needs say
I am an old man, you should give me rest. I would to God my name were
not so terrible to the enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to
death with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Well, be honest, be honest, and God bless your expedition!

FALSTAFF.
Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Not a penny, not a penny; you are too impatient to bear crosses. Fare
you well: commend me to my cousin Westmoreland.

 [_Exeunt Chief Justice and Servant._]

FALSTAFF.
If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A man can no more separate
age and covetousness than he can part young limbs and lechery: but the
gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the other; and so both the
degrees prevent my curses. Boy!

PAGE.
Sir?

FALSTAFF.
What money is in my purse?

PAGE.
Seven groats and two pence.

FALSTAFF.
I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse. Borrowing
only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear
this letter to my Lord of Lancaster; this to the Prince; this to the
Earl of Westmoreland; and this to old Mistress Ursula, whom I have
weekly sworn to marry since I perceived the first white hair of my
chin. About it. You know where to find me. [_Exit Page_.] A pox of this
gout! or a gout of this pox! for the one or the other plays the rogue
with my great toe. ’Tis no matter if I do halt; I have the wars for my
colour, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will
make use of anything. I will turn diseases to commodity.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. York. The Archbishop’s palace.

Enter the Archbishop, the Lords Hastings, Mowbray and Bardolph.

ARCHBISHOP.
Thus have you heard our cause and known our means,
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes.
And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?

MOWBRAY.
I well allow the occasion of our arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied
How in our means we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the King.

HASTINGS.
Our present musters grow upon the file
To five and twenty thousand men of choice;
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.

LORD BARDOLPH.
The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:
Whether our present five and twenty thousand
May hold up head without Northumberland.

HASTINGS.
With him we may.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Yea, marry, there’s the point:
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgement is, we should not step too far
Till we had his assistance by the hand;
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this
Conjecture, expectation, and surmise
Of aids incertain should not be admitted.

ARCHBISHOP.
’Tis very true, Lord Bardolph, for indeed
It was young Hotspur’s case at Shrewsbury.

LORD BARDOLPH.
It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air on promise of supply,
Flatt’ring himself in project of a power
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts,
And so, with great imagination
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death
And winking leap’d into destruction.

HASTINGS.
But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Yes, if this present quality of war—
Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot—
Lives so in hope, as in an early spring
We see th’ appearing buds; which to prove fruit
Hope gives not so much warrant as despair
That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot, then draw the model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then we must rate the cost of the erection,
Which if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the model
In fewer offices, or at least desist
To build at all? Much more, in this great work,
Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down
And set another up, should we survey
The plot of situation and the model,
Consent upon a sure foundation,
Question surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a work to undergo,
To weigh against his opposite; or else
We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men instead of men,
Like one that draws the model of a house
Beyond his power to build it, who, half through,
Gives o’er and leaves his part-created cost
A naked subject to the weeping clouds
And waste for churlish winter’s tyranny.

HASTINGS.
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
Should be still-born, and that we now possess’d
The utmost man of expectation,
I think we are a body strong enough,
Even as we are, to equal with the King.

LORD BARDOLPH.
What, is the King but five and twenty thousand?

HASTINGS.
To us no more; nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph;
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
Are in three heads: one power against the French,
And one against Glendower; perforce a third
Must take up us. So is the unfirm king
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.

ARCHBISHOP.
That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against us in full puissance
Need not be dreaded.

HASTINGS.
If he should do so,
He leaves his back unarm’d, the French and Welsh
Baying him at the heels: never fear that.

LORD BARDOLPH.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?

HASTINGS.
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
But who is substituted ’gainst the French
I have no certain notice.

ARCHBISHOP.
Let us on,
And publish the occasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice;
Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.
An habitation giddy and unsure
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond many, with what loud applause
Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke,
Before he was what thou wouldst have him be!
And being now trimm’d in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him
That thou provok’st thyself to cast him up.
So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard;
And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up,
And howl’st to find it. What trust is in these times?
They that, when Richard lived, would have him die
Are now become enamour’d on his grave.
Thou that threw’st dust upon his goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on
After th’ admired heels of Bolingbroke,
Criest now “O earth, yield us that king again,
And take thou this!” O thoughts of men accursed!
Past and to come seems best; things present, worst.

MOWBRAY.
Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?

HASTINGS.
We are time’s subjects, and time bids be gone.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. London. A street.

Enter Hostess with two Officers, Fang and Snare, following.

HOSTESS.
Master Fang, have you entered the action?

FANG.
It is entered.

HOSTESS.
Where’s your yeoman? Is ’t a lusty yeoman? Will he stand to ’t?

FANG.
Sirrah, where’s Snare?

HOSTESS.
O Lord, ay! Good Master Snare.

SNARE.
Here, here.

FANG.
Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.

HOSTESS.
Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him and all.

SNARE.
It may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.

HOSTESS.
Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me in mine own house, and
that most beastly, in good faith. He cares not what mischief he does,
if his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will spare
neither man, woman, nor child.

FANG.
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.

HOSTESS.
No, nor I neither. I’ll be at your elbow.

FANG.
An I but fist him once, an he come but within my vice,—

HOSTESS.
I am undone by his going, I warrant you, he’s an infinitive thing upon
my score. Good Master Fang, hold him sure. Good Master Snare, let him
not ’scape. He comes continuantly to Pie Corner—saving your manhoods—to
buy a saddle, and he is indited to dinner to the Lubber’s Head in
Lumbert Street, to Master Smooth’s the silkman. I pray you, since my
exion is entered, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
brought in to his answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor lone
woman to bear, and I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been
fubbed off, and fubbed off, and fubbed off, from this day to that day,
that it is a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in such
dealing, unless a woman should be made an ass and a beast, to bear
every knave’s wrong. Yonder he comes, and that arrant malmsey-nose
knave, Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your offices, Master
Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.

Enter Falstaff, Bardolph and Page.

FALSTAFF.
How now, whose mare’s dead? What’s the matter?

FANG.
Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.

FALSTAFF.
Away, varlets! Draw, Bardolph! Cut me off the villain’s head. Throw the
quean in the channel.

HOSTESS.
Throw me in the channel? I’ll throw thee in the channel. Wilt thou,
wilt thou, thou bastardly rogue? Murder, murder! Ah, thou honeysuckle
villain, wilt thou kill God’s officers and the King’s? Ah, thou
honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a man-queller, and a
woman-queller.

FALSTAFF.
Keep them off, Bardolph.

FANG.
A rescue! A rescue!

HOSTESS.
Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou wo’t, wo’t thou? Thou wo’t,
wo’t ta? Do, do, thou rogue! Do, thou hempseed!

PAGE.
Away, you scullion! you rampallian! you fustilarian! I’ll tickle your
catastrophe.

Enter the Lord Chief Justice and his men.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!

HOSTESS.
Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you stand to me.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
How now, Sir John? What are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time and business?
You should have been well on your way to York.
Stand from him, fellow. Wherefore hang’st thou upon him?

HOSTESS.
O my most worshipful lord, an’t please your Grace, I am a poor widow of
Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
For what sum?

HOSTESS.
It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all, all I have. He hath
eaten me out of house and home. He hath put all my substance into that
fat belly of his: but I will have some of it out again, or I will ride
thee o’ nights like the mare.

FALSTAFF.
I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have any vantage of ground
to get up.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
How comes this, Sir John? Fie! what man of good temper would endure
this tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor
widow to so rough a course to come by her own?

FALSTAFF.
What is the gross sum that I owe thee?

HOSTESS.
Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money too. Thou
didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin
chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, upon Wednesday in
Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for liking his father to a
singing-man of Windsor, thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing
thy wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife. Canst thou deny
it? Did not goodwife Keech, the butcher’s wife, come in then and call
me gossip Quickly? coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar, telling us
she had a good dish of prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some,
whereby I told thee they were ill for green wound? And didst thou not,
when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity
with such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam?
And didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings? I
put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it, if thou canst.

FALSTAFF.
My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and down the town
that her eldest son is like you. She hath been in good case, and the
truth is, poverty hath distracted her. But for these foolish officers,
I beseech you I may have redress against them.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching
the true cause the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the
throng of words that come with such more than impudent sauciness from
you, can thrust me from a level consideration. You have, as it appears
to me, practised upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman, and made
her serve your uses both in purse and in person.

HOSTESS.
Yea, in truth, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe her, and unpay the villany
you have done with her. The one you may do with sterling money, and the
other with current repentance.

FALSTAFF.
My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without reply. You call
honourable boldness impudent sauciness; if a man will make curtsy and
say nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble duty remembered, I
will not be your suitor. I say to you, I do desire deliverance from
these officers, being upon hasty employment in the King’s affairs.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
You speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in th’ effect of your
reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.

FALSTAFF.
Come hither, hostess.

Enter Gower.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Now, Master Gower, what news?

GOWER.
The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales
Are near at hand: the rest the paper tells.

FALSTAFF.
As I am a gentleman.

HOSTESS.
Faith, you said so before.

FALSTAFF.
As I am a gentleman. Come, no more words of it.

HOSTESS.
By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain to pawn both my
plate and the tapestry of my dining-chambers.

FALSTAFF.
Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. And for thy walls, a pretty
slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal, or the German hunting in
waterwork, is worth a thousand of these bed-hangers and these
fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound, if thou canst. Come, an
’twere not for thy humours, there’s not a better wench in England. Go,
wash thy face, and draw the action. Come, thou must not be in this
humour with me; dost not know me? Come, come, I know thou wast set on
to this.

HOSTESS.
Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles. I’ faith, I am loath
to pawn my plate, so God save me, la!

FALSTAFF.
Let it alone, I’ll make other shift: you’ll be a fool still.

HOSTESS.
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown. I hope you’ll come to
supper. You’ll pay me all together?

FALSTAFF.
Will I live? [_To Bardolph_.] Go, with her, with her. Hook on, hook on.

HOSTESS.
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?

FALSTAFF.
No more words, let’s have her.

 [_Exeunt Hostess, Fang, Snare, Bardolph and Page._]

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I have heard better news.

FALSTAFF.
What’s the news, my lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Where lay the King tonight?

GOWER.
At Basingstoke, my lord.

FALSTAFF.
I hope, my lord, all’s well. What is the news, my lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Come all his forces back?

GOWER.
No, fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse
Are march’d up to my Lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.

FALSTAFF.
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
You shall have letters of me presently.
Come, go along with me, good Master Gower.

FALSTAFF.
My lord!

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What’s the matter?

FALSTAFF.
Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?

GOWER.
I must wait upon my good lord here, I thank you, good Sir John.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to take soldiers up
in counties as you go.

FALSTAFF.
Will you sup with me, Master Gower?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir John?

FALSTAFF.
Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that taught them me.
This is the right fencing grace, my lord; tap for tap, and so part
fair.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great fool.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. London. Another street.

Enter Prince Henry and Poins.

PRINCE.
Before God, I am exceeding weary.

POINS.
Is ’t come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one
of so high blood.

PRINCE.
Faith, it does me, though it discolours the complexion of my greatness
to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vilely in me to desire small beer?

POINS.
Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a
composition.

PRINCE.
Belike then my appetite was not princely got, for, by my troth, I do
now remember the poor creature small beer. But indeed, these humble
considerations make me out of love with my greatness. What a disgrace
is it to me to remember thy name! or to know thy face tomorrow! or to
take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hast—viz. these, and
those that were thy peach-coloured ones! or to bear the inventory of
thy shirts, as, one for superfluity, and another for use! But that the
tennis-court keeper knows better than I, for it is a low ebb of linen
with thee when thou keepest not racket there; as thou hast not done a
great while, because the rest of thy low countries have made a shift to
eat up thy holland. And God knows whether those that bawl out of the
ruins of thy linen shall inherit his kingdom: but the midwives say the
children are not in the fault; whereupon the world increases, and
kindreds are mightily strengthened.

POINS.
How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you should talk so
idly! Tell me, how many good young princes would do so, their fathers
being so sick as yours at this time is?

PRINCE.
Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?

POINS.
Yes, faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.

PRINCE.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.

POINS.
Go to, I stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.

PRINCE.
Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad, now my father
is sick; albeit I could tell to thee, as to one it pleases me, for
fault of a better, to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad indeed
too.

POINS.
Very hardly upon such a subject.

PRINCE.
By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil’s book as thou and
Falstaff for obduracy and persistency. Let the end try the man. But I
tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my father is so sick; and
keeping such vile company as thou art hath in reason taken from me all
ostentation of sorrow.

POINS.
The reason?

PRINCE.
What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?

POINS.
I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.

PRINCE.
It would be every man’s thought; and thou art a blessed fellow to think
as every man thinks. Never a man’s thought in the world keeps the
roadway better than thine: every man would think me an hypocrite
indeed. And what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?

POINS.
Why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to Falstaff.

PRINCE.
And to thee.

POINS.
By this light, I am well spoke on; I can hear it with mine own ears.
The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second brother, and
that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two things, I confess,
I cannot help. By the mass, here comes Bardolph.

Enter Bardolph and Page.

PRINCE.
And the boy that I gave Falstaff. He had him from me Christian, and
look if the fat villain have not transformed him ape.

BARDOLPH.
God save your Grace!

PRINCE.
And yours, most noble Bardolph!

POINS.
Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing?
Wherefore blush you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms are you become! Is
’t such a matter to get a pottle-pot’s maidenhead?

PAGE.
He calls me e’en now, my lord, through a red lattice, and I could
discern no part of his face from the window. At last I spied his eyes,
and methought he had made two holes in the ale-wife’s new petticoat and
so peeped through.

PRINCE.
Has not the boy profited?

BARDOLPH.
Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!

PAGE.
Away, you rascally Althaea’s dream, away!

PRINCE.
Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?

PAGE.
Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamt she was delivered of a firebrand; and
therefore I call him her dream.

PRINCE.
A crown’s worth of good interpretation. There ’tis, boy.

POINS.
O, that this blossom could be kept from cankers! Well, there is
sixpence to preserve thee.

BARDOLPH.
An you do not make him be hanged among you, the gallows shall have
wrong.

PRINCE.
And how doth thy master, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH.
Well, my lord. He heard of your Grace’s coming to town. There’s a
letter for you.

POINS.
Delivered with good respect. And how doth the martlemas, your master?

BARDOLPH.
In bodily health, sir.

POINS.
Marry, the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him.
Though that be sick, it dies not.

PRINCE.
I do allow this wen to be as familiar with me as my dog, and he holds
his place, for look you how he writes.

POINS.
[_Reads_.] “John Falstaff, knight,” Every man must know that, as oft as
he has occasion to name himself: even like those that are kin to the
King, for they never prick their finger but they say, “There’s some of
the King’s blood spilt.” “How comes that?” says he that takes upon him
not to conceive. The answer is as ready as a borrower’s cap, “I am the
King’s poor cousin, sir.”

PRINCE.
Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from Japhet. But to
the letter: “Sir John Falstaff, knight, to the son of the King, nearest
his father, Harry Prince of Wales, greeting.”

POINS.
Why, this is a certificate.

PRINCE.
Peace! “I will imitate the honourable Romans in brevity.”

POINS.
He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.

PRINCE.
“I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I leave thee. Be not too
familiar with Poins, for he misuses thy favours so much that he swears
thou art to marry his sister Nell. Repent at idle times as thou mayst,
and so, farewell.
Thine by yea and no, which is as much as to say, as thou usest him—Jack
Falstaff with my familiars, John with my brothers and sisters, and Sir
John with all Europe.”

POINS.
My lord, I’ll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.

PRINCE.
That’s to make him eat twenty of his words. But do you use me thus,
Ned? Must I marry your sister?

POINS.
God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.

PRINCE.
Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of the wise
sit in the clouds and mock us. Is your master here in London?

BARDOLPH.
Yea, my lord.

PRINCE.
Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?

BARDOLPH.
At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.

PRINCE.
What company?

PAGE.
Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.

PRINCE.
Sup any women with him?

PAGE.
None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll Tearsheet.

PRINCE.
What pagan may that be?

PAGE.
A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master’s.

PRINCE.
Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull. Shall we
steal upon them, Ned, at supper?

POINS.
I am your shadow, my lord, I’ll follow you.

PRINCE.
Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your master that I am yet
come to town. There’s for your silence.

BARDOLPH.
I have no tongue, sir.

PAGE.
And for mine, sir, I will govern it.

PRINCE.
Fare you well; go.

 [_Exeunt Bardolph and Page._]

This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.

POINS.
I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Albans and London.

PRINCE.
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself tonight in his true colours,
and not ourselves be seen?

POINS.
Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table
as drawers.

PRINCE.
From a god to a bull? A heavy descension! It was Jove’s case. From a
prince to a ’prentice? A low transformation that shall be mine, for in
everything the purpose must weigh with the folly. Follow me, Ned.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Warkworth. Before the castle.

Enter Northumberland, Lady Northumberland and Lady Percy.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs;
Put not you on the visage of the times
And be like them to Percy troublesome.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
I have given over, I will speak no more.
Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Alas, sweet wife, my honour is at pawn,
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.

LADY PERCY.
O yet, for God’s sake, go not to these wars!
The time was, father, that you broke your word,
When you were more endear’d to it than now;
When your own Percy, when my heart’s dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to see his father
Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honours lost, yours and your son’s.
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the grey vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the chivalry of England move
To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
He had no legs that practis’d not his gait;
And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish,
Became the accents of the valiant;
For those who could speak low and tardily
Would turn their own perfection to abuse,
To seem like him. So that in speech, in gait,
In diet, in affections of delight,
In military rules, humours of blood,
He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
That fashion’d others. And him—O wondrous him!
O miracle of men!—him did you leave,
Second to none, unseconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In disadvantage, to abide a field
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur’s name
Did seem defensible: so you left him.
Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
To hold your honour more precise and nice
With others than with him! Let them alone.
The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong:
Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
Today might I, hanging on Hotspur’s neck,
Have talk’d of Monmouth’s grave.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Beshrew your heart,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me
With new lamenting ancient oversights.
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place,
And find me worse provided.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
O, fly to Scotland,
Till that the nobles and the armed commons
Have of their puissance made a little taste.

LADY PERCY.
If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them like a rib of steel,
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your son;
He was so suffer’d. So came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven
For recordation to my noble husband.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Come, come, go in with me. ’Tis with my mind
As with the tide swell’d up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland. There am I,
Till time and vantage crave my company.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. The Boar’s head Tavern in Eastcheap.

Enter two Drawers.

FIRST DRAWER.
What the devil hast thou brought there—applejohns? Thou knowest Sir
John cannot endure an applejohn.

SECOND DRAWER.
Mass, thou sayest true. The Prince once set a dish of applejohns before
him, and told him there were five more Sir Johns, and, putting off his
hat, said “I will now take my leave of these six dry, round, old,
withered knights.” It angered him to the heart. But he hath forgot
that.

FIRST DRAWER.
Why then, cover, and set them down, and see if thou canst find out
Sneak’s noise. Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear some music. Dispatch.
The room where they supped is too hot, they’ll come in straight.

SECOND DRAWER.
Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon, and they will
put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and Sir John must not know of it.
Bardolph hath brought word.

FIRST DRAWER.
By the mass, here will be old utis. It will be an excellent stratagem.

SECOND DRAWER.
I’ll see if I can find out Sneak.

 [_Exit._]

Enter Hostess and Doll Tearsheet.

HOSTESS.
I’ faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent good
temperality. Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart would
desire, and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good
truth, la! But, i’ faith, you have drunk too much canaries, and that’s
a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can say
“What’s this?” How do you now?

DOLL.
Better than I was. Hem!

HOSTESS.
Why, that’s well said. A good heart’s worth gold. Lo, here comes Sir
John.

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
[_Singing_.] “When Arthur first in court”—Empty the jordan.
[_Exit First Drawer_.]—[_Singing_.] “And was a worthy king.”
How now, Mistress Doll!

HOSTESS.
Sick of a calm, yea, good faith.

FALSTAFF.
So is all her sect; an they be once in a calm, they are sick.

DOLL.
A pox damn you, you muddy rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?

FALSTAFF.
You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.

DOLL.
I make them? Gluttony and diseases make them; I make them not.

FALSTAFF.
If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to make the diseases,
Doll: we catch of you, Doll. We catch of you; grant that, my poor
virtue, grant that.

DOLL.
Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.

FALSTAFF.
“Your brooches, pearls, and ouches:”—for to serve bravely is to come
halting off, you know; to come off the breach with his pike bent
bravely, and to surgery bravely; to venture upon the charged chambers
bravely—

DOLL.
Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!

HOSTESS.
By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never meet but you fall
to some discord. You are both, i’ good truth, as rheumatic as two dry
toasts. You cannot one bear with another’s confirmities. What the
good-year! One must bear, and that must be you. You are the weaker
vessel, as as they say, the emptier vessel.

DOLL.
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? There’s a whole
merchant’s venture of Bourdeaux stuff in him; you have not seen a hulk
better stuffed in the hold. Come, I’ll be friends with thee, Jack. Thou
art going to the wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again or no,
there is nobody cares.

Enter First Drawer.

FIRST DRAWER.
Sir, Ancient Pistol’s below, and would speak with you.

DOLL.
Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither: it is the
foul-mouthed’st rogue in England.

HOSTESS.
If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by my faith, I must live
among my neighbours. I’ll no swaggerers. I am in good name and fame
with the very best. Shut the door, there comes no swaggerers here. I
have not lived all this while to have swaggering now. Shut the door, I
pray you.

FALSTAFF.
Dost thou hear, hostess?

HOSTESS.
Pray ye pacify yourself, Sir John. There comes no swaggerers here.

FALSTAFF.
Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.

HOSTESS.
Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne’er tell me. And our ancient swaggerer comes
not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick, the debuty t’other day,
and, as he said to me,—’twas no longer ago than Wednesday last, i’ good
faith,—“Neighbour Quickly,” says he—Master Dumb, our minister, was by
then—“Neighbour Quickly,” says he, “receive those that are civil, for,”
said he “you are in an ill name.” Now he said so, I can tell whereupon.
“For,” says he, “you are an honest woman, and well thought on.
Therefore take heed what guests you receive. Receive,” says he, “no
swaggering companions.” There comes none here. You would bless you to
hear what he said. No, I’ll no swaggerers.

FALSTAFF.
He’s no swaggerer, hostess; a tame cheater, i’ faith, you may stroke
him as gently as a puppy greyhound. He’ll not swagger with a Barbary
hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance. Call him up,
drawer.

 [_Exit First Drawer._]

HOSTESS.
Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no
cheater, but I do not love swaggering, by my troth, I am the worse when
one says “swagger.” Feel, masters, how I shake; look you, I warrant
you.

DOLL.
So you do, hostess.

HOSTESS.
Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an ’twere an aspen leaf. I cannot abide
swaggerers.

Enter Pistol, Bardolph and Page.

PISTOL.
God save you, Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I charge you with a cup of sack.
Do you discharge upon mine hostess.

PISTOL.
I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.

FALSTAFF.
She is pistol-proof, sir; you shall not hardly offend her.

HOSTESS.
Come, I’ll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I’ll drink no more than will
do me good, for no man’s pleasure, I.

PISTOL.
Then to you, Mistress Dorothy! I will charge you.

DOLL.
Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What, you poor, base,
rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! I am
meat for your master.

PISTOL.
I know you, Mistress Dorothy.

DOLL.
Away, you cut-purse rascal, you filthy bung, away! By this wine, I’ll
thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with
me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal, you basket-hilt stale juggler, you!
Since when, I pray you, sir? God’s light, with two points on your
shoulder? Much!

PISTOL.
God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.

FALSTAFF.
No more, Pistol! I would not have you go off here. Discharge yourself
of our company, Pistol.

HOSTESS.
No, good Captain Pistol, not here, sweet captain.

DOLL.
Captain! Thou abominable damned cheater, art thou not ashamed to be
called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you
out, for taking their names upon you before you have earned them. You a
captain? You slave, for what? For tearing a poor whore’s ruff in a
bawdy-house? He a captain! Hang him, rogue, he lives upon mouldy stewed
prunes and dried cakes. A captain? God’s light, these villains will
make the word as odious as the word “occupy,” which was an excellent
good word before it was ill sorted. Therefore captains had need look
to’t.

BARDOLPH.
Pray thee go down, good ancient.

FALSTAFF.
Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.

PISTOL.
Not I. I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her. I’ll be
revenged of her.

PAGE.
Pray thee go down.

PISTOL.
I’ll see her damned first to Pluto’s damned lake, by this hand, to th’
infernal deep, with Erebus and tortures vile also. Hold hook and line,
say I. Down, down, dogs! Down, faitors! Have we not Hiren here?

HOSTESS.
Good Captain Peesel, be quiet, ’tis very late, i’ faith. I beseek you
now, aggravate your choler.

PISTOL.
These be good humours, indeed! Shall packhorses
And hollow pamper’d jades of Asia,
Which cannot go but thirty mile a day,
Compare with Caesars and with Cannibals,
And Trojant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with
King Cerberus; and let the welkin roar.
Shall we fall foul for toys?

HOSTESS.
By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.

BARDOLPH.
Be gone, good ancient. This will grow to a brawl anon.

PISTOL.
Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have we not Hiren here?

HOSTESS.
O’ my word, captain, there’s none such here. What the good-year, do you
think I would deny her? For God’s sake, be quiet.

PISTOL.
Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis.
Come, give ’s some sack.
_Si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento._
Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire.
Give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.

 [_Laying down his sword._]

Come we to full points here? And are etceteras nothings?

FALSTAFF.
Pistol, I would be quiet.

PISTOL.
Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What! we have seen the seven stars.

DOLL.
For God’s sake, thrust him downstairs. I cannot endure such a fustian
rascal.

PISTOL.
Thrust him downstairs? Know we not Galloway nags?

FALSTAFF.
Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat shilling. Nay, an he do
nothing but speak nothing, he shall be nothing here.

BARDOLPH.
Come, get you downstairs.

PISTOL.
What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue?

 [_Snatching up his sword._]

Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!
Why then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
Untwind the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!

HOSTESS.
Here’s goodly stuff toward!

FALSTAFF.
Give me my rapier, boy.

DOLL.
I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.

FALSTAFF.
Get you downstairs.

 [_Drawing, and driving Pistol out._]

HOSTESS.
Here’s a goodly tumult! I’ll forswear keeping house, afore I’ll be in
these tirrits and frights. So, murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas, put
up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.

 [_Exeunt Bardolph and Pistol._]

DOLL.
I pray thee, Jack, be quiet. The rascal’s gone. Ah, you whoreson little
valiant villain, you!

HOSTESS.
Are you not hurt i’ th’ groin? Methought he made a shrewd thrust at
your belly.

Enter Bardolph.

FALSTAFF.
Have you turned him out o’ doors?

BARDOLPH.
Yea, sir. The rascal’s drunk. You have hurt him, sir, i’ th’ shoulder.

FALSTAFF.
A rascal, to brave me!

DOLL.
Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! Alas, poor ape, how thou sweat’st!
Come, let me wipe thy face. Come on, you whoreson chops. Ah, rogue! i’
faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five
of Agamemnon, and ten times better than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!

FALSTAFF.
A rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.

DOLL.
Do, an thou darest for thy heart. An thou dost, I’ll canvass thee
between a pair of sheets.

Enter Music.

PAGE.
The music is come, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, Doll. A rascal bragging
slave! The rogue fled from me like quicksilver.

DOLL.
I’ faith, and thou followedst him like a church. Thou whoreson little
tidy Bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and
foining a-nights, and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven?

Enter, behind, Prince Henry and Poins, disguised as drawers.

FALSTAFF.
Peace, good Doll, do not speak like a death’s-head; do not bid me
remember mine end.

DOLL.
Sirrah, what humour ’s the Prince of?

FALSTAFF.
A good shallow young fellow; he would have made a good pantler; he
would ha’ chipped bread well.

DOLL.
They say Poins has a good wit.

FALSTAFF.
He a good wit? Hang him, baboon! His wit’s as thick as Tewksbury
mustard; there’s no more conceit in him than is in a mallet.

DOLL.
Why does the Prince love him so, then?

FALSTAFF.
Because their legs are both of a bigness, and he plays at quoits well,
and eats conger and fennel, and drinks off candles’ ends for
flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon
joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very
smooth like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling
of discreet stories, and such other gambol faculties he has that show a
weak mind and an able body, for the which the Prince admits him: for
the Prince himself is such another. The weight of a hair will turn the
scales between their avoirdupois.

PRINCE.
Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?

POINS.
Let’s beat him before his whore.

PRINCE.
Look whe’er the withered elder hath not his poll clawed like a parrot.

POINS.
Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive performance?

FALSTAFF.
Kiss me, Doll.

PRINCE.
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! What says th’ almanac to
that?

POINS.
And look whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not lisping to his
master’s old tables, his note-book, his counsel-keeper.

FALSTAFF.
Thou dost give me flattering busses.

DOLL.
By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.

FALSTAFF.
I am old, I am old.

DOLL.
I love thee better than I love e’er a scurvy young boy of them all.

FALSTAFF.
What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive money o’ Thursday;
shalt have a cap tomorrow. A merry song! Come, it grows late, we’ll to
bed. Thou’lt forget me when I am gone.

DOLL.
By my troth, thou’lt set me a-weeping an thou sayest so. Prove that
ever I dress myself handsome till thy return. Well, hearken a’ th’ end.

FALSTAFF.
Some sack, Francis.

PRINCE & POINS.
Anon, anon, sir.

 [_Coming forward._]

FALSTAFF.
Ha! A bastard son of the King’s? And art thou not Poins his brother?

PRINCE.
Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou lead!

FALSTAFF.
A better than thou. I am a gentleman, thou art a drawer.

PRINCE.
Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.

HOSTESS.
O, the Lord preserve thy Grace! By my troth, welcome to London. Now,
the Lord bless that sweet face of thine! O Jesu, are you come from
Wales?

FALSTAFF.
Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by this light flesh and corrupt
blood, thou art welcome.

DOLL.
How? You fat fool, I scorn you.

POINS.
My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all to a
merriment, if you take not the heat.

PRINCE.
You whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you speak of me even now
before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!

HOSTESS.
God’s blessing of your good heart! and so she is, by my troth.

FALSTAFF.
Didst thou hear me?

PRINCE.
Yea, and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by Gad’s Hill. You
knew I was at your back, and spoke it on purpose to try my patience.

FALSTAFF.
No, no, no, not so; I did not think thou wast within hearing.

PRINCE.
I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and then I know how
to handle you.

FALSTAFF.
No abuse, Hal, o’ mine honour, no abuse.

PRINCE.
Not to dispraise me, and call me pantler and bread-chipper and I know
not what?

FALSTAFF.
No abuse, Hal.

POINS.
No abuse?

FALSTAFF.
No abuse, Ned, i’ th’ world, honest Ned, none. I dispraised him before
the wicked, that the wicked might not fall in love with thee; in which
doing, I have done the part of a careful friend and a true subject, and
thy father is to give me thanks for it. No abuse, Hal; none, Ned, none;
no, faith, boys, none.

PRINCE.
See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not make thee wrong
this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us. Is she of the wicked? Is
thine hostess here of the wicked? Or is thy boy of the wicked? Or
honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in his nose, of the wicked?

POINS.
Answer, thou dead elm, answer.

FALSTAFF.
The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable, and his face is
Lucifer’s privy-kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms.
For the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the devil outbids him
too.

PRINCE.
For the women?

FALSTAFF.
For one of them, she’s in hell already, and burns poor souls. For th’
other, I owe her money, and whether she be damned for that I know not.

HOSTESS.
No, I warrant you.

FALSTAFF.
No, I think thou art not, I think thou art quit for that. Marry, there
is another indictment upon thee, for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy
house, contrary to the law, for the which I think thou wilt howl.

HOSTESS.
All victuallers do so. What’s a joint of mutton or two in a whole Lent?

PRINCE.
You, gentlewoman.

DOLL.
What says your Grace?

FALSTAFF.
His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.

 [Peto _knocks at door._]

HOSTESS.
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th’ door there, Francis.

Enter Peto.

PRINCE.
Peto, how now, what news?

PETO.
The King your father is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
Come from the north: and as I came along,
I met and overtook a dozen captains,
Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
And asking everyone for Sir John Falstaff.

PRINCE.
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame,
So idly to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion, like the south
Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night.

 [_Exeunt Prince, Poins, Peto and Bardolph._]

FALSTAFF.
Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we must hence and
leave it unpicked.
[_Knocking within_.] More knocking at the door?

Enter Bardolph.

How now, what’s the matter?

BARDOLPH.
You must away to court, sir, presently.
A dozen captains stay at door for you.

FALSTAFF.
[_To the Page_.] Pay the musicians, sirrah. Farewell, hostess;
farewell, Doll. You see, my good wenches, how men of merit are sought
after. The undeserver may sleep, when the man of action is called on.
Farewell, good wenches. If I be not sent away post, I will see you
again ere I go.

DOLL.
I cannot speak; if my heart be not ready to burst—well, sweet Jack,
have a care of thyself.

FALSTAFF.
Farewell, farewell.

 [_Exeunt Falstaff and Bardolph._]

HOSTESS.
Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these twenty-nine years, come
peascod-time; but an honester and truer-hearted man—well, fare thee
well.

BARDOLPH.
[_Within_.] Mistress Tearsheet!

HOSTESS.
What’s the matter?

BARDOLPH.
[_Within_.] Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.

HOSTESS.
O, run, Doll, run; run, good Doll; come. She comes blubbered. Yea, will
you come, Doll?

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Westminster. The palace.

Enter the King in his nightgown, with a Page.

KING.
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
But, ere they come, bid them o’er-read these letters
And well consider of them. Make good speed.

 [_Exit Page._]

How many thousands of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep,
Nature’s soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lull’d with sound of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile
In loathsome beds, and leavest the kingly couch
A watch-case or a common ’larum-bell?
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast
Seal up the ship-boy’s eyes, and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them
With deafing clamour in the slippery clouds,
That with the hurly death itself awakes?
Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
And in the calmest and most stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a King? Then happy low, lie down!
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.

Enter Warwick and Surrey.

WARWICK.
Many good morrows to your Majesty!

KING.
Is it good morrow, lords?

WARWICK.
’Tis one o’clock, and past.

KING.
Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o’er the letters that I sent you?

WARWICK.
We have, my liege.

KING.
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
How foul it is, what rank diseases grow,
And with what danger, near the heart of it.

WARWICK.
It is but as a body yet distemper’d,
Which to his former strength may be restored
With good advice and little medicine.
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool’d.

KING.
O God, that one might read the book of fate,
And see the revolution of the times
Make mountains level, and the continent,
Weary of solid firmness, melt itself
Into the sea, and other times to see
The beachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune’s hips; how chance’s mocks
And changes fill the cup of alteration
With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
Would shut the book, and sit him down and die.
’Tis not ten years gone
Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together, and in two years after
Were they at wars. It is but eight years since
This Percy was the man nearest my soul,
Who like a brother toil’d in my affairs
And laid his love and life under my foot,
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by—
[_To Warwick_.] You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember—
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then check’d and rated by Northumberland,
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
“Northumberland, thou ladder by the which
My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne”
Though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bow’d the state
That I and greatness were compell’d to kiss—
“The time shall come,” thus did he follow it,
“The time will come, that foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption”—so went on,
Foretelling this same time’s condition
And the division of our amity.

WARWICK.
There is a history in all men’s lives
Figuring the natures of the times deceased;
The which observed, a man may prophesy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
And weak beginning lie intreasured.
Such things become the hatch and brood of time;
And by the necessary form of this
King Richard might create a perfect guess
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon,
Unless on you.

KING.
Are these things then necessities?
Then let us meet them like necessities;
And that same word even now cries out on us.
They say the bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong.

WARWICK.
It cannot be, my lord.
Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
The powers that you already have sent forth
Shall bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance that Glendower is dead.
Your majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
And these unseason’d hours perforce must add
Unto your sickness.

KING.
I will take your counsel.
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Gloucestershire. Before Justice Shallow’s house.

Enter Shallow and Silence, meeting; Mouldy, Shadow, Wart, Feeble,
Bullcalf, a Servant or two with them.

SHALLOW.
Come on, come on, come on. Give me your hand, sir, give me your hand,
sir. An early stirrer, by the rood! And how doth my good cousin
Silence?

SILENCE.
Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.

SHALLOW.
And how doth my cousin, your bedfellow? And your fairest daughter and
mine, my god-daughter Ellen?

SILENCE.
Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow!

SHALLOW.
By yea and no, sir, I dare say my cousin William is become a good
scholar. He is at Oxford still, is he not?

SILENCE.
Indeed, sir, to my cost.

SHALLOW.
He must, then, to the Inns o’ Court shortly. I was once of Clement’s
Inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.

SILENCE.
You were called “lusty Shallow” then, cousin.

SHALLOW.
By the mass, I was called anything, and I would have done anything
indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little John Doit of
Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will
Squele, a Cotswold man. You had not four such swinge-bucklers in all
the Inns o’ Court again. And I may say to you, we knew where the
bona-robas were and had the best of them all at commandment. Then was
Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of
Norfolk.

SILENCE.
This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?

SHALLOW.
The same Sir John, the very same. I see him break Scoggin’s head at the
court gate, when he was a crack not thus high; and the very same day
did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Gray’s Inn.
Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I have spent! And to see how many of my
old acquaintance are dead!

SILENCE.
We shall all follow, cousin.

SHALLOW.
Certain, ’tis certain, very sure, very sure. Death, as the Psalmist
saith, is certain to all, all shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at
Stamford fair?

SILENCE.
By my troth, I was not there.

SHALLOW.
Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living yet?

SILENCE.
Dead, sir.

SHALLOW.
Jesu, Jesu, dead! He drew a good bow, and dead! He shot a fine shoot.
John a Gaunt loved him well, and betted much money on his head. Dead!
He would have clapped i’ th’ clout at twelve score, and carried you a
forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would have
done a man’s heart good to see. How a score of ewes now?

SILENCE.
Thereafter as they be; a score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.

SHALLOW.
And is old Double dead?

SILENCE.
Here come two of Sir John Falstaff’s men, as I think.

Enter Bardolph and one with him.

SHALLOW.
Good morrow, honest gentlemen.

BARDOLPH.
I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?

SHALLOW.
I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this county, and one of the
King’s justices of the peace. What is your good pleasure with me?

BARDOLPH.
My captain, sir, commends him to you, my captain, Sir John Falstaff, a
tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant leader.

SHALLOW.
He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good backsword man. How doth the
good knight? May I ask how my lady his wife doth?

BARDOLPH.
Sir, pardon. A soldier is better accommodated than with a wife.

SHALLOW.
It is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said indeed too. “Better
accommodated!” It is good, yea indeed, is it. Good phrases are surely,
and ever were, very commendable. “Accommodated.” It comes of
_accommodo_. Very good, a good phrase.

BARDOLPH.
Pardon, sir, I have heard the word—phrase call you it? By this day, I
know not the phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword to be a
soldier-like word, and a word of exceeding good command, by heaven.
Accommodated, that is when a man is, as they say, accommodated, or when
a man is being whereby he may be thought to be accommodated; which is
an excellent thing.

SHALLOW.
It is very just.

Enter Falstaff.

Look, here comes good Sir John. Give me your good hand, give me your
worship’s good hand. By my troth, you like well and bear your years
very well. Welcome, good Sir John.

FALSTAFF.
I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow. Master Surecard,
as I think?

SHALLOW.
No, Sir John, it is my cousin Silence, in commission with me.

FALSTAFF.
Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of the peace.

SILENCE.
Your good worship is welcome.

FALSTAFF.
Fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you provided me here half a
dozen sufficient men?

SHALLOW.
Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?

FALSTAFF.
Let me see them, I beseech you.

SHALLOW.
Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Let me see, let
me see, let me see. So, so, so, so, so, so, so. Yea, marry, sir: Ralph
Mouldy! Let them appear as I call; let them do so, let them do so. Let
me see; where is Mouldy?

MOULDY.
Here, an it please you.

SHALLOW.
What think you, Sir John? A good-limbed fellow, young, strong, and of
good friends.

FALSTAFF.
Is thy name Mouldy?

MOULDY.
Yea, an’t please you.

FALSTAFF.
’Tis the more time thou wert used.

SHALLOW.
Ha, ha, ha! most excellent, i’ faith! Things that are mouldy lack use.
Very singular good, in faith, well said, Sir John, very well said.

FALSTAFF.
Prick him.

MOULDY.
I was pricked well enough before, an you could have let me alone. My
old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry and her
drudgery. You need not to have pricked me, there are other men fitter
to go out than I.

FALSTAFF.
Go to. Peace, Mouldy; you shall go. Mouldy, it is time you were spent.

MOULDY.
Spent?

SHALLOW.
Peace, fellow, peace. Stand aside. Know you where you are? For
th’other, Sir John. Let me see: Simon Shadow!

FALSTAFF.
Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under. He’s like to be a cold
soldier.

SHALLOW.
Where’s Shadow?

SHADOW.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Shadow, whose son art thou?

SHADOW.
My mother’s son, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Thy mother’s son! Like enough, and thy father’s shadow. So the son of
the female is the shadow of the male. It is often so indeed, but much
of the father’s substance!

SHALLOW.
Do you like him, Sir John?

FALSTAFF.
Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him, for we have a number of
shadows to fill up the muster-book.

SHALLOW.
Thomas Wart!

FALSTAFF.
Where’s he?

WART.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Is thy name Wart?

WART.
Yea, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Thou art a very ragged wart.

SHALLOW.
Shall I prick him, Sir John?

FALSTAFF.
It were superfluous, for his apparel is built upon his back, and the
whole frame stands upon pins. Prick him no more.

SHALLOW.
Ha, ha, ha! You can do it, sir, you can do it. I commend you well.
Francis Feeble!

FEEBLE.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
What trade art thou, Feeble?

FEEBLE.
A woman’s tailor, sir.

SHALLOW.
Shall I prick him, sir?

FALSTAFF.
You may; but if he had been a man’s tailor, he’d ha’ pricked you. Wilt
thou make as many holes in an enemy’s battle as thou hast done in a
woman’s petticoat?

FEEBLE.
I will do my good will, sir, you can have no more.

FALSTAFF.
Well said, good woman’s tailor! Well said, courageous Feeble! Thou wilt
be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse. Prick the
woman’s tailor: well, Master Shallow, deep, Master Shallow.

FEEBLE.
I would Wart might have gone, sir.

FALSTAFF.
I would thou wert a man’s tailor, that thou mightst mend him and make
him fit to go. I cannot put him to a private soldier that is the leader
of so many thousands. Let that suffice, most forcible Feeble.

FEEBLE.
It shall suffice, sir.

FALSTAFF.
I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is next?

SHALLOW.
Peter Bullcalf o’ th’ green!

FALSTAFF.
Yea, marry, let’s see Bullcalf.

BULLCALF.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Fore God, a likely fellow! Come, prick me Bullcalf till he roar again.

BULLCALF.
O Lord! good my lord captain—

FALSTAFF.
What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?

BULLCALF.
O Lord, sir, I am a diseased man.

FALSTAFF.
What disease hast thou?

BULLCALF.
A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I caught with ringing in the
King’s affairs upon his coronation day, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown; we will have away thy cold,
and I will take such order that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is
here all?

SHALLOW.
Here is two more called than your number; you must have but four here,
sir; and so, I pray you, go in with me to dinner.

FALSTAFF.
Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to
see you, by my troth, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the windmill in
Saint George’s Field?

FALSTAFF.
No more of that, good Master Shallow, no more of that.

SHALLOW.
Ha, ’twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?

FALSTAFF.
She lives, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
She never could away with me.

FALSTAFF.
Never, never; she would always say she could not abide Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
By the mass, I could anger her to th’ heart. She was then a bona-roba.
Doth she hold her own well?

FALSTAFF.
Old, old, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
Nay, she must be old, she cannot choose but be old, certain she’s old,
and had Robin Nightwork by old Nightwork before I came to Clement’s
Inn.

SILENCE.
That’s fifty-five year ago.

SHALLOW.
Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that this knight and I
have seen! Ha, Sir John, said I well?

FALSTAFF.
We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
That we have, that we have, that we have; in faith, Sir John, we have.
Our watchword was “Hem boys!” Come, let’s to dinner; come, let’s to
dinner. Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.

 [_Exeunt Falstaff, Shallow and Silence._]

BULLCALF.
Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend; and here’s four Harry
ten shillings in French crowns for you. In very truth, sir, I had as
lief be hanged, sir, as go. And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not
care; but rather because I am unwilling, and, for mine own part, have a
desire to stay with my friends; else, sir, I did not care, for mine own
part, so much.

BARDOLPH.
Go to, stand aside.

MOULDY.
And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my old dame’s sake, stand my
friend. She has nobody to do anything about her when I am gone, and she
is old, and cannot help herself. You shall have forty, sir.

BARDOLPH.
Go to, stand aside.

FEEBLE.
By my troth, I care not. A man can die but once. We owe God a death.
I’ll ne’er bear a base mind. An ’t be my destiny, so; an ’t be not, so.
No man’s too good to serve’s prince, and let it go which way it will,
he that dies this year is quit for the next.

BARDOLPH.
Well said, th’art a good fellow.

FEEBLE.
Faith, I’ll bear no base mind.

Enter Falstaff and the Justices.

FALSTAFF.
Come, sir, which men shall I have?

SHALLOW.
Four of which you please.

BARDOLPH.
Sir, a word with you. I have three pound to free Mouldy and Bullcalf.

FALSTAFF.
Go to, well.

SHALLOW.
Come, Sir John, which four will you have?

FALSTAFF.
Do you choose for me.

SHALLOW.
Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.

FALSTAFF.
Mouldy and Bullcalf: for you, Mouldy, stay at home till you are past
service; and for your part, Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it. I
will none of you.

SHALLOW.
Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong. They are your likeliest men,
and I would have you served with the best.

FALSTAFF.
Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a man? Care I for the
limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and big assemblance of a man? Give
me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here’s Wart. You see what a ragged
appearance it is. He shall charge you and discharge you with the motion
of a pewterer’s hammer, come off and on swifter than he that gibbets on
the brewer’s bucket. And this same half-faced fellow, Shadow; give me
this man. He presents no mark to the enemy. The foeman may with as
great aim level at the edge of a penknife. And for a retreat, how
swiftly will this Feeble, the woman’s tailor, run off! O, give me the
spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a caliver into Wart’s
hand, Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Hold, Wart. Traverse. Thas, thas, thas.

FALSTAFF.
Come, manage me your caliver. So, very well, go to, very good,
exceeding good. O, give me always a little, lean, old, chopt, bald
shot. Well said, i’ faith, Wart. Th’art a good scab. Hold, there’s a
tester for thee.

SHALLOW.
He is not his craft’s master, he doth not do it right. I remember at
Mile-End Green, when I lay at Clement’s Inn—I was then Sir Dagonet in
Arthur’s show—there was a little quiver fellow, and he would manage you
his piece thus. And he would about and about, and come you in and come
you in. “Rah, tah, tah,” would he say. “Bounce” would he say; and away
again would he go, and again would he come. I shall ne’er see such a
fellow.

FALSTAFF.
These fellows will do well. Master Shallow. God keep you, Master
Silence: I will not use many words with you. Fare you well, gentlemen
both. I thank you. I must a dozen mile tonight. Bardolph, give the
soldiers coats.

SHALLOW.
Sir John, the Lord bless you! God prosper your affairs! God send us
peace! At your return, visit our house, let our old acquaintance be
renewed. Peradventure I will with ye to the court.

FALSTAFF.
Fore God, I would you would, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
Go to, I have spoke at a word. God keep you.

FALSTAFF.
Fare you well, gentle gentlemen. [_Exeunt Justices_.] On, Bardolph,
lead the men away. [_Exeunt Bardolph, recruits, &c._] As I return, I
will fetch off these justices. I do see the bottom of Justice Shallow.
Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying! This same
starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of
his youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbull Street, and every
third word a lie, duer paid to the hearer than the Turk’s tribute. I do
remember him at Clement’s Inn, like a man made after supper of a
cheese-paring. When he was naked, he was, for all the world, like a
forked radish, with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife.
He was so forlorn, that his dimensions to any thick sight were
invincible. He was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a
monkey, and the whores called him mandrake. He came ever in the
rearward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the overscutched
huswives that he heard the carmen whistle, and sware they were his
fancies or his good-nights. And now is this Vice’s dagger become a
squire, and talks as familiarly of John a Gaunt as if he had been sworn
brother to him, and I’ll be sworn he ne’er saw him but once in the
tilt-yard, and then he burst his head for crowding among the marshal’s
men. I saw it and told John a Gaunt he beat his own name, for you might
have thrust him and all his apparel into an eel-skin; the case of a
treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a court. And now has he land and
beefs. Well, I’ll be acquainted with him if I return, and ’t shall go
hard but I’ll make him a philosopher’s two stones to me. If the young
dace be a bait for the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature
but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and there an end.

 [_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Yorkshire. Gaultree Forest.

Enter the Archbishop of York, Mowbray, Hastings and others.

ARCHBISHOP.
What is this forest call’d?

HASTINGS.
’Tis Gaultree Forest, an ’t shall please your Grace.

ARCHBISHOP.
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth
To know the numbers of our enemies.

HASTINGS.
We have sent forth already.

ARCHBISHOP.
’Tis well done.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
I must acquaint you that I have received
New-dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy; whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers
That your attempts may overlive the hazard
And fearful meeting of their opposite.

MOWBRAY.
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
And dash themselves to pieces.

Enter a Messenger.

HASTINGS.
Now, what news?

MESSENGER.
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.

MOWBRAY.
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.

Enter Westmoreland.

ARCHBISHOP.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?

MOWBRAY.
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND.
Health and fair greeting from our general,
The prince, Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.

ARCHBISHOP.
Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,
What doth concern your coming.

WESTMORELAND.
Then, my lord,
Unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion
Came like itself, in base and abject routs,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags,
And countenanced by boys and beggary;
I say, if damn’d commotion so appear’d
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble lords
Had not been here to dress the ugly form
Of base and bloody insurrection
With your fair honours. You, Lord Archbishop,
Whose see is by a civil peace maintain’d,
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch’d,
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor’d,
Whose white investments figure innocence,
The dove and very blessed spirit of peace,
Wherefore you do so ill translate yourself
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boisterous tongue of war;
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances and your tongue divine
To a loud trumpet and a point of war?

ARCHBISHOP.
Wherefore do I this? So the question stands.
Briefly to this end: we are all diseased,
And with our surfeiting and wanton hours
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
And we must bleed for it; of which disease
Our late King Richard, being infected, died.
But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,
I take not on me here as a physician,
Nor do I as an enemy to peace
Troop in the throngs of military men,
But rather show awhile like fearful war
To diet rank minds sick of happiness,
And purge th’ obstructions which begin to stop
Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weigh’d
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
And find our griefs heavier than our offences.
We see which way the stream of time doth run,
And are enforced from our most quiet there
By the rough torrent of occasion,
And have the summary of all our griefs,
When time shall serve, to show in articles;
Which long ere this we offer’d to the King
And might by no suit gain our audience.
When we are wrong’d and would unfold our griefs,
We are denied access unto his person
Even by those men that most have done us wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth
With yet-appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute’s instance, present now,
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.

WESTMORELAND.
Whenever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer hath been suborn’d to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine
And consecrate commotion’s bitter edge?

ARCHBISHOP.
My brother general, the commonwealth,
To brother born an household cruelty,
I make my quarrel in particular.

WESTMORELAND.
There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

MOWBRAY.
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before,
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honours?

WESTMORELAND.
O, my good Lord Mowbray,
Construe the times to their necessities,
And you shall say indeed, it is the time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me
Either from the King or in the present time
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a grief on. Were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolk’s signories,
Your noble and right well rememb’red father’s?

MOWBRAY.
What thing, in honour, had my father lost,
That need to be revived and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the state stood then,
Was force perforce compell’d to banish him,
And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
And the loud trumpet blowing them together,
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay’d
My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
O, when the King did throw his warder down,
His own life hung upon the staff he threw;
Then threw he down himself and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.

WESTMORELAND.
You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant gentleman.
Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled?
But if your father had been victor there,
He ne’er had borne it out of Coventry;
For all the country in a general voice
Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on
And bless’d and graced, indeed more than the King.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace
That he will give you audience; and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, everything set off
That might so much as think you enemies.

MOWBRAY.
But he hath forc’d us to compel this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love.

WESTMORELAND.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so;
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
For, lo, within a ken our army lies,
Upon mine honour, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armour all as strong, our cause the best;
Then reason will our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then our offer is compell’d.

MOWBRAY.
Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.

WESTMORELAND.
That argues but the shame of your offence:
A rotten case abides no handling.

HASTINGS.
Hath the Prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?

WESTMORELAND.
That is intended in the general’s name:
I muse you make so slight a question.

ARCHBISHOP.
Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
For this contains our general grievances.
Each several article herein redress’d,
All members of our cause, both here and hence,
That are insinew’d to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form
And present execution of our wills
To us and to our purposes confined,
We come within our awful banks again
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.

WESTMORELAND.
This will I show the general. Please you, lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
And either end in peace, which God so frame!
Or to the place of difference call the swords
Which must decide it.

ARCHBISHOP.
My lord, we will do so.

 [_Exit Westmoreland._]

MOWBRAY.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.

HASTINGS.
Fear you not that: if we can make our peace
Upon such large terms and so absolute
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.

MOWBRAY.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action;
That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnow’d with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff
And good from bad find no partition.

ARCHBISHOP.
No, no, my lord. Note this; the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances;
For he hath found to end one doubt by death
Revives two greater in the heirs of life;
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean
And keep no tell-tale to his memory
That may repeat and history his loss
To new remembrance. For full well he knows
He cannot so precisely weed this land
As his misdoubts present occasion.
His foes are so enrooted with his friends
That, plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend.
So that this land, like an offensive wife
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his infant up
And hangs resolved correction in the arm
That was uprear’d to execution.

HASTINGS.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very instruments of chastisement;
So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
May offer, but not hold.

ARCHBISHOP.
’Tis very true,
And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshal,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will, like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking.

MOWBRAY.
Be it so.
Here is return’d my Lord of Westmoreland.

Enter Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND.
The prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your lordship
To meet his Grace just distance ’tween our armies.

MOWBRAY.
Your Grace of York, in God’s name then set forward.

ARCHBISHOP.
Before, and greet his Grace. My lord, we come.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the forest.

Enter, from one side, Mowbray, attended; afterwards, the Archbishop,
Hastings, and others; from the other side, Prince John of Lancaster,
and Westmoreland; Officers, and others with them.

LANCASTER.
You are well encounter’d here, my cousin Mowbray.
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop;
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.
My Lord of York, it better show’d with you
When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
Encircled you to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy text
Than now to see you here an iron man,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarch’s heart,
And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
Would he abuse the countenance of the king,
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach
In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken
How deep you were within the books of God,
To us the speaker in his parliament,
To us th’ imagined voice of God himself,
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
And our dull workings? O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Employ the countenance and grace of heaven
As a false favourite doth his prince’s name,
In deeds dishonourable? You have ta’en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of his substitute, my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him
Have here up-swarm’d them.

ARCHBISHOP.
Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your father’s peace;
But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland,
The time misorder’d doth, in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court,
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charm’d asleep
With grant of our most just and right desires,
And true obedience, of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.

MOWBRAY.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
To the last man.

HASTINGS.
And though we here fall down,
We have supplies to second our attempt:
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them;
And so success of mischief shall be born,
And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up
Whiles England shall have generation.

LANCASTER.
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow,
To sound the bottom of the after-times.

WESTMORELAND.
Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
How far forth you do like their articles.

LANCASTER.
I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here, by the honour of my blood,
My father’s purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning and authority.
My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress’d;
Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours; and here between the armies
Let’s drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
Of our restored love and amity.

ARCHBISHOP.
I take your princely word for these redresses.

LANCASTER.
I give it you, and will maintain my word;
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.

HASTINGS.
Go, captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.
I know it will please them. Hie thee, captain.

 [_Exit Officer._]

ARCHBISHOP.
To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND.
I pledge your Grace; and if you knew what pains
I have bestow’d to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely; but my love to ye
Shall show itself more openly hereafter.

ARCHBISHOP.
I do not doubt you.

WESTMORELAND.
I am glad of it.
Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.

MOWBRAY.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.

ARCHBISHOP.
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness foreruns the good event.

WESTMORELAND.
Therefore be merry, coz, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus, “Some good thing comes tomorrow.”

ARCHBISHOP.
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.

MOWBRAY.
So much the worse, if your own rule be true.

 [_Shouts within._]

LANCASTER.
The word of peace is render’d. Hark how they shout!

MOWBRAY.
This had been cheerful after victory.

ARCHBISHOP.
A peace is of the nature of a conquest;
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loser.

LANCASTER.
Go, my lord.
And let our army be discharged too.

 [_Exit Westmoreland._]

And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains
March by us, that we may peruse the men
We should have coped withal.

ARCHBISHOP.
Go, good Lord Hastings,
And, ere they be dismiss’d, let them march by.

 [_Exit Hastings._]

LANCASTER.
I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.

Enter Westmoreland.

Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?

WESTMORELAND.
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.

LANCASTER.
They know their duties.

Enter Hastings.

HASTINGS.
My lord, our army is dispersed already.
Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses
East, west, north, south; or, like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.

WESTMORELAND.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings; for the which
I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason;
And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both.

MOWBRAY.
Is this proceeding just and honourable?

WESTMORELAND.
Is your assembly so?

ARCHBISHOP.
Will you thus break your faith?

LANCASTER.
I pawn’d thee none.
I promised you redress of these same grievances
Whereof you did complain; which, by mine honour,
I will perform with a most Christian care.
But for you, rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums, pursue the scattr’d stray:
God, and not we, hath safely fought today.
Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
Treason’s true bed and yielder-up of breath.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the forest.

Alarum. Excursions. Enter Falstaff and Colevile, meeting.

FALSTAFF.
What’s your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of what place, I
pray?

COLEVILE.
I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the Dale.

FALSTAFF.
Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is your degree, and your
place the Dale. Colevile shall be still your name, a traitor your
degree, and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough; so shall you
be still Colevile of the Dale.

COLEVILE.
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?

FALSTAFF.
As good a man as he, sir, whoe’er I am. Do ye yield, sir, or shall I
sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers, and
they weep for thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do
observance to my mercy.

COLEVILE.
I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.

FALSTAFF.
I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a
tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name. An I had but a
belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in
Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our general.

Enter Prince John of Lancaster, Westmoreland, Blunt, and others.

LANCASTER.
The heat is past; follow no further now.
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.

 [_Exit Westmoreland._]

Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When everything is ended, then you come.
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
One time or other break some gallows’ back.

FALSTAFF.
I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus. I never knew yet but
rebuke and check was the reward of valour. Do you think me a swallow,
an arrow, or a bullet? Have I, in my poor and old motion, the
expedition of thought? I have speeded hither with the very extremest
inch of possibility; I have foundered nine score and odd posts; and
here, travel-tainted as I am, have in my pure and immaculate valour,
taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a most furious knight and valorous
enemy. But what of that? He saw me, and yielded; that I may justly say,
with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, “I came, saw, and overcame.”

LANCASTER.
It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.

FALSTAFF.
I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him. And I beseech your Grace,
let it be booked with the rest of this day’s deeds, or, by the Lord, I
will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the
top on’t, Colevile kissing my foot: to the which course if I be
enforced, if you do not all show like gilt twopences to me, and I in
the clear sky of fame o’ershine you as much as the full moon doth the
cinders of the element, which show like pins’ heads to her, believe not
the word of the noble. Therefore let me have right, and let desert
mount.

LANCASTER.
Thine’s too heavy to mount.

FALSTAFF.
Let it shine, then.

LANCASTER.
Thine’s too thick to shine.

FALSTAFF.
Let it do something, my good lord, that may do me good, and call it
what you will.

LANCASTER.
Is thy name Colevile?

COLEVILE.
It is, my lord.

LANCASTER.
A famous rebel art thou, Colevile.

FALSTAFF.
And a famous true subject took him.

COLEVILE.
I am, my lord, but as my betters are
That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.

FALSTAFF.
I know not how they sold themselves, but thou, like a kind fellow,
gavest thyself away gratis, and I thank thee for thee.

Enter Westmoreland.

LANCASTER.
Now, have you left pursuit?

WESTMORELAND.
Retreat is made and execution stay’d.

LANCASTER.
Send Colevile with his confederates
To York, to present execution.
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.

 [_Exeunt Blunt and others with Colevile._]

And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.
I hear the King my father is sore sick.
Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,
Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.

FALSTAFF.
My lord, I beseech you give me leave to go through Gloucestershire,
and, when you come to court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good
report.

LANCASTER.
Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.

 [_Exeunt all but Falstaff._]

FALSTAFF.
I would you had but the wit, ’twere better than your dukedom. Good
faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man
cannot make him laugh; but that’s no marvel, he drinks no wine. There’s
never none of these demure boys come to any proof; for thin drink doth
so over-cool their blood, and making many fish meals, that they fall
into a kind of male green-sickness; and then, when they marry, they get
wenches. They are generally fools and cowards, which some of us should
be too, but for inflammation. A good sherris-sack hath a two-fold
operation in it. It ascends me into the brain, dries me there all the
foolish and dull and crudy vapours which environ it, makes it
apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery, and delectable
shapes, which, delivered o’er to the voice, the tongue, which is the
birth, becomes excellent wit. The second property of your excellent
sherris is the warming of the blood, which, before cold and settled,
left the liver white and pale, which is the badge of pusillanimity and
cowardice. But the sherris warms it and makes it course from the
inwards to the parts’ extremes. It illumineth the face, which as a
beacon gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, to
arm; and then the vital commoners and inland petty spirits muster me
all to their captain, the heart, who, great and puffed up with this
retinue, doth any deed of courage; and this valour comes of sherris. So
that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it
a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil, till sack
commences it and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes it that Prince
Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his
father he hath, like lean, sterile and bare land, manured, husbanded
and tilled with excellent endeavour of drinking good and good store of
fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant. If I had a
thousand sons, the first humane principle I would teach them should be
to forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.

Enter Bardolph.

How now, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH.
The army is discharged all and gone.

FALSTAFF.
Let them go. I’ll through Gloucestershire, and there will I visit
Master Robert Shallow, Esquire. I have him already tempering between my
finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with him. Come away.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Westminster. The Jerusalem Chamber.

Enter the King, Warwick, Thomas Duke of Clarence and Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester and others.

KING.
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields
And draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is address’d, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And everything lies level to our wish.
Only we want a little personal strength;
And pause us till these rebels now afoot
Come underneath the yoke of government.

WARWICK.
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty
Shall soon enjoy.

KING.
Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,
Where is the Prince your brother?

GLOUCESTER.
I think he’s gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.

KING.
And how accompanied?

GLOUCESTER.
I do not know, my lord.

KING.
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?

GLOUCESTER.
No, my good lord, he is in presence here.

CLARENCE.
What would my lord and father?

KING.
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy,
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation, after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren.
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
By seeming cold or careless of his will;
For he is gracious, if he be observed,
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for melting charity:
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he’s flint,
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth;
But, being moody, give him time and scope,
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
Mingled with venom of suggestion—
As, force perforce, the age will pour it in—
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
As aconitum or rash gunpowder.

CLARENCE.
I shall observe him with all care and love.

KING.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?

CLARENCE.
He is not there today; he dines in London.

KING.
And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?

CLARENCE.
With Poins, and other his continual followers.

KING.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he, the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them; therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape
In forms imaginary th’ unguided days
And rotten times that you shall look upon
When I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
O, with what wings shall his affections fly
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!

WARWICK.
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
The prince but studies his companions
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,
’Tis needful that the most immodest word
Be looked upon and learned; which once attained,
Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern or a measure live,
By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,
Turning past evils to advantages.

KING.
’Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
In the dead carrion.

Enter Westmoreland.

Who’s here? Westmoreland?

WESTMORELAND.
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver!
Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace’s hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings and all
Are brought to the correction of your law.
There is not now a rebel’s sword unsheathed,
But Peace puts forth her olive everywhere.
The manner how this action hath been borne
Here at more leisure may your Highness read,
With every course in his particular.

KING.
O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day.

Enter Harcourt.

Look, here’s more news.

HARCOURT.
From enemies heaven keep your Majesty;
And when they stand against you, may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of!
The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
With a great power of English and of Scots,
Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
The manner and true order of the fight
This packet, please it you, contains at large.

KING.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach and no food—
Such are the poor, in health; or else a feast
And takes away the stomach—such are the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not.
I should rejoice now at this happy news,
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy.
O me! Come near me, now I am much ill.

GLOUCESTER.
Comfort, your Majesty!

CLARENCE.
O my royal father!

WESTMORELAND.
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.

WARWICK.
Be patient, princes; you do know these fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air; he’ll straight be well.

CLARENCE.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs.
Th’ incessant care and labour of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through and will break out.

GLOUCESTER.
The people fear me, for they do observe
Unfather’d heirs and loathly births of nature.
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months asleep and leap’d them over.

CLARENCE.
The river hath thrice flow’d, no ebb between,
And the old folk, time’s doting chronicles,
Say it did so a little time before
That our great-grandsire, Edward, sick’d and died.

WARWICK.
Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.

GLOUCESTER.
This apoplexy will certain be his end.

KING.
I pray you take me up, and bear me hence
Into some other chamber: softly, pray.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another chamber.

The King lying on a bed. Clarence, Gloucester, Warwick and others in
attendance.

KING.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favourable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.

WARWICK.
Call for the music in the other room.

KING.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.

CLARENCE.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.

WARWICK.
Less noise, less noise!

Enter Prince Henry.

PRINCE.
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?

CLARENCE.
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.

PRINCE.
How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
How doth the King?

GLOUCESTER.
Exceeding ill.

PRINCE.
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.

GLOUCESTER.
He alt’red much upon the hearing it.

PRINCE.
If he be sick with joy, he’ll recover without physic.

WARWICK.
Not so much noise, my lords. Sweet prince, speak low;
The King your father is disposed to sleep.

CLARENCE.
Let us withdraw into the other room.

WARWICK.
Will’t please your Grace to go along with us?

PRINCE.
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.

 [_Exeunt all but the Prince._]

Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polish’d perturbation! golden care!
That keep’st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now;
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
That scald’st with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not:
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down
Perforce must move. My gracious lord, my father!
This sleep is sound indeed; this is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorced
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness,
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me. Lo, where it sits,
Which God shall guard; and put the world’s whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force
This lineal honour from me. This from thee
Will I to mine leave, as ’tis left to me.

 [_Exit._]

KING.
Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!

Enter Warwick, Gloucester, Clarence and the rest.

CLARENCE.
Doth the King call?

WARWICK.
What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?

KING.
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?

CLARENCE.
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.

KING.
The Prince of Wales! Where is he? Let me see him.
He is not here.

WARWICK.
This door is open, he is gone this way.

GLOUCESTER.
He came not through the chamber where we stay’d.

KING.
Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?

WARWICK.
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.

KING.
The Prince hath ta’en it hence. Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose
My sleep my death?
Find him, my Lord of Warwick, chide him hither.

 [_Exit Warwick._]

This part of his conjoins with my disease,
And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are,
How quickly nature falls into revolt
When gold becomes her object!
For this the foolish over-careful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry;
For this they have engrossed and piled up
The canker’d heaps of strange-achieved gold;
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises;
When, like the bee, tolling from every flower
The virtuous sweets,
Our thighs pack’d with wax, our mouths with honey,
We bring it to the hive; and like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste
Yields his engrossments to the ending father.

Enter Warwick.

Now where is he that will not stay so long
Till his friend sickness hath determin’d me?

WARWICK.
My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow
That tyranny, which never quaff’d but blood,
Would, by beholding him, have wash’d his knife
With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.

KING.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?

Enter Prince Henry.

Lo where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry.
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.

 [_Exeunt Warwick and the rest._]

PRINCE.
I never thought to hear you speak again.

KING.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth!
Thou seek’st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind
That it will quickly drop. My day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that which after some few hours
Were thine without offence, and at my death
Thou hast seal’d up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou loved’st me not,
And thou wilt have me die assured of it.
Thou hid’st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts
Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head,
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees;
For now a time is come to mock at form.
Harry the Fifth is crown’d. Up, vanity!
Down, royal state! All you sage counsellors, hence!
And to the English court assemble now,
From every region, apes of idleness!
Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum.
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his treble guilt,
England shall give him office, honour, might,
For the fifth Harry from curb’d license plucks
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
O, thou wilt be a wilderness again,
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants!

PRINCE.
O, pardon me, my liege! But for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestall’d this dear and deep rebuke
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown;
And He that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours! If I affect it more
Than as your honour and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending.
God witness with me, when I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,
O, let me in my present wildness die
And never live to show th’ incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed!
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spake unto this crown as having sense,
And thus upbraided it: “The care on thee depending
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold.
Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
Preserving life in med’cine potable;
But thou, most fine, most honour’d, most renown’d,
Hast eat thy bearer up.” Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it, as with an enemy
That had before my face murder’d my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head
And make me as the poorest vassal is
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!

KING.
O my son,
God put it in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou mightst win the more thy father’s love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it!
Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son,
By what by-paths and indirect crook’d ways
I met this crown, and I myself know well
How troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. It seem’d in me
But as an honour snatch’d with boisterous hand,
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their assistances,
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears
Thou seest with peril I have answered;
For all my reign hath been but as a scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased,
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort;
So thou the garland wear’st successively.
Yet though thou stand’st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green;
And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta’en out;
By whose fell working I was first advanced
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displaced; which to avoid,
I cut them off, and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest and lying still might make them look
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels, that action, hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so
That strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, O God, forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live!

PRINCE.
My gracious liege,
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more than with a common pain
’Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.

Enter Lord John of Lancaster and others.

KING.
Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.

LANCASTER.
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father!

KING.
Thou bring’st me happiness and peace, son John,
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare wither’d trunk. Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick?

PRINCE.
My Lord of Warwick!

Enter Warwick and others.

KING.
Doth any name particular belong
Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?

WARWICK.
’Tis call’d Jerusalem, my noble lord.

KING.
Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not die but in Jerusalem,
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land.
But bear me to that chamber; there I’ll lie;
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Gloucestershire. Shallow’s house.

Enter Shallow, Falstaff, Bardolph and Page.

SHALLOW.
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.
What, Davy, I say!

FALSTAFF.
You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.

SHALLOW.
I will not excuse you, you shall not be excused. Excuses shall not be
admitted, there is no excuse shall serve, you shall not be excused.
Why, Davy!

Enter Davy.

DAVY.
Here, sir.

SHALLOW.
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see.
Yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither. Sir John, you shall not
be excused.

DAVY.
Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served; and again, sir—shall
we sow the hade land with wheat?

SHALLOW.
With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook, are there no young pigeons?

DAVY.
Yes, sir. Here is now the smith’s note for shoeing and plough-irons.

SHALLOW.
Let it be cast and paid. Sir John, you shall not be excused.

DAVY.
Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had. And, sir, do you
mean to stop any of William’s wages, about the sack he lost the other
day at Hinckley fair?

SHALLOW.
He shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple of short-legged hens,
a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William
cook.

DAVY.
Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?

SHALLOW.
Yea, Davy, I will use him well: a friend i’ th’ court is better than a
penny in purse. Use his men well, Davy, for they are arrant knaves, and
will backbite.

DAVY.
No worse than they are backbitten, sir, for they have marvellous foul
linen.

SHALLOW.
Well conceited, Davy. About thy business, Davy.

DAVY.
I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor of Woncot against
Clement Perkes o’ th’ hill.

SHALLOW.
There is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor. That Visor is an
arrant knave, on my knowledge.

DAVY.
I grant your worship that he is a knave, sir, but yet, God forbid, sir,
but a knave should have some countenance at his friend’s request. An
honest man, sir, is able to speak for himself, when a knave is not. I
have served your worship truly, sir, this eight years; and if I cannot
once or twice in a quarter bear out a knave against an honest man, I
have but a very little credit with your worship. The knave is mine
honest friend, sir; therefore I beseech your worship let him be
countenanced.

SHALLOW.
Go to; I say he shall have no wrong. Look about, Davy.

 [_Exit Davy._]

Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off with your boots.
Give me your hand, Master Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
I am glad to see your worship.

SHALLOW.
I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph; and welcome, my
tall fellow [_to the Page_]. Come, Sir John.

FALSTAFF.
I’ll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.

 [_Exit Shallow._]

Bardolph, look to our horses.

 [_Exeunt Bardolph and Page._]

If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four dozen of such
bearded hermits’ staves as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to
see the semblable coherence of his men’s spirits and his. They, by
observing of him, do bear themselves like foolish justices: he, by
conversing with them, is turned into a justice-like serving-man. Their
spirits are so married in conjunction with the participation of society
that they flock together in consent, like so many wild-geese. If I had
a suit to Master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation of
being near their master: if to his men, I would curry with Master
Shallow that no man could better command his servants. It is certain
that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take
diseases, one of another. Therefore let men take heed of their company.
I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow to keep Prince Harry in
continual laughter the wearing out of six fashions, which is four
terms, or two actions, and he shall laugh without intervallums. O, it
is much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a sad brow will
do with a fellow that never had the ache in his shoulders! O, you shall
see him laugh till his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up!

SHALLOW.
[_Within_.] Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
I come, Master Shallow, I come, Master Shallow.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Westminster. The palace.

Enter Warwick and the Lord Chief Justice, meeting.

WARWICK.
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
How doth the King?

WARWICK.
Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I hope, not dead.

WARWICK.
He’s walk’d the way of nature,
And to our purposes he lives no more.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I would his Majesty had call’d me with him.
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries.

WARWICK.
Indeed I think the young King loves you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.

Enter Lancaster, Clarence, Gloucester and others.

WARWICK.
Here comes the heavy issue of dead Harry.
O that the living Harry had the temper
Of he the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many nobles then should hold their places,
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!

CHIEF JUSTICE.
O God, I fear all will be overturn’d.

LANCASTER.
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.

GLOUCESTER & CLARENCE.
Good morrow, cousin.

LANCASTER.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.

WARWICK.
We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

LANCASTER.
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy!

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier!

GLOUCESTER.
O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed;
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.

LANCASTER.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
I am the sorrier; would ’twere otherwise.

CLARENCE.
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of quality.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Sweet Princes, what I did I did in honour,
Led by th’ impartial conduct of my soul;
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestall’d remission.
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I’ll to the King my master that is dead,
And tell him who hath sent me after him.

WARWICK.
Here comes the Prince.

Enter King Henry the Fifth, attended.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Good morrow, and God save your Majesty!

KING.
This new and gorgeous garment, majesty,
Sits not so easy on me as you think.
Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.
This is the English, not the Turkish court;
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,
But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
That I will deeply put the fashion on
And wear it in my heart. Why then, be sad;
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Than a joint burden laid upon us all.
For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured,
I’ll be your father and your brother too;
Let me but bear your love, I’ll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry’s dead, and so will I;
But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.

PRINCES.
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.

KING.
You all look strangely on me. And you most;
You are, I think, assured I love you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I am assured, if I be measured rightly,
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.

KING.
No?
How might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What! rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison
Th’ immediate heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be wash’d in Lethe and forgotten?

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I then did use the person of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me;
And in the administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgement;
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
I gave bold way to my authority
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought?
To pluck down justice from your awful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword
That guards the peace and safety of your person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image,
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
Be now the father and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdain’d,
And then imagine me taking your part
And in your power soft silencing your son.
After this cold considerance, sentence me;
And, as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege’s sovereignty.

KING.
You are right, justice, and you weigh this well.
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword.
And I do wish your honours may increase
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you and obey you, as I did.
So shall I live to speak my father’s words:
“Happy am I, that have a man so bold
That dares do justice on my proper son;
And not less happy, having such a son
That would deliver up his greatness so
Into the hands of justice.” You did commit me,
For which I do commit into your hand
Th’ unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance: that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done ’gainst me. There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop and humble my intents
To your well-practised wise directions.
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you,
My father is gone wild into his grave,
For in his tomb lie my affections;
And with his spirit sadly I survive
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me
Hath proudly flow’d in vanity till now.
Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best-govern’d nation;
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us;
In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
Our coronation done, we will accite,
As I before remember’d, all our state:
And, God consigning to my good intents,
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
God shorten Harry’s happy life one day!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Gloucestershire. Shallow’s orchard.

Enter Falstaff, Shallow, Silence, Davy, Bardolph and the Page.

SHALLOW.
Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we will eat a last
year’s pippin of mine own graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so
forth. Come, cousin Silence. And then to bed.

FALSTAFF.
Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling, and a rich.

SHALLOW.
Barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, Sir John. Marry, good
air. Spread, Davy, spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.

FALSTAFF.
This Davy serves you for good uses; he is your serving-man and your
husband.

SHALLOW.
A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir John. By the
mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A good varlet. Now sit
down, now sit down. Come, cousin.

SILENCE.
Ah, sirrah! quoth-a, we shall [_Singing._]

    _Do nothing but eat, and make good cheer,
    And praise God for the merry year,
    When flesh is cheap and females dear,
    And lusty lads roam here and there
    So merrily,
    And ever among so merrily._

FALSTAFF.
There’s a merry heart! Good Master Silence, I’ll give you a health for
that anon.

SHALLOW.
Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.

DAVY.
Sweet sir, sit. I’ll be with you anon. Most sweet sir, sit. Master
page, good master page, sit. Proface! What you want in meat, we’ll have
in drink, but you must bear; the heart’s all.

 [_Exit._]

SHALLOW.
Be merry, Master Bardolph, and, my little soldier there, be merry.

SILENCE.
[_Singing._]

    _Be merry, be merry, my wife has all,
    For women are shrews, both short and tall.
    ’Tis merry in hall when beards wag all,
    And welcome merry Shrove-tide.
    Be merry, be merry._

FALSTAFF.
I did not think Master Silence had been a man of this mettle.

SILENCE.
Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.

Enter Davy.

DAVY.
[_To Bardolph_.] There’s a dish of leather-coats for you.

SHALLOW.
Davy!

DAVY.
Your worship? I’ll be with you straight.
[_To Bardolph_] A cup of wine, sir?

SILENCE.
[_Singing._]

    _A cup of wine that’s brisk and fine,
    And drink unto thee, leman mine,
    And a merry heart lives long-a._

FALSTAFF.
Well said, Master Silence.

SILENCE.
An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o’ th’ night.

FALSTAFF.
Health and long life to you, Master Silence.

SILENCE.
[_Singing._]

    _Fill the cup, and let it come,
    I’ll pledge you a mile to th’ bottom._

SHALLOW.
Honest Bardolph, welcome! If thou want’st anything and wilt not call,
beshrew thy heart. Welcome, my little tiny thief, [_to the Page_] and
welcome indeed too. I’ll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the
cabileros about London.

DAVY.
I hope to see London once ere I die.

BARDOLPH.
An I might see you there, Davy,—

SHALLOW.
By the mass, you’ll crack a quart together, ha! will you not, Master
Bardolph?

BARDOLPH.
Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.

SHALLOW.
By God’s liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick by thee, I can
assure thee that. He will not out, he. ’Tis true bred.

BARDOLPH.
And I’ll stick by him, sir.

SHALLOW.
Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing! Be merry.

 [_Knocking within._]

Look who’s at door there, ho! Who knocks?

 [_Exit Davy._]

FALSTAFF.
[_To Silence, seeing him take off a bumper_.] Why, now you have done me
right.

SILENCE.
[_Singing._]

    _Do me right,
    And dub me knight:
    Samingo._

Is’t not so?

FALSTAFF.
’Tis so.

SILENCE.
Is’t so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.

Enter Davy.

DAVY.
An’t please your worship, there’s one Pistol come from the court with
news.

FALSTAFF.
From the court? Let him come in.

Enter Pistol.

How now, Pistol?

PISTOL.
Sir John, God save you!

FALSTAFF.
What wind blew you hither, Pistol?

PISTOL.
Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight, thou art now
one of the greatest men in this realm.

SILENCE.
By’r lady, I think he be, but goodman Puff of Barson.

PISTOL.
Puff!
Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,
And tidings do I bring and lucky joys,
And golden times, and happy news of price.

FALSTAFF.
I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.

PISTOL.
A foutre for the world and worldlings base!
I speak of Africa and golden joys.

FALSTAFF.
O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?
Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.

SILENCE.
[_Singing_.] _And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John._

PISTOL.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?
And shall good news be baffled?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies’ lap.

SHALLOW.
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.

PISTOL.
Why then, lament therefor.

SHALLOW.
Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from the court, I take
it there’s but two ways, either to utter them, or conceal them. I am,
sir, under the King, in some authority.

PISTOL.
Under which king, Besonian? Speak, or die.

SHALLOW.
Under King Harry.

PISTOL.
Harry the Fourth, or Fifth?

SHALLOW.
Harry the Fourth.

PISTOL.
A foutre for thine office!
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is King;
Harry the Fifth’s the man. I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this, and fig me, like
The bragging Spaniard.

FALSTAFF.
What, is the old King dead?

PISTOL.
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.

FALSTAFF.
Away, Bardolph, saddle my horse. Master Robert Shallow, choose what
office thou wilt in the land, ’tis thine. Pistol, I will double-charge
thee with dignities.

BARDOLPH.
O joyful day!
I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.

PISTOL.
What! I do bring good news.

FALSTAFF.
Carry Master Silence to bed. Master Shallow, my Lord Shallow, be what
thou wilt; I am Fortune’s steward! Get on thy boots, we’ll ride all
night. O sweet Pistol! Away, Bardolph!

 [_Exit Bardolph._]

Come, Pistol, utter more to me; and withal devise something to do
thyself good. Boot, boot, Master Shallow. I know the young King is sick
for me. Let us take any man’s horses. The laws of England are at my
commandment. Blessed are they that have been my friends, and woe to my
Lord Chief Justice!

PISTOL.
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
“Where is the life that late I led?” say they:
Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. A street.

Enter Beadles, dragging in Hostess Quickly and Doll Tearsheet.

HOSTESS.
No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I might die, that I might
have thee hanged. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.

FIRST BEADLE.
The constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall have
whipping-cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been a man or two
lately killed about her.

DOLL.
Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I’ll tell thee what, thou damned
tripe-visaged rascal, an the child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert
better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-faced villain.

HOSTESS.
O the Lord, that Sir John were come! He would make this a bloody day to
somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb miscarry!

FIRST BEADLE.
If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; you have but eleven
now. Come, I charge you both go with me, for the man is dead that you
and Pistol beat amongst you.

DOLL.
I’ll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you as
soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle rogue, you filthy famished
correctioner, if you be not swinged, I’ll forswear half-kirtles.

FIRST BEADLE.
Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.

HOSTESS.
O God, that right should thus overcome might! Well, of sufferance comes
ease.

DOLL.
Come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.

HOSTESS.
Ay, come, you starved bloodhound.

DOLL.
Goodman death, goodman bones!

HOSTESS.
Thou atomy, thou!

DOLL.
Come, you thin thing, come, you rascal!

FIRST BEADLE.
Very well.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A public place near Westminster Abbey.

Enter two Grooms, strewing rushes.

FIRST GROOM.
More rushes, more rushes.

SECOND GROOM.
The trumpets have sounded twice.

FIRST GROOM.
’Twill be two o’clock ere they come from the coronation. Dispatch,
dispatch.

 [_Exeunt._]

Trumpets sound, and the King and his train pass over the stage. Enter
Falstaff, Shallow, Pistol, Bardolph and Page.

FALSTAFF.
Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow. I will make the King do you
grace. I will leer upon him as he comes by, and do but mark the
countenance that he will give me.

PISTOL.
God bless thy lungs, good knight!

FALSTAFF.
Come here, Pistol, stand behind me. O, if I had had time to have made
new liveries, I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of
you. But ’tis no matter, this poor show doth better. This doth infer
the zeal I had to see him.

SHALLOW.
It doth so.

FALSTAFF.
It shows my earnestness of affection—

SHALLOW.
It doth so.

FALSTAFF.
My devotion—

SHALLOW.
It doth, it doth, it doth.

FALSTAFF.
As it were, to ride day and night, and not to deliberate, not to
remember, not to have patience to shift me—

SHALLOW.
It is best, certain.

FALSTAFF.
But to stand stained with travel, and sweating with desire to see him,
thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if
there were nothing else to be done but to see him.

PISTOL.
’Tis _semper idem_, for _obsque hoc nihil est;_ ’tis all in every part.

SHALLOW.
’Tis so, indeed.

PISTOL.
My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver,
And make thee rage.
Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in base durance and contagious prison,
Haled thither
By most mechanical and dirty hand.
Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto’s snake,
For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.

FALSTAFF.
I will deliver her.

 [_Shouts within. The trumpets sound._]

PISTOL.
There roar’d the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.

Enter the King and his train, the Lord Chief Justice among them.

FALSTAFF.
God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal!

PISTOL.
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!

FALSTAFF.
God save thee, my sweet boy!

KING.
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Have you your wits? Know you what ’tis you speak?

FALSTAFF.
My King! My Jove! I speak to thee, my heart!

KING.
I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers.
How ill white hairs becomes a fool and jester!
I have long dreamt of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swell’d, so old, and so profane;
But, being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace;
Leave gormandizing; know the grave doth gape
For thee thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest.
Presume not that I am the thing I was;
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turn’d away my former self;
So will I those that kept me company.
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots.
Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils.
And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will, according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,
To see perform’d the tenor of our word.
Set on.

 [_Exeunt King with his train._]

FALSTAFF.
Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pounds.

SHALLOW.
Yea, marry, Sir John, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.

FALSTAFF.
That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not you grieve at this; I shall
be sent for in private to him. Look you, he must seem thus to the
world. Fear not your advancements; I will be the man yet that shall
make you great.

SHALLOW.
I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your doublet and stuff me out
with straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me have five hundred of
my thousand.

FALSTAFF.
Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard was but a
colour.

SHALLOW.
A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John.

FALSTAFF.
Fear no colours. Go with me to dinner. Come, Lieutenant Pistol; come,
Bardolph. I shall be sent for soon at night.

Enter the Lord Chief Justice and Prince John, Officers with them.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.
Take all his company along with him.

FALSTAFF.
My lord, my lord,—

CHIEF JUSTICE.
I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.
Take them away.

PISTOL.
_Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta._

 [_Exeunt all but Prince John and the Lord Chief Justice._]

LANCASTER.
I like this fair proceeding of the King’s.
He hath intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banish’d till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
And so they are.

LANCASTER.
The King hath call’d his parliament, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE.
He hath.

LANCASTER.
I will lay odds that, ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire
As far as France. I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King.
Come, will you hence?

 [_Exeunt._]




EPILOGUE.


First my fear; then my curtsy; last my speech. My fear is your
displeasure; my curtsy, my duty; and my speech, to beg your pardons. If
you look for a good speech now, you undo me, for what I have to say is
of mine own making; and what indeed I should say will, I doubt, prove
mine own marring. But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it
known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end of a
displeasing play, to pray your patience for it and to promise you a
better. I meant indeed to pay you with this; which, if like an ill
venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle creditors,
lose. Here I promised you I would be, and here I commit my body to your
mercies. Bate me some, and I will pay you some, and, as most debtors
do, promise you infinitely.

If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to
use my legs? And yet that were but light payment, to dance out of your
debt. But a good conscience will make any possible satisfaction, and so
would I. All the gentlewomen here have forgiven me; if the gentlemen
will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen, which
was never seen before in such an assembly.

One word more, I beseech you. If you be not too much cloyed with fat
meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in it,
and make you merry with fair Katharine of France; where, for anything I
know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already he be killed with
your hard opinions; for Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the
man. My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid you good
night.




THE LIFE OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH


Contents

ACT I
Prologue.
Scene I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.
Scene II. The same. The presence chamber.

ACT II
Chorus.
Scene I. London. A street.
Scene II. Southampton. A council-chamber.
Scene III. London. Before a tavern.
Scene IV. France. The King’s palace.

ACT III
Chorus.
Scene I. France. Before Harfleur.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. Before the gates.
Scene IV. The French King’s palace.
Scene V. The same.
Scene VI. The English camp in Picardy.
Scene VII. The French camp, near Agincourt.

ACT IV
Chorus.
Scene I. The English camp at Agincourt.
Scene II. The French camp.
Scene III. The English camp.
Scene IV. The field of battle.
Scene V. Another part of the field.
Scene VI. Another part of the field.
Scene VII. Another part of the field.
Scene VIII. Before King Henry’s pavilion.

ACT V
Chorus.
Scene I. France. The English camp.
Scene II. France. A royal palace.
Epilogue.


Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY V.
DUKE OF CLARENCE, brother to the King.
DUKE OF BEDFORD, brother to the King.
DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, brother to the King.
DUKE OF EXETER, uncle to the King.
DUKE OF YORK, cousin to the King.
EARL OF SALISBURY.
EARL OF HUNTINGDON.
EARL OF WESTMORLAND.
EARL OF WARWICK.
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
BISHOP OF ELY.
EARL OF CAMBRIDGE.
LORD SCROOP.
SIR THOMAS GREY.
SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM, officer in King Henry’s army.
GOWER, officer in King Henry’s army.
FLUELLEN, officer in King Henry’s army.
MACMORRIS, officer in King Henry’s army.
JAMY, officer in King Henry’s army.
BATES, soldier in the same.
COURT, soldier in the same.
WILLIAMS, soldier in the same.
PISTOL.
NYM.
BARDOLPH.
BOY.
A Herald.

CHARLES VI, king of France.
LEWIS, the Dauphin.
DUKE OF BERRY.
DUKE OF BRITTANY.
DUKE OF BURGUNDY.
DUKE OF ORLEANS.
DUKE OF BOURBON.
The Constable of France.
RAMBURES, French Lord.
GRANDPRÉ, French Lord.
Governor of Harfleur
MONTJOY, a French herald.
Ambassadors to the King of England.

ISABEL, queen of France.
KATHARINE, daughter to Charles and Isabel.
ALICE, a lady attending on her.
HOSTESS of a tavern in Eastcheap, formerly Mistress Nell Quickly, and
now married to Pistol.

CHORUS.

Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, and
Attendants.

SCENE: England; afterwards France.




PROLOGUE.

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention,
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,
Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,
The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
So great an object. Can this cockpit hold
The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this wooden O the very casques
That did affright the air at Agincourt?
O pardon! since a crooked figure may
Attest in little place a million,
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
On your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.
For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,
Turning the accomplishment of many years
Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,
Admit me Chorus to this history;
Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.

 [_Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.


 Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.
My lord, I’ll tell you, that self bill is urg’d
Which in the eleventh year of the last king’s reign
Was like, and had indeed against us passed
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.

ELY.
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?

CANTERBURY.
It must be thought on. If it pass against us,
We lose the better half of our possession:
For all the temporal lands, which men devout
By testament have given to the Church,
Would they strip from us; being valu’d thus:
As much as would maintain, to the King’s honour,
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
And, to relief of lazars and weak age,
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
A hundred almshouses right well supplied;
And to the coffers of the King beside,
A thousand pounds by th’ year. Thus runs the bill.

ELY.
This would drink deep.

CANTERBURY.
’Twould drink the cup and all.

ELY.
But what prevention?

CANTERBURY.
The King is full of grace and fair regard.

ELY.
And a true lover of the holy Church.

CANTERBURY.
The courses of his youth promis’d it not.
The breath no sooner left his father’s body
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment
Consideration like an angel came
And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,
Leaving his body as a paradise
T’ envelope and contain celestial spirits.
Never was such a sudden scholar made,
Never came reformation in a flood
With such a heady currance scouring faults,
Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness
So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
As in this king.

ELY.
We are blessed in the change.

CANTERBURY.
Hear him but reason in divinity
And, all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a prelate;
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
You would say it hath been all in all his study;
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear
A fearful battle rendered you in music;
Turn him to any cause of policy,
The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears
To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;
So that the art and practic part of life
Must be the mistress to this theoric:
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to courses vain,
His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts and popularity.

ELY.
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
Neighboured by fruit of baser quality;
And so the Prince obscured his contemplation
Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.

CANTERBURY.
It must be so, for miracles are ceased,
And therefore we must needs admit the means
How things are perfected.

ELY.
But, my good lord,
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty
Incline to it, or no?

CANTERBURY.
He seems indifferent,
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;
For I have made an offer to his Majesty,
Upon our spiritual convocation
And in regard of causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France, to give a greater sum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
Did to his predecessors part withal.

ELY.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?

CANTERBURY.
With good acceptance of his Majesty;
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,
The severals and unhidden passages
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,
And generally to the crown and seat of France,
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.

ELY.
What was th’ impediment that broke this off?

CANTERBURY.
The French ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience; and the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?

ELY.
It is.

CANTERBURY.
Then go we in, to know his embassy,
Which I could with a ready guess declare
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

ELY.
I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The presence chamber.

 Enter King Henry, Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmorland,
 Exeter and Attendants.

KING HENRY.
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?

EXETER.
Not here in presence.

KING HENRY.
Send for him, good uncle.

WESTMORLAND.
Shall we call in th’ ambassador, my liege?

KING HENRY.
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight
That task our thoughts concerning us and France.

 Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.
God and his angels guard your sacred throne
And make you long become it!

KING HENRY.
Sure, we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed
And justly and religiously unfold
Why the law Salic that they have in France
Or should or should not bar us in our claim.
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colours with the truth;
For God doth know how many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
How you awake our sleeping sword of war.
We charge you in the name of God, take heed;
For never two such kingdoms did contend
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint
’Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this conjuration speak, my lord,
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart
That what you speak is in your conscience washed
As pure as sin with baptism.

CANTERBURY.
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness’ claim to France
But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
_In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant_,
“No woman shall succeed in Salic land;”
Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
That the land Salic is in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;
Where Charles the Great, having subdu’d the Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French;
Who, holding in disdain the German women
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Establish’d then this law, to wit, no female
Should be inheritrix in Salic land;
Which Salic, as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala,
Is at this day in Germany call’d Meissen.
Then doth it well appear the Salic law
Was not devised for the realm of France;
Nor did the French possess the Salic land
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly suppos’d the founder of this law,
Who died within the year of our redemption
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
Subdu’d the Saxons, and did seat the French
Beyond the river Sala, in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
Did, as heir general, being descended
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurp’d the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To find his title with some shows of truth,
Though, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught,
Convey’d himself as the heir to the Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son
To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the Tenth,
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Was re-united to the crown of France.
So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun,
King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim,
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in right and title of the female.
So do the kings of France unto this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law
To bar your Highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Usurp’d from you and your progenitors.

KING HENRY.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?

CANTERBURY.
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,
“When the man dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord,
Stand for your own! Unwind your bloody flag!
Look back into your mighty ancestors!
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,
And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground play’d a tragedy,
Making defeat on the full power of France,
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility.
O noble English, that could entertain
With half their forces the full pride of France
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work and cold for action!

ELY.
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
You are their heir; you sit upon their throne;
The blood and courage that renowned them
Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.

EXETER.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
As did the former lions of your blood.

WESTMORLAND.
They know your Grace hath cause and means and might;
So hath your Highness. Never King of England
Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
And lie pavilion’d in the fields of France.

CANTERBURY.
O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
With blood and sword and fire to win your right;
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum
As never did the clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your ancestors.

KING HENRY.
We must not only arm to invade the French,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
With all advantages.

CANTERBURY.
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers.

KING HENRY.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbour to us;
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Never went with his forces into France
But that the Scot on his unfurnish’d kingdom
Came pouring, like the tide into a breach,
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
Girdling with grievous siege castles and towns;
That England, being empty of defence,
Hath shook and trembled at the ill neighbourhood.

CANTERBURY.
She hath been then more fear’d than harm’d, my liege;
For hear her but exampl’d by herself:
When all her chivalry hath been in France,
And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended
But taken and impounded as a stray
The King of Scots; whom she did send to France
To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings,
And make her chronicle as rich with praise
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries.

WESTMORLAND.
But there’s a saying very old and true,
“If that you will France win,
Then with Scotland first begin.”
For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To tear and havoc more than she can eat.

EXETER.
It follows then the cat must stay at home;
Yet that is but a crush’d necessity,
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
The advised head defends itself at home;
For government, though high and low and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music.

CANTERBURY.
Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavour in continual motion,
To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,
Obedience; for so work the honey-bees,
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers of sorts,
Where some, like magistrates, correct at home,
Others like merchants, venture trade abroad,
Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent-royal of their emperor;
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys
The singing masons building roofs of gold,
The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,
The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,
Delivering o’er to executors pale
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer,
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously.
As many arrows, loosed several ways,
Come to one mark; as many ways meet in one town;
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;
As many lines close in the dial’s centre;
So many a thousand actions, once afoot,
End in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried and our nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.

KING HENRY.
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.

 [_Exeunt some Attendants._]

Now are we well resolv’d; and, by God’s help,
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe,
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit,
Ruling in large and ample empery
O’er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
Either our history shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshipp’d with a waxen epitaph.

 Enter Ambassadors of France.

Now are we well prepar’d to know the pleasure
Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hear
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.

FIRST AMBASSADOR.
May’t please your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge,
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?

KING HENRY.
We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fett’red in our prisons;
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.

AMBASSADOR.
Thus, then, in few.
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right
Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.
In answer of which claim, the prince our master
Says that you savour too much of your youth,
And bids you be advis’d there’s nought in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won.
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.

KING HENRY.
What treasure, uncle?

EXETER.
Tennis-balls, my liege.

KING HENRY.
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have match’d our rackets to these balls,
We will, in France, by God’s grace, play a set
Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturb’d
With chaces. And we understand him well,
How he comes o’er us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valu’d this poor seat of England;
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
To barbarous licence; as ’tis ever common
That men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness
When I do rouse me in my throne of France.
For that I have laid by my majesty
And plodded like a man for working days,
But I will rise there with so full a glory
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
Hath turn’d his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,
Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal; and in whose name
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on
To venge me as I may, and to put forth
My rightful hand in a well-hallow’d cause.
So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin
His jest will savour but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.—
Convey them with safe conduct.—Fare you well.

 [_Exeunt Ambassadors._]

EXETER.
This was a merry message.

KING HENRY.
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
That may give furtherance to our expedition;
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore, let our proportions for these wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More feathers to our wings; for, God before,
We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II


 Flourish. Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies.
Now thrive the armourers, and honour’s thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
Following the mirror of all Christian kings,
With winged heels, as English Mercuries.
For now sits Expectation in the air,
And hides a sword from hilts unto the point
With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets,
Promis’d to Harry and his followers.
The French, advis’d by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England! model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What mightst thou do, that honour would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural!
But see thy fault! France hath in thee found out
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills
With treacherous crowns; and three corrupted men,
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
Sir Thomas Grey, knight of Northumberland,
Have, for the gilt of France,—O guilt indeed!—
Confirm’d conspiracy with fearful France;
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If hell and treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we’ll digest
The abuse of distance, force a play.
The sum is paid; the traitors are agreed;
The King is set from London; and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit;
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
And bring you back, charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle pass; for, if we may,
We’ll not offend one stomach with our play.
But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. London. A street.

 Enter Corporal Nym and Lieutenant Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Well met, Corporal Nym.

NYM.
Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?

NYM.
For my part, I care not. I say little; but when time shall serve, there
shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I
will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though?
It will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man’s sword
will; and there’s an end.

BARDOLPH.
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we’ll be all three
sworn brothers to France. Let it be so, good Corporal Nym.

NYM.
Faith, I will live so long as I may, that’s the certain of it; and when
I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my rest, that is
the rendezvous of it.

BARDOLPH.
It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly; and
certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.

NYM.
I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and they may
have their throats about them at that time; and some say knives have
edges. It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired mare, yet she
will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I cannot tell.

 Enter Pistol and Hostess.

BARDOLPH.
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good Corporal, be patient here.
How now, mine host Pistol!

PISTOL.
Base tike, call’st thou me host?
Now, by this hand, I swear I scorn the term;
Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.

HOSTESS.
No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or
fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles,
but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight. [_Nym and Pistol
draw._] O well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! We shall see wilful
adultery and murder committed.

BARDOLPH.
Good Lieutenant! good corporal! offer nothing here.

NYM.
Pish!

PISTOL.
Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear’d cur of Iceland!

HOSTESS.
Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.

NYM.
Will you shog off? I would have you _solus_.

PISTOL.
_Solus_, egregious dog! O viper vile!
The _solus_ in thy most mervailous face;
The _solus_ in thy teeth, and in thy throat,
And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy,
And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth!
I do retort the _solus_ in thy bowels;
For I can take, and Pistol’s cock is up,
And flashing fire will follow.

NYM.
I am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me. I have an humour to knock you
indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you
with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would
prick your guts a little, in good terms, as I may; and that’s the
humour of it.

PISTOL.
O braggart vile and damned furious wight!
The grave doth gape, and doting death is near,
Therefore exhale.

BARDOLPH.
Hear me, hear me what I say. He that strikes the first stroke I’ll run
him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.

 [_Draws._]

PISTOL.
An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate.
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give.
Thy spirits are most tall.

NYM.
I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair terms: that is the
humour of it.

PISTOL.
“Couple a gorge!”
That is the word. I thee defy again.
O hound of Crete, think’st thou my spouse to get?
No! to the spital go,
And from the powdering tub of infamy
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid’s kind,
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.
I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
For the only she; and _pauca_, there’s enough.
Go to.

 Enter the Boy.

BOY.
Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and you, hostess. He is
very sick, and would to bed. Good Bardolph, put thy face between his
sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he’s very ill.

BARDOLPH.
Away, you rogue!

HOSTESS.
By my troth, he’ll yield the crow a pudding one of these days.
The King has kill’d his heart.
Good husband, come home presently.

 [_Exeunt Hostess and Boy._]

BARDOLPH.
Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to France together; why the
devil should we keep knives to cut one another’s throats?

PISTOL.
Let floods o’erswell, and fiends for food howl on!

NYM.
You’ll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?

PISTOL.
Base is the slave that pays.

NYM.
That now I will have: that’s the humour of it.

PISTOL.
As manhood shall compound. Push home.

 [_They draw._]

BARDOLPH.
By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I’ll kill him; by this
sword, I will.

PISTOL.
Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.

BARDOLPH.
Corporal Nym, and thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not,
why, then, be enemies with me too. Prithee, put up.

NYM.
I shall have my eight shillings I won from you at betting?

PISTOL.
A noble shalt thou have, and present pay;
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.
I’ll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me.
Is not this just? For I shall sutler be
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
Give me thy hand.

NYM.
I shall have my noble?

PISTOL.
In cash most justly paid.

NYM.
Well, then, that’s the humour of’t.

 Enter Hostess.

HOSTESS.
As ever you come of women, come in quickly to Sir John.
Ah, poor heart! he is so shak’d of a burning quotidian tertian,
that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come to him.

NYM.
The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that’s the even of it.

PISTOL.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right.
His heart is fracted and corroborate.

NYM.
The King is a good king; but it must be as it may; he passes some
humours and careers.

PISTOL.
Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Southampton. A council-chamber.

 Enter Exeter, Bedford and Westmorland.

BEDFORD.
’Fore God, his Grace is bold, to trust these traitors.

EXETER.
They shall be apprehended by and by.

WESTMORLAND.
How smooth and even they do bear themselves!
As if allegiance in their bosoms sat
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.

BEDFORD.
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception which they dream not of.

EXETER.
Nay, but the man that was his bed-fellow,
Whom he hath dull’d and cloy’d with gracious favours,
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
His sovereign’s life to death and treachery.

 Trumpets sound. Enter King Henry, Scroop, Cambridge and Grey.

KING HENRY.
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
Doing the execution and the act
For which we have in head assembled them?

SCROOP.
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.

KING HENRY.
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
We carry not a heart with us from hence
That grows not in a fair consent with ours,
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish
Success and conquest to attend on us.

CAMBRIDGE.
Never was monarch better fear’d and lov’d
Than is your Majesty. There’s not, I think, a subject
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.

GREY.
True; those that were your father’s enemies
Have steep’d their galls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.

KING HENRY.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
According to the weight and worthiness.

SCROOP.
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labour shall refresh itself with hope,
To do your Grace incessant services.

KING HENRY.
We judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday,
That rail’d against our person. We consider
It was excess of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.

SCROOP.
That’s mercy, but too much security.
Let him be punish’d, sovereign, lest example
Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.

KING HENRY.
O, let us yet be merciful.

CAMBRIDGE.
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.

GREY.
Sir,
You show great mercy if you give him life
After the taste of much correction.

KING HENRY.
Alas, your too much love and care of me
Are heavy orisons ’gainst this poor wretch!
If little faults, proceeding on distemper,
Shall not be wink’d at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chew’d, swallow’d, and digested,
Appear before us? We’ll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care
And tender preservation of our person,
Would have him punish’d. And now to our French causes.
Who are the late commissioners?

CAMBRIDGE.
I one, my lord.
Your Highness bade me ask for it today.

SCROOP.
So did you me, my liege.

GREY.
And I, my royal sovereign.

KING HENRY.
Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;
There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, sir knight,
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmorland, and uncle Exeter,
We will aboard tonight.—Why, how now, gentlemen!
What see you in those papers that you lose
So much complexion?—Look ye, how they change!
Their cheeks are paper.—Why, what read you there,
That have so cowarded and chas’d your blood
Out of appearance?

CAMBRIDGE.
I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness’ mercy.

GREY, SCROOP.
To which we all appeal.

KING HENRY.
The mercy that was quick in us but late,
By your own counsel is suppress’d and kill’d.
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.
See you, my princes and my noble peers,
These English monsters! My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish him with an appertinents
Belonging to his honour; and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspir’d
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton; to the which
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But, O
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop? thou cruel,
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature!
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew’st the very bottom of my soul,
That almost mightst have coin’d me into gold,
Wouldst thou have practis’d on me for thy use,—
May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? ’Tis so strange,
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason and murder ever kept together,
As two yoke-devils sworn to either’s purpose,
Working so grossly in a natural cause
That admiration did not whoop at them;
But thou, ’gainst all proportion, didst bring in
Wonder to wait on treason and on murder;
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;
And other devils that suggest by treasons
Do botch and bungle up damnation
With patches, colours, and with forms being fetch’d
From glist’ring semblances of piety.
But he that temper’d thee bade thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
If that same demon that hath gull’d thee thus
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
He might return to vasty Tartar back,
And tell the legions, “I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishman’s.”
O, how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Garnish’d and deck’d in modest complement,
Not working with the eye without the ear,
And but in purged judgement trusting neither?
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To mark the full-fraught man and best indued
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee;
For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like
Another fall of man. Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of the law;
And God acquit them of their practices!

EXETER.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard Earl of
Cambridge.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop of
Masham.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, knight, of
Northumberland.

SCROOP.
Our purposes God justly hath discover’d,
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.

CAMBRIDGE.
For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The sooner to effect what I intended.
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God and you to pardon me.

GREY.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
Than I do at this hour joy o’er myself,
Prevented from a damned enterprise.
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.

KING HENRY.
God quit you in his mercy! Hear your sentence.
You have conspir’d against our royal person,
Join’d with an enemy proclaim’d, and from his coffers
Received the golden earnest of our death;
Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter,
His princes and his peers to servitude,
His subjects to oppression and contempt,
And his whole kingdom into desolation.
Touching our person seek we no revenge;
But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death,
The taste whereof God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance
Of all your dear offences! Bear them hence.

 [_Exeunt Cambridge, Scroop and Grey, guarded._]

Now, lords, for France; the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you, as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen! Let us deliver
Our puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to sea! The signs of war advance!
No king of England, if not king of France!

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE III. London. Before a tavern.

 Enter Pistol, Nym, Bardolph, Boy and Hostess.

HOSTESS.
Prithee, honey, sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.

PISTOL.
No; for my manly heart doth yearn.
Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;
Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he is dead,
And we must yearn therefore.

BARDOLPH.
Would I were with him, wheresome’er he is, either in heaven or in hell!

HOSTESS.
Nay, sure, he’s not in hell. He’s in Arthur’s bosom, if ever man went
to Arthur’s bosom. ’A made a finer end and went away an it had been any
christom child. ’A parted even just between twelve and one, even at the
turning o’ the tide: for after I saw him fumble with the sheets, and
play with flowers, and smile upon his fingers’ ends, I knew there was
but one way; for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and ’a babbled of
green fields. “How now, Sir John!” quoth I; “what, man! be o’ good
cheer.” So ’a cried out, “God, God, God!” three or four times. Now I,
to comfort him, bid him ’a should not think of God; I hop’d there was
no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So ’a bade me
lay more clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and felt them,
and they were as cold as any stone. Then I felt to his knees, and so
upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.

NYM.
They say he cried out of sack.

HOSTESS.
Ay, that ’a did.

BARDOLPH.
And of women.

HOSTESS.
Nay, that ’a did not.

BOY.
Yes, that ’a did; and said they were devils incarnate.

HOSTESS.
’A could never abide carnation; ’twas a colour he never liked.

BOY.
’A said once, the devil would have him about women.

HOSTESS.
’A did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then he was rheumatic,
and talk’d of the whore of Babylon.

BOY.
Do you not remember, ’a saw a flea stick upon Bardolph’s nose, and ’a
said it was a black soul burning in hell-fire?

BARDOLPH.
Well, the fuel is gone that maintain’d that fire. That’s all the riches
I got in his service.

NYM.
Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.

PISTOL.
Come, let’s away. My love, give me thy lips.
Look to my chattels and my movables.
Let senses rule; the word is “Pitch and Pay.”
Trust none;
For oaths are straws, men’s faiths are wafer-cakes
And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck;
Therefore, _Caveto_ be thy counsellor.
Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,
Let us to France; like horse-leeches, my boys,
To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck!

BOY.
And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.

PISTOL.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.

BARDOLPH.
Farewell, hostess.

 [_Kissing her._]

NYM.
I cannot kiss; that is the humour of it; but, adieu.

PISTOL.
Let housewifery appear. Keep close, I thee command.

HOSTESS.
Farewell; adieu.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. France. The King’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter the French King, the Dauphin, the Dukes of Berry and
 Brittany, the Constable and others.

FRENCH KING.
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more than carefully it us concerns
To answer royally in our defences.
Therefore the Dukes of Berry and of Brittany,
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant;
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident
As fears may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English
Upon our fields.

DAUPHIN.
My most redoubted father,
It is most meet we arm us ’gainst the foe;
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,
But that defences, musters, preparations,
Should be maintain’d, assembled, and collected,
As were a war in expectation.
Therefore, I say, ’tis meet we all go forth
To view the sick and feeble parts of France.
And let us do it with no show of fear;
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance;
For, my good liege, she is so idly king’d,
Her sceptre so fantastically borne
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.

CONSTABLE.
O peace, Prince Dauphin!
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late ambassadors
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
How modest in exception, and withal
How terrible in constant resolution,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly;
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.

DAUPHIN.
Well, ’tis not so, my Lord High Constable;
But though we think it so, it is no matter.
In cases of defence ’tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems,
So the proportions of defence are fill’d;
Which, of a weak and niggardly projection,
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting
A little cloth.

FRENCH KING.
Think we King Harry strong;
And, Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath been flesh’d upon us;
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
That haunted us in our familiar paths.
Witness our too much memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck,
And all our princes captiv’d by the hand
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales;
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing,
Up in the air, crown’d with the golden sun,
Saw his heroical seed, and smil’d to see him,
Mangle the work of nature and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock; and let us fear
The native mightiness and fate of him.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Ambassadors from Harry King of England
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.

FRENCH KING.
We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.

 [_Exeunt Messenger and certain Lords._]

You see this chase is hotly follow’d, friends.

DAUPHIN.
Turn head and stop pursuit; for coward dogs
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a monarchy you are the head.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
As self-neglecting.

 Enter Exeter.

FRENCH KING.
From our brother of England?

EXETER.
From him; and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
That you divest yourself, and lay apart
The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven,
By law of nature and of nations, ’longs
To him and to his heirs; namely, the crown
And all wide-stretched honours that pertain
By custom and the ordinance of times
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
’Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim
Pick’d from the worm-holes of long-vanish’d days,
Nor from the dust of old oblivion rak’d,
He sends you this most memorable line,
In every branch truly demonstrative;
Willing you overlook this pedigree;
And when you find him evenly deriv’d
From his most fam’d of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.

FRENCH KING.
Or else what follows?

EXETER.
Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove,
That, if requiring fail, he will compel;
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head
Turning the widows’ tears, the orphans’ cries,
The dead men’s blood, the pining maidens’ groans,
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,
That shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threat’ning, and my message;
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly I bring greeting too.

FRENCH KING.
For us, we will consider of this further.
Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our brother of England.

DAUPHIN.
For the Dauphin,
I stand here for him. What to him from England?

EXETER.
Scorn and defiance. Slight regard, contempt,
And anything that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my king: an if your father’s Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
He’ll call you to so hot an answer of it
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
In second accent of his ordinance.

DAUPHIN.
Say, if my father render fair return,
It is against my will; for I desire
Nothing but odds with England. To that end,
As matching to his youth and vanity,
I did present him with the Paris balls.

EXETER.
He’ll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
Were it the mistress-court of mighty Europe;
And, be assur’d, you’ll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days
And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read
In your own losses, if he stay in France.

FRENCH KING.
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.

 [_Flourish._]

EXETER.
Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king
Come here himself to question our delay;
For he is footed in this land already.

FRENCH KING.
You shall be soon dispatch’d with fair conditions.
A night is but small breath and little pause
To answer matters of this consequence.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III


 Flourish. Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Thus with imagin’d wing our swift scene flies,
In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen
The well-appointed king at Hampton pier
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet
With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning.
Play with your fancies; and in them behold
Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing;
Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give
To sounds confus’d; behold the threaden sails,
Borne with the invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow’d sea,
Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage and behold
A city on the inconstant billows dancing;
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow!
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Either past or not arriv’d to pith and puissance.
For who is he, whose chin is but enrich’d
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
These cull’d and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.
Suppose the ambassador from the French comes back,
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The offer likes not; and the nimble gunner
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,

 [_Alarum, and chambers go off._]

And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. France. Before Harfleur.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, Gloucester and Soldiers,
 with scaling-ladders.

KING HENRY.
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
Or close the wall up with our English dead.
In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility;
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage;
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o’erwhelm it
As fearfully as does a galled rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swill’d with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheath’d their swords for lack of argument.
Dishonour not your mothers; now attest
That those whom you call’d fathers did beget you.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war. And you, good yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not;
For there is none of you so mean and base,
That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot!
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Cry, “God for Harry! England and Saint George!”

 [_Exeunt. Alarum, and chambers go off._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Nym, Bardolph, Pistol and Boy.

BARDOLPH.
On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!

NYM.
Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot; and, for mine own
part, I have not a case of lives. The humour of it is too hot; that is
the very plain-song of it.

PISTOL.
The plain-song is most just, for humours do abound.
Knocks go and come; God’s vassals drop and die;
    And sword and shield,
    In bloody field,
    Doth win immortal fame.

BOY.
Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my fame for a
pot of ale and safety.

PISTOL.
And I.
    If wishes would prevail with me,
    My purpose should not fail with me,
    But thither would I hie.

BOY.
    As duly,
    But not as truly,
    As bird doth sing on bough.

 Enter Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!

 [_Driving them forward._]

PISTOL.
Be merciful, great Duke, to men of mould.
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage,
Abate thy rage, great Duke!
Good bawcock, bate thy rage; use lenity, sweet chuck!

NYM.
These be good humours! Your honour wins bad humours.

 [_Exeunt all but Boy._]

BOY.
As young as I am, I have observ’d these three swashers. I am boy to
them all three; but all they three, though they would serve me, could
not be man to me; for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man.
For Bardolph, he is white-liver’d and red-fac’d; by the means whereof
’a faces it out, but fights not. For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue
and a quiet sword; by the means whereof ’a breaks words, and keeps
whole weapons. For Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the
best men; and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest ’a should be
thought a coward. But his few bad words are match’d with as few good
deeds; for ’a never broke any man’s head but his own, and that was
against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything, and call it
purchase. Bardolph stole a lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold
it for three half-pence. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in
filching, and in Calais they stole a fire-shovel. I knew by that piece
of service the men would carry coals. They would have me as familiar
with men’s pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers; which makes
much against my manhood, if I should take from another’s pocket to put
into mine; for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them,
and seek some better service. Their villainy goes against my weak
stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Gower and Fluellen.

GOWER.
Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines.
The Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.

FLUELLEN.
To the mines! Tell you the Duke, it is not so good to come to the
mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of
the war. The concavities of it is not sufficient; for, look you, the
athversary, you may discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt himself
four yard under the countermines. By Cheshu, I think ’a will plow up
all, if there is not better directions.

GOWER.
The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is
altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i’ faith.

FLUELLEN.
It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?

GOWER.
I think it be.

FLUELLEN.
By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. I will verify as much in his
beard. He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars,
look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy-dog.

 Enter Macmorris and Captain Jamy.

GOWER.
Here ’a comes; and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Jamy is a marvellous falorous gentleman, that is certain; and
of great expedition and knowledge in the anchient wars, upon my
particular knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his
argument as well as any military man in the world, in the disciplines
of the pristine wars of the Romans.

JAMY.
I say gud-day, Captain Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
God-den to your worship, good Captain James.

GOWER.
How now, Captain Macmorris! have you quit the mines?
Have the pioneers given o’er?

MACMORRIS.
By Chrish, la! ’tish ill done! The work ish give over, the trompet
sound the retreat. By my hand I swear, and my father’s soul, the work
ish ill done; it ish give over. I would have blowed up the town, so
Chrish save me, la! in an hour. O, ’tish ill done, ’tish ill done; by
my hand, ’tish ill done!

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a
few disputations with you, as partly touching or concerning the
disciplines of the war, the Roman wars, in the way of argument, look
you, and friendly communication; partly to satisfy my opinion, and
partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the
direction of the military discipline; that is the point.

JAMY.
It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captains bath: and I sall quit you
with gud leve, as I may pick occasion; that sall I, marry.

MACMORRIS.
It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. The day is hot, and the
weather, and the wars, and the King, and the Dukes. It is no time to
discourse. The town is beseech’d, and the trumpet call us to the
breach, and we talk, and, be Chrish, do nothing. ’Tis shame for us all.
So God sa’ me, ’tis shame to stand still; it is shame, by my hand; and
there is throats to be cut, and works to be done; and there ish nothing
done, so Chrish sa’ me, la!

JAMY.
By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, I’ll
de gud service, or I’ll lig i’ the grund for it; ay, or go to death;
and I’ll pay’t as valorously as I may, that sall I suerly do, that is
the breff and the long. Marry, I wad full fain heard some question
’tween you tway.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your correction, there is
not many of your nation—

MACMORRIS.
Of my nation! What ish my nation? Ish a villain, and a bastard, and a
knave, and a rascal? What ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?

FLUELLEN.
Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, Captain
Macmorris, peradventure I shall think you do not use me with that
affability as in discretion you ought to use me, look you, being as
good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war, and in the
derivation of my birth, and in other particularities.

MACMORRIS.
I do not know you so good a man as myself. So Chrish save me,
I will cut off your head.

GOWER.
Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.

JAMY.
Ah! that’s a foul fault.

 [_A parley sounded._]

GOWER.
The town sounds a parley.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be
required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you I know the
disciplines of war; and there is an end.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before the gates.

 The Governor and some citizens on the walls; the English forces below.
 Enter King Henry and his train.

KING HENRY.
How yet resolves the governor of the town?
This is the latest parle we will admit;
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves,
Or like to men proud of destruction
Defy us to our worst; for, as I am a soldier,
A name that in my thoughts becomes me best,
If I begin the battery once again,
I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
And the flesh’d soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand shall range
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow’ring infants.
What is it then to me, if impious War,
Array’d in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his smirch’d complexion all fell feats
Enlink’d to waste and desolation?
What is’t to me, when you yourselves are cause,
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
We may as bootless spend our vain command
Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil
As send precepts to the leviathan
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
Take pity of your town and of your people,
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
O’erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.
If not, why, in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters;
Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
And their most reverend heads dash’d to the walls;
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus’d
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
At Herod’s bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid,
Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroy’d?

GOVERNOR.
Our expectation hath this day an end.
The Dauphin, whom of succours we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates; dispose of us and ours;
For we no longer are defensible.

KING HENRY.
Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,
And fortify it strongly ’gainst the French.
Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle,
The winter coming on, and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest;
Tomorrow for the march are we addrest.

 Flourish. The King and his train enter the town.

SCENE IV. The French King’s palace.

 Enter Katharine and Alice, an old Gentlewoman.

KATHARINE.
_Alice, tu as été en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage._

ALICE.
_Un peu, madame._

KATHARINE.
_Je te prie, m’enseignez; il faut que j’apprenne à parler.
Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?_

ALICE.
_La main? Elle est appelée_ de hand.

KATHARINE.
De hand. _Et les doigts?_

ALICE.
_Les doigts? Ma foi, j’oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les
doigts? Je pense qu’ils sont appelés_ de fingres; _oui_, de fingres.

KATHARINE.
_La main_, de hand; _les doigts_, de fingres. _Je pense que je suis le
bon écolier; j’ai gagné deux mots d’anglais vitement. Comment
appelez-vous les ongles?_

ALICE.
_Les ongles? Nous les appelons_ de nails.

KATHARINE.
De nails. _Écoutez; dites-moi, si je parle bien:_ de hand, de fingres,
_et_ de nails.

ALICE.
_C’est bien dit, madame; il est fort bon anglais._

KATHARINE.
_Dites-moi l’anglais pour le bras._

ALICE.
De arm, _madame._

KATHARINE.
_Et le coude?_

ALICE.
D’elbow.

KATHARINE.
D’elbow. _Je m’en fais la répétition de tous les mots que vous m’avez
appris dès à présent._

ALICE.
_Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense._

KATHARINE.
_Excusez-moi, Alice. Écoutez:_ d’hand, de fingres, de nails, d’arm, de
bilbow.

ALICE.
D’elbow, _madame._

KATHARINE.
_O Seigneur Dieu, je m’en oublie!_ D’elbow.
_Comment appelez-vous le col?_

ALICE.
De nick, _madame._

KATHARINE.
De nick. _Et le menton?_

ALICE.
De chin.

KATHARINE.
De sin. _Le col_, de nick; _le menton_, de sin.

ALICE.
_Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots aussi
droit que les natifs d’Angleterre._

KATHARINE.
_Je ne doute point d’apprendre, par la grâce de Dieu, et en peu de
temps._

ALICE.
_N’avez-vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?_

KATHARINE.
_Non, je réciterai à vous promptement:_ d’hand, de fingres, de mails,—

ALICE.
De nails, _madame._

KATHARINE.
De nails, de arm, de ilbow.

ALICE.
_Sauf votre honneur_, de elbow.

KATHARINE.
_Ainsi dis-je_, d’elbow, de nick, _et_ de sin. _Comment appelez-vous le
pied et la robe?_

ALICE.
De foot, _madame; et_ de coun.

KATHARINE.
De foot _et_ de coun! _O Seigneur Dieu! ils sont les mots de son
mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les dames
d’honneur d’user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les
seigneurs de France pour tout le monde. Foh!_ le foot _et_ le coun!
_Néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois ma leçon ensemble:_ d’hand, de
fingres, de nails, d’arm, d’elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun.

ALICE.
_Excellent, madame!_

KATHARINE.
_C’est assez pour une fois. Allons-nous à dîner._

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same.

 Enter the King of France, the Dauphin, the Duke of Bourbon, the
 Constable of France and others.

FRENCH KING.
’Tis certain he hath pass’d the river Somme.

CONSTABLE.
And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France; let us quit all
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.

DAUPHIN.
_O Dieu vivant_! shall a few sprays of us,
The emptying of our fathers’ luxury,
Our scions put in wild and savage stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
And overlook their grafters?

BOURBON.
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
_Mort de ma vie_, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom,
To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.

CONSTABLE.
_Dieu de batailles_, where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull,
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-rein’d jades, their barley-broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses’ thatch, whiles a more frosty people
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
Poor we may call them in their native lords.

DAUPHIN.
By faith and honour,
Our madams mock at us, and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.

BOURBON.
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos;
Saying our grace is only in our heels,
And that we are most lofty runaways.

FRENCH KING.
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field!
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berry,
Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Fauconbridge,
Foix, Lestrale, Boucicault, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights,
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him, you have power enough,
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
Bring him our prisoner.

CONSTABLE.
This becomes the great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famish’d in their march;
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He’ll drop his heart into the sink of fear
And for achievement offer us his ransom.

FRENCH KING.
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.

DAUPHIN.
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

FRENCH KING.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of England’s fall.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The English camp in Picardy.

 Enter Gower and Fluellen, meeting.

GOWER.
How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge?

FLUELLEN.
I assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.

GOWER.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?

FLUELLEN.
The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon; and a man that I
love and honour with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life,
and my living, and my uttermost power. He is not—God be praised and
blessed!—any hurt in the world; but keeps the bridge most valiantly,
with excellent discipline. There is an anchient lieutenant there at the
pridge, I think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark
Antony; and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but I did see
him do as gallant service.

GOWER.
What do you call him?

FLUELLEN.
He is call’d Anchient Pistol.

GOWER.
I know him not.

 Enter Pistol.

FLUELLEN.
Here is the man.

PISTOL.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours.
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.

FLUELLEN.
Ay, I praise God; and I have merited some love at his hands.

PISTOL.
Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,
And of buxom valour, hath by cruel fate
And giddy Fortune’s furious fickle wheel,
That goddess blind,
That stands upon the rolling restless stone—

FLUELLEN.
By your patience, Anchient Pistol. Fortune is painted blind, with a
muffler afore his eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and
she is painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which is the moral
of it, that she is turning, and inconstant, and mutability, and
variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone,
which rolls, and rolls, and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most
excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent moral.

PISTOL.
Fortune is Bardolph’s foe, and frowns on him;
For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must ’a be,—
A damned death!
Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
For pax of little price.
Therefore, go speak; the Duke will hear thy voice;
And let not Bardolph’s vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.
Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.

FLUELLEN.
Anchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.

PISTOL.
Why then, rejoice therefore.

FLUELLEN.
Certainly, anchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at; for if, look you,
he were my brother, I would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure,
and put him to execution; for discipline ought to be used.

PISTOL.
Die and be damn’d! and _fico_ for thy friendship!

FLUELLEN.
It is well.

PISTOL.
The fig of Spain.

 [_Exit._]

FLUELLEN.
Very good.

GOWER.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. I remember him now; a bawd,
a cutpurse.

FLUELLEN.
I’ll assure you, ’a uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall
see in a summer’s day. But it is very well; what he has spoke to me,
that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.

GOWER.
Why, ’t is a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars,
to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier.
And such fellows are perfect in the great commanders’ names; and they
will learn you by rote where services were done; at such and such a
sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who
was shot, who disgrac’d, what terms the enemy stood on; and this they
con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned
oaths: and what a beard of the general’s cut and a horrid suit of the
camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-wash’d wits, is wonderful to
be thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or
else you may be marvellously mistook.

FLUELLEN.
I tell you what, Captain Gower; I do perceive he is not the man that he
would gladly make show to the world he is. If I find a hole in his
coat, I will tell him my mind. [_Drum heard._] Hark you, the King is
coming, and I must speak with him from the pridge.

 Drum and colours. Enter King Henry, Gloucester and his poor soldiers.

God bless your Majesty!

KING HENRY.
How now, Fluellen! cam’st thou from the bridge?

FLUELLEN.
Ay, so please your Majesty. The Duke of Exeter has very gallantly
maintain’d the pridge. The French is gone off, look you; and there is
gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th’ athversary was have
possession of the pridge; but he is enforced to retire, and the Duke of
Exeter is master of the pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the Duke is a
prave man.

KING HENRY.
What men have you lost, Fluellen?

FLUELLEN.
The perdition of the athversary hath been very great, reasonable great.
Marry, for my part, I think the Duke hath lost never a man, but one
that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph, if your
Majesty know the man. His face is all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs,
and flames o’ fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a
coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red; but his nose is
executed, and his fire’s out.

KING HENRY.
We would have all such offenders so cut off; and we give express
charge, that in our marches through the country, there be nothing
compell’d from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the
French upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and
cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.

 Tucket. Enter Montjoy.

MONTJOY.
You know me by my habit.

KING HENRY.
Well then I know thee. What shall I know of thee?

MONTJOY.
My master’s mind.

KING HENRY.
Unfold it.

MONTJOY.
Thus says my King: Say thou to Harry of England: Though we seem’d dead,
we did but sleep; advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him
we could have rebuk’d him at Harfleur, but that we thought not good to
bruise an injury till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and
our voice is imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his
weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his
ransom; which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we
have lost, the disgrace we have digested; which in weight to re-answer,
his pettishness would bow under. For our losses, his exchequer is too
poor; for the effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too
faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our
feet, but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this add defiance; and
tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose
condemnation is pronounc’d. So far my King and master; so much my
office.

KING HENRY.
What is thy name? I know thy quality.

MONTJOY.
Montjoy.

KING HENRY.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy King I do not seek him now,
But could be willing to march on to Calais
Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth,
Though ’tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessen’d, and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God,
That I do brag thus! This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent.
Go therefore, tell thy master here I am;
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
My army but a weak and sickly guard;
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself and such another neighbour
Stand in our way. There’s for thy labour, Montjoy.
Go, bid thy master well advise himself.
If we may pass, we will; if we be hind’red,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolour; and so, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle, as we are;
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.
So tell your master.

MONTJOY.
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.

 [_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
I hope they will not come upon us now.

KING HENRY.
We are in God’s hands, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge; it now draws toward night.
Beyond the river we’ll encamp ourselves,
And on tomorrow bid them march away.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The French camp, near Agincourt.

 Enter the Constable of France, the Lord Rambures, Orleans, Dauphin
 with others.

CONSTABLE.
Tut! I have the best armour of the world.
Would it were day!

ORLEANS.
You have an excellent armour; but let my horse have his due.

CONSTABLE.
It is the best horse of Europe.

ORLEANS.
Will it never be morning?

DAUPHIN.
My Lord of Orleans, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of horse and
armour?

ORLEANS.
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.

DAUPHIN.
What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with any that
treads but on four pasterns. Ch’ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his
entrails were hairs; _le cheval volant_, the Pegasus, _qui a les
narines de feu!_ When I bestride him, I soar, I am a hawk. He trots the
air; the earth sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his hoof is
more musical than the pipe of Hermes.

ORLEANS.
He’s of the colour of the nutmeg.

DAUPHIN.
And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He is pure
air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in
him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. He is
indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.

CONSTABLE.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.

DAUPHIN.
It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the bidding of a
monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.

ORLEANS.
No more, cousin.

DAUPHIN.
Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to
the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a
theme as fluent as the sea; turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and
my horse is argument for them all. ’Tis a subject for a sovereign to
reason on, and for a sovereign’s sovereign to ride on; and for the
world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular
functions and wonder at him. I once writ a sonnet in his praise and
began thus: “Wonder of nature,”—

ORLEANS.
I have heard a sonnet begin so to one’s mistress.

DAUPHIN.
Then did they imitate that which I compos’d to my courser, for my horse
is my mistress.

ORLEANS.
Your mistress bears well.

DAUPHIN.
Me well; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and
particular mistress.

CONSTABLE.
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.

DAUPHIN.
So perhaps did yours.

CONSTABLE.
Mine was not bridled.

DAUPHIN.
O then belike she was old and gentle; and you rode, like a kern of
Ireland, your French hose off, and in your strait strossers.

CONSTABLE.
You have good judgment in horsemanship.

DAUPHIN.
Be warn’d by me, then; they that ride so and ride not warily, fall into
foul bogs. I had rather have my horse to my mistress.

CONSTABLE.
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.

DAUPHIN.
I tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.

CONSTABLE.
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow to my mistress.

DAUPHIN.
“_Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au
bourbier_.” Thou mak’st use of anything.

CONSTABLE.
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so
little kin to the purpose.

RAMBURES.
My Lord Constable, the armour that I saw in your tent tonight, are
those stars or suns upon it?

CONSTABLE.
Stars, my lord.

DAUPHIN.
Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.

CONSTABLE.
And yet my sky shall not want.

DAUPHIN.
That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and ’twere more honour
some were away.

CONSTABLE.
Even as your horse bears your praises; who would trot as well, were
some of your brags dismounted.

DAUPHIN.
Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? I
will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English
faces.

CONSTABLE.
I will not say so, for fear I should be fac’d out of my way. But I
would it were morning; for I would fain be about the ears of the
English.

RAMBURES.
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?

CONSTABLE.
You must first go yourself to hazard, ere you have them.

DAUPHIN.
’Tis midnight; I’ll go arm myself.

 [_Exit._]

ORLEANS.
The Dauphin longs for morning.

RAMBURES.
He longs to eat the English.

CONSTABLE.
I think he will eat all he kills.

ORLEANS.
By the white hand of my lady, he’s a gallant prince.

CONSTABLE.
Swear by her foot that she may tread out the oath.

ORLEANS.
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.

CONSTABLE.
Doing is activity; and he will still be doing.

ORLEANS.
He never did harm, that I heard of.

CONSTABLE.
Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep that good name still.

ORLEANS.
I know him to be valiant.

CONSTABLE.
I was told that by one that knows him better than you.

ORLEANS.
What’s he?

CONSTABLE.
Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he car’d not who knew it.

ORLEANS.
He needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.

CONSTABLE.
By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. ’Tis
a hooded valour; and when it appears, it will bate.

ORLEANS.
“Ill will never said well.”

CONSTABLE.
I will cap that proverb with “There is flattery in friendship.”

ORLEANS.
And I will take up that with “Give the devil his due.”

CONSTABLE.
Well plac’d. There stands your friend for the devil; have at the very
eye of that proverb with “A pox of the devil.”

ORLEANS.
You are the better at proverbs, by how much “A fool’s bolt is soon
shot.”

CONSTABLE.
You have shot over.

ORLEANS.
’Tis not the first time you were overshot.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of
your tents.

CONSTABLE.
Who hath measur’d the ground?

MESSENGER.
The Lord Grandpré.

CONSTABLE.
A valiant and most expert gentleman. Would it were day! Alas, poor
Harry of England, he longs not for the dawning as we do.

ORLEANS.
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this King of England, to mope
with his fat-brain’d followers so far out of his knowledge!

CONSTABLE.
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.

ORLEANS.
That they lack; for if their heads had any intellectual armour, they
could never wear such heavy head-pieces.

RAMBURES.
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their mastiffs
are of unmatchable courage.

ORLEANS.
Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and
have their heads crush’d like rotten apples! You may as well say,
that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.

CONSTABLE.
Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious
and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives; and then,
give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like
wolves and fight like devils.

ORLEANS.
Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.

CONSTABLE.
Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to
fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we about it?

ORLEANS.
It is now two o’clock; but, let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp through the foul womb of night
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fix’d sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other’s watch;
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the other’s umber’d face;
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the night’s dull ear; and from the tents
The armourers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And the third hour of drowsy morning name.
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and over-lusty French
Do the low-rated English play at dice;
And chide the cripple tardy-gaited Night
Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The morning’s danger; and their gesture sad,
Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Presented them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruin’d band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry, “Praise and glory on his head!”
For forth he goes and visits all his host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him;
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour
Unto the weary and all-watched night,
But freshly looks, and over-bears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.
A largess universal like the sun
His liberal eye doth give to everyone,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
A little touch of Harry in the night.
And so our scene must to the battle fly,
Where—O for pity!—we shall much disgrace
With four or five most vile and ragged foils,
Right ill-dispos’d in brawl ridiculous,
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mock’ries be.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. The English camp at Agincourt.

 Enter King Henry, Bedford and Gloucester.

KING HENRY.
Gloucester, ’tis true that we are in great danger;
The greater therefore should our courage be.
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distil it out;
For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences,
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed,
And make a moral of the devil himself.

 Enter Erpingham.

Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Were better than a churlish turf of France.

ERPINGHAM.
Not so, my liege; this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say, “Now lie I like a king.”

KING HENRY.
’Tis good for men to love their present pains
Upon example; so the spirit is eased;
And when the mind is quick’ned, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move,
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp;
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my pavilion.

GLOUCESTER.
We shall, my liege.

ERPINGHAM.
Shall I attend your Grace?

KING HENRY.
No, my good knight;
Go with my brothers to my lords of England.
I and my bosom must debate a while,
And then I would no other company.

ERPINGHAM.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!

 [_Exeunt all but King._]

KING HENRY.
God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak’st cheerfully.

 Enter Pistol.

PISTOL.
_Qui vous là?_

KING HENRY.
A friend.

PISTOL.
Discuss unto me; art thou officer?
Or art thou base, common, and popular?

KING HENRY.
I am a gentleman of a company.

PISTOL.
Trail’st thou the puissant pike?

KING HENRY.
Even so. What are you?

PISTOL.
As good a gentleman as the Emperor.

KING HENRY.
Then you are a better than the King.

PISTOL.
The King’s a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame;
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?

KING HENRY.
Harry le Roy.

PISTOL.
Le Roy! a Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish crew?

KING HENRY.
No, I am a Welshman.

PISTOL.
Know’st thou Fluellen?

KING HENRY.
Yes.

PISTOL.
Tell him I’ll knock his leek about his pate
Upon Saint Davy’s day.

KING HENRY.
Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that
about yours.

PISTOL.
Art thou his friend?

KING HENRY.
And his kinsman too.

PISTOL.
The _fico_ for thee, then!

KING HENRY.
I thank you. God be with you!

PISTOL.
My name is Pistol call’d.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
It sorts well with your fierceness.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

GOWER.
Captain Fluellen!

FLUELLEN.
So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. It is the greatest
admiration in the universal world, when the true and anchient
prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the
pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I
warrant you, that there is no tiddle taddle nor pibble pabble in
Pompey’s camp. I warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the
wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety of it,
and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.

GOWER.
Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.

FLUELLEN.
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet,
think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a
prating coxcomb? In your own conscience, now?

GOWER.
I will speak lower.

FLUELLEN.
I pray you and beseech you that you will.

 [_Exeunt Gower and Fluellen._]

KING HENRY.
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valour in this Welshman.

 Enter three soldiers, John Bates, Alexander Court and Michael
 Williams.

COURT.
Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?

BATES.
I think it be; but we have no great cause to desire the approach of
day.

WILLIAMS.
We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see
the end of it. Who goes there?

KING HENRY.
A friend.

WILLIAMS.
Under what captain serve you?

KING HENRY.
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.

WILLIAMS.
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman. I pray you, what thinks
he of our estate?

KING HENRY.
Even as men wreck’d upon a sand, that look to be wash’d off the next
tide.

BATES.
He hath not told his thought to the King?

KING HENRY.
No; nor it is not meet he should. For though I speak it to you, I think
the King is but a man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to
me; the element shows to him as it doth to me; all his senses have but
human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears
but a man; and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet,
when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees
reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same
relish as ours are; yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any
appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.

BATES.
He may show what outward courage he will; but I believe, as cold a
night as ’tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck; and so I
would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.

KING HENRY.
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the King: I think he would
not wish himself anywhere but where he is.

BATES.
Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed,
and a many poor men’s lives saved.

KING HENRY.
I dare say you love him not so ill, to wish him here alone, howsoever
you speak this to feel other men’s minds. Methinks I could not die
anywhere so contented as in the King’s company, his cause being just
and his quarrel honourable.

WILLIAMS.
That’s more than we know.

BATES.
Ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know enough, if we know
we are the King’s subjects. If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the
King wipes the crime of it out of us.

WILLIAMS.
But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a heavy reckoning
to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopp’d off in a
battle, shall join together at the latter day and cry all, “We died at
such a place”; some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon
their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some
upon their children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die well that
die in a battle; for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when
blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be
a black matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were
against all proportion of subjection.

KING HENRY.
So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully
miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule,
should be imposed upon his father that sent him; or if a servant, under
his master’s command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by
robbers and die in many irreconcil’d iniquities, you may call the
business of the master the author of the servant’s damnation. But this
is not so. The King is not bound to answer the particular endings of
his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant; for
they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services.
Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come
to the arbitrement of swords, can try it out with all unspotted
soldiers. Some peradventure have on them the guilt of premeditated and
contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of
perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored
the gentle bosom of Peace with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men
have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can
outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is his beadle,
war is his vengeance; so that here men are punish’d for before-breach
of the King’s laws in now the King’s quarrel. Where they feared the
death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they
perish. Then if they die unprovided, no more is the King guilty of
their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the
which they are now visited. Every subject’s duty is the King’s; but
every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in the
wars do as every sick man in his bed, wash every mote out of his
conscience; and dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the
time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained; and in him
that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making God so free an
offer, He let him outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach
others how they should prepare.

WILLIAMS.
’Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head, the
King is not to answer for it.

BATES.
I do not desire he should answer for me; and yet I determine to fight
lustily for him.

KING HENRY.
I myself heard the King say he would not be ransom’d.

WILLIAMS.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully; but when our throats are
cut, he may be ransom’d, and we ne’er the wiser.

KING HENRY.
If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.

WILLIAMS.
You pay him then. That’s a perilous shot out of an elder-gun, that a
poor and a private displeasure can do against a monarch! You may as
well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a
peacock’s feather. You’ll never trust his word after! Come, ’tis a
foolish saying.

KING HENRY.
Your reproof is something too round. I should be angry with you, if the
time were convenient.

WILLIAMS.
Let it be a quarrel between us if you live.

KING HENRY.
I embrace it.

WILLIAMS.
How shall I know thee again?

KING HENRY.
Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my bonnet; then, if
ever thou dar’st acknowledge it, I will make it my quarrel.

WILLIAMS.
Here’s my glove; give me another of thine.

KING HENRY.
There.

WILLIAMS.
This will I also wear in my cap. If ever thou come to me and say, after
tomorrow, “This is my glove,” by this hand I will take thee a box on
the ear.

KING HENRY.
If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.

WILLIAMS.
Thou dar’st as well be hang’d.

KING HENRY.
Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the King’s company.

WILLIAMS.
Keep thy word; fare thee well.

BATES.
Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We have French quarrels
enough, if you could tell how to reckon.

KING HENRY.
Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat
us, for they bear them on their shoulders; but it is no English treason
to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the King himself will be a clipper.

 [_Exeunt soldiers._]

 Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls,
Our debts, our careful wives,
Our children, and our sins lay on the King!
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing! What infinite heart’s ease
Must kings neglect, that private men enjoy!
And what have kings, that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony?
What kind of god art thou, that suffer’st more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents? What are thy comings in?
O Ceremony, show me but thy worth!
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy being fear’d
Than they in fearing.
What drink’st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
But poison’d flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure!
Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou command’st the beggar’s knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That play’st so subtly with a king’s repose;
I am a king that find thee, and I know
’Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running ’fore the King,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world,
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous Ceremony,—
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave,
Who with a body fill’d and vacant mind
Gets him to rest, cramm’d with distressful bread,
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn,
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year,
With profitable labour, to his grave:
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the country’s peace,
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.

 Enter Erpingham.

ERPINGHAM.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you.

KING HENRY.
Good old knight,
Collect them all together at my tent.
I’ll be before thee.

ERPINGHAM.
I shall do’t, my lord.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
O God of battles! steel my soldiers’ hearts.
Possess them not with fear. Take from them now
The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
O, not today, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown!
I Richard’s body have interred new,
And on it have bestow’d more contrite tears
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their wither’d hands hold up
Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will I do;
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
My liege!

KING HENRY.
My brother Gloucester’s voice? Ay;
I know thy errand, I will go with thee.
The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The French camp.

 Enter the Dauphin, Orleans, Rambures and others.

ORLEANS.
The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords!

DAUPHIN.
_Monte à cheval!_ My horse, _varlet! laquais_, ha!

ORLEANS.
O brave spirit!

DAUPHIN.
_Via, les eaux et terre!_

ORLEANS.
_Rien puis? L’air et feu?_

DAUPHIN.
_Cieux_, cousin Orleans.

 Enter Constable.

Now, my Lord Constable!

CONSTABLE.
Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh!

DAUPHIN.
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!

RAMBURES.
What, will you have them weep our horses’ blood?
How shall we, then, behold their natural tears?

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The English are embattl’d, you French peers.

CONSTABLE.
To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse!
Do but behold yon poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands;
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,
That our French gallants shall today draw out,
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,
The vapour of our valour will o’erturn them.
’Tis positive ’gainst all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
Though we upon this mountain’s basis by
Took stand for idle speculation,
But that our honours must not. What’s to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall crouch down in fear and yield.

 Enter Grandpré.

GRANDPRÉ.
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favouredly become the morning field.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar’d host,
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps;
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks
With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, drooping the hides and hips,
The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit
Lies foul with chew’d grass, still, and motionless;
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly o’er them, all impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle,
In life so lifeless as it shows itself.

CONSTABLE.
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.

DAUPHIN.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits
And give their fasting horses provender,
And after fight with them?

CONSTABLE.
I stay but for my guard; on to the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The English camp.

 Enter Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, Erpingham, with all his host:
 Salisbury and Westmorland.

GLOUCESTER.
Where is the King?

BEDFORD.
The King himself is rode to view their battle.

WESTMORLAND.
Of fighting men they have full three-score thousand.

EXETER.
There’s five to one; besides, they all are fresh.

SALISBURY.
God’s arm strike with us! ’tis a fearful odds.
God be wi’ you, princes all; I’ll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu!

BEDFORD.
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee!

EXETER.
Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly today!
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art fram’d of the firm truth of valour.

 [_Exit Salisbury._]

BEDFORD.
He is as full of valour as of kindness,
Princely in both.

 Enter the King.

WESTMORLAND.
O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work today!

KING.
What’s he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmorland? No, my fair cousin.
If we are mark’d to die, we are enough
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
God’s will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires;
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.
God’s peace! I would not lose so great an honour
As one man more, methinks, would share from me
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmorland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart. His passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse.
We would not die in that man’s company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is call’d the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.”
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,
And say, “These wounds I had on Crispian’s day.”
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he’ll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford, and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered,
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers.
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now abed
Shall think themselves accurs’d they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.

 Enter Salisbury.

SALISBURY.
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.

KING HENRY.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.

WESTMORLAND.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!

KING HENRY.
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?

WESTMORLAND.
God’s will! my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!

KING HENRY.
Why, now thou hast unwish’d five thousand men,
Which likes me better than to wish us one.
You know your places. God be with you all!

 Tucket. Enter Montjoy.

MONTJOY.
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow;
For certainly thou art so near the gulf,
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind
Thy followers of repentance; that their souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
Must lie and fester.

KING HENRY.
Who hath sent thee now?

MONTJOY.
The Constable of France.

KING HENRY.
I pray thee, bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the lion’s skin
While the beast liv’d, was kill’d with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves, upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this day’s work;
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be fam’d; for there the sun shall greet them,
And draw their honours reeking up to heaven;
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
Mark then abounding valour in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullet’s grazing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
We are but warriors for the working-day.
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch’d
With rainy marching in the painful field;
There’s not a piece of feather in our host—
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly—
And time hath worn us into slovenry;
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
They’ll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats o’er the French soldiers’ heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this—
As, if God please, they shall,—my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labour.
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald.
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
Which if they have as I will leave ’em them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.

MONTJOY.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well;
Thou never shalt hear herald any more.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
I fear thou’lt once more come again for ransom.

 Enter York.

YORK.
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
The leading of the vaward.

KING HENRY.
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away;
And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The field of battle.

 Alarum. Excursions. Enter Pistol, French Soldier and Boy.

PISTOL.
Yield, cur!

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Je pense que vous êtes le gentilhomme de bonne qualité._

PISTOL.
_Qualité? Caleno custore me!_
Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O Seigneur Dieu!_

PISTOL.
O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman.
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark:
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
Except, O signieur, thou do give to me
Egregious ransom.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O, prenez miséricorde! Ayez pitié de moi!_

PISTOL.
Moy shall not serve; I will have forty moys,
Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
In drops of crimson blood.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Est-il impossible d’échapper la force de ton bras?_

PISTOL.
Brass, cur!
Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,
Offer’st me brass?

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O pardonnez-moi!_

PISTOL.
Say’st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?
Come hither, boy; ask me this slave in French
What is his name.

BOY.
_Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?_

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Monsieur le Fer._

BOY.
He says his name is Master Fer.

PISTOL.
Master Fer! I’ll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him.
Discuss the same in French unto him.

BOY.
I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.

PISTOL.
Bid him prepare; for I will cut his throat.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Que dit-il, monsieur?_

BOY.
_Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat
ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge._

PISTOL.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O, je vous supplie, pour l’amour de Dieu, me pardonner! Je suis le
gentilhomme de bonne maison; gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux
cents écus._

PISTOL.
What are his words?

BOY.
He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a good house; and
for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.

PISTOL.
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I
The crowns will take.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Petit monsieur, que dit-il?_

BOY.
_Encore qu’il est contre son jurement de pardonner aucun prisonnier;
néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, il est content à
vous donner la liberté, le franchisement._

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remerciements; et je m’estime
heureux que je suis tombé entre les mains d’un chevalier, je pense, le
plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué seigneur d’Angleterre._

PISTOL.
Expound unto me, boy.

BOY.
He gives you upon his knees, a thousand thanks; and he esteems himself
happy that he hath fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most
brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy _seigneur_ of England.

PISTOL.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me!

BOY.
_Suivez-vous le grand capitaine._

 [_Exeunt Pistol and French Soldier._]

I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart; but the
saying is true, “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph
and Nym had ten times more valour than this roaring devil i’ the old
play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger; and they
are both hang’d; and so would this be, if he durst steal anything
adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our
camp. The French might have a good prey of us, if he knew of it; for
there is none to guard it but boys.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE V. Another part of the field.

 Enter Constable, Orleans, Bourbon, Dauphin and Rambures.

CONSTABLE.
_O diable!_

ORLEANS.
_O Seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!_

DAUPHIN.
_Mort de ma vie!_ all is confounded, all!
Reproach and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our plumes.

 [_A short alarum._]

_O méchante Fortune!_ Do not run away.

CONSTABLE.
Why, all our ranks are broke.

DAUPHIN.
O perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves,
Be these the wretches that we play’d at dice for?

ORLEANS.
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?

BOURBON.
Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let’s die in honour! Once more back again!
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand,
Like a base pandar, hold the chamber door
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.

CONSTABLE.
Disorder, that hath spoil’d us, friend us now!
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

ORLEANS.
We are enough yet living in the field
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.

BOURBON.
The devil take order now! I’ll to the throng.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another part of the field.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry and his train, with prisoners.

KING HENRY.
Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen.
But all’s not done; yet keep the French the field.

EXETER.
The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting.
From helmet to the spur all blood he was.

EXETER.
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,
Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,
Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first died; and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the beard; kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud, “Tarry, my cousin Suffolk!
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven;
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry.”
Upon these words I came and cheer’d him up.
He smil’d me in the face, raught me his hand,
And, with a feeble gripe, says, “Dear my lord,
Commend my service to my sovereign.”
So did he turn and over Suffolk’s neck
He threw his wounded arm and kiss’d his lips;
And so espous’d to death, with blood he seal’d
A testament of noble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner of it forc’d
Those waters from me which I would have stopp’d;
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears.

KING HENRY.
I blame you not;
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.

 [_Alarum._]

But hark! what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforc’d their scatter’d men.
Then every soldier kill his prisoners;
Give the word through.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another part of the field.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

FLUELLEN.
Kill the poys and the luggage! ’Tis expressly against the law of arms.
’Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offer’t; in
your conscience, now, is it not?

GOWER.
’Tis certain there’s not a boy left alive; and the cowardly rascals
that ran from the battle ha’ done this slaughter. Besides, they have
burned and carried away all that was in the King’s tent; wherefore the
King, most worthily, hath caus’d every soldier to cut his prisoner’s
throat. O, ’tis a gallant king!

FLUELLEN.
Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What call you the town’s
name where Alexander the Pig was born?

GOWER.
Alexander the Great.

FLUELLEN.
Why, I pray you, is not pig great? The pig, or the great, or the
mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save
the phrase is a little variations.

GOWER.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was called
Philip of Macedon, as I take it.

FLUELLEN.
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I tell you, Captain,
if you look in the maps of the ’orld, I warrant you sall find, in the
comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look
you, is both alike. There is a river in Macedon; and there is also
moreover a river at Monmouth; it is call’d Wye at Monmouth; but it is
out of my prains what is the name of the other river; but ’tis all one,
’tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in
both. If you mark Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is
come after it indifferent well; for there is figures in all things.
Alexander, God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and
his wraths, and his cholers, and his moods, and his displeasures, and
his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains,
did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend,
Cleitus.

GOWER.
Our King is not like him in that. He never kill’d any of his friends.

FLUELLEN.
It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth,
ere it is made and finished. I speak but in the figures and comparisons
of it. As Alexander kill’d his friend Cleitus, being in his ales and
his cups; so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his good
judgements, turn’d away the fat knight with the great belly doublet. He
was full of jests, and gipes, and knaveries, and mocks; I have forgot
his name.

GOWER.
Sir John Falstaff.

FLUELLEN.
That is he. I’ll tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.

GOWER.
Here comes his Majesty.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry and forces; Warwick, Gloucester, Exeter with
 prisoners. Flourish.

KING HENRY.
I was not angry since I came to France
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald;
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field; they do offend our sight.
If they’ll do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skirr away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we’ll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.

 Enter Montjoy.

EXETER.
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.

GLOUCESTER.
His eyes are humbler than they us’d to be.

KING HENRY.
How now! what means this, herald? Know’st thou not
That I have fin’d these bones of mine for ransom?
Com’st thou again for ransom?

MONTJOY.
No, great King;
I come to thee for charitable license,
That we may wander o’er this bloody field
To book our dead, and then to bury them;
To sort our nobles from our common men.
For many of our princes—woe the while!—
Lie drown’d and soak’d in mercenary blood;
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great King,
To view the field in safety, and dispose
Of their dead bodies!

KING HENRY.
I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no;
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop o’er the field.

MONTJOY.
The day is yours.

KING HENRY.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle call’d that stands hard by?

MONTJOY.
They call it Agincourt.

KING HENRY.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

FLUELLEN.
Your grandfather of famous memory, an’t please your Majesty, and your
great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have read in the
chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.

KING HENRY.
They did, Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties is rememb’red of it, the
Welshmen did good service in garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks
in their Monmouth caps; which, your Majesty know, to this hour is an
honourable badge of the service; and I do believe your Majesty takes no
scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy’s day.

KING HENRY.
I wear it for a memorable honour;
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.

FLUELLEN.
All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh plood out of your
pody, I can tell you that. Got pless it and preserve it, as long as it
pleases His grace, and His majesty too!

KING HENRY.
Thanks, good my countryman.

FLUELLEN.
By Jeshu, I am your Majesty’s countryman, I care not who know it. I
will confess it to all the ’orld. I need not be asham’d of your
Majesty, praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an honest man.

KING HENRY.
God keep me so!

 Enter Williams.

Our heralds go with him;
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.

 [_Exeunt Heralds with Montjoy._]

EXETER.
Soldier, you must come to the King.

KING HENRY.
Soldier, why wear’st thou that glove in thy cap?

WILLIAMS.
An’t please your Majesty, ’tis the gage of one that I should fight
withal, if he be alive.

KING HENRY.
An Englishman?

WILLIAMS.
An’t please your Majesty, a rascal that swagger’d with me last night;
who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, I have sworn to
take him a box o’ the ear; or if I can see my glove in his cap, which
he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, I will strike it
out soundly.

KING HENRY.
What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?

FLUELLEN.
He is a craven and a villain else, an’t please your Majesty, in my
conscience.

KING HENRY.
It may be his enemy is a gentlemen of great sort, quite from the answer
of his degree.

FLUELLEN.
Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as Lucifier and
Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his
vow and his oath. If he be perjur’d, see you now, his reputation is as
arrant a villain and a Jacksauce, as ever his black shoe trod upon
God’s ground and His earth, in my conscience, la!

KING HENRY.
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet’st the fellow.

WILLIAMS.
So I will, my liege, as I live.

KING HENRY.
Who serv’st thou under?

WILLIAMS.
Under Captain Gower, my liege.

FLUELLEN.
Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the
wars.

KING HENRY.
Call him hither to me, soldier.

WILLIAMS.
I will, my liege.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
Here, Fluellen; wear thou this favour for me and stick it in thy cap.
When Alençon and myself were down together, I pluck’d this glove from
his helm. If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alençon, and an
enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou
dost me love.

FLUELLEN.
Your Grace does me as great honours as can be desir’d in the hearts of
his subjects. I would fain see the man, that has but two legs, that
shall find himself aggrief’d at this glove; that is all. But I would
fain see it once, an please God of His grace that I might see.

KING HENRY.
Know’st thou Gower?

FLUELLEN.
He is my dear friend, an please you.

KING HENRY.
Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.

FLUELLEN.
I will fetch him.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
My Lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The glove which I have given him for a favour
May haply purchase him a box o’ the ear.
It is the soldier’s; I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it;
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And, touch’d with choler, hot as gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Before King Henry’s pavilion.

 Enter Gower and Williams.

WILLIAMS.
I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.

 Enter Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
God’s will and his pleasure, captain, I beseech you now, come apace to
the King. There is more good toward you peradventure than is in your
knowledge to dream of.

WILLIAMS.
Sir, know you this glove?

FLUELLEN.
Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.

WILLIAMS.
I know this; and thus I challenge it.

 [_Strikes him._]

FLUELLEN.
’Sblood! an arrant traitor as any is in the universal world, or in
France, or in England!

GOWER.
How now, sir! you villain!

WILLIAMS.
Do you think I’ll be forsworn?

FLUELLEN.
Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason his payment into plows,
I warrant you.

WILLIAMS.
I am no traitor.

FLUELLEN.
That’s a lie in thy throat. I charge you in his Majesty’s name,
apprehend him; he’s a friend of the Duke Alençon’s.

 Enter Warwick and Gloucester.

WARWICK.
How now, how now! what’s the matter?

FLUELLEN.
My lord of Warwick, here is—praised be God for it!—a most contagious
treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer’s day.
Here is his Majesty.

 Enter King Henry and Exeter.

KING HENRY.
How now! what’s the matter?

FLUELLEN.
My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your Grace, has
struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of
Alençon.

WILLIAMS.
My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it; and he that I
gave it to in change promis’d to wear it in his cap. I promis’d to
strike him, if he did. I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I
have been as good as my word.

FLUELLEN.
Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesty’s manhood, what an arrant,
rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. I hope your Majesty is pear me
testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that this is the glove of
Alençon that your Majesty is give me; in your conscience, now?

KING HENRY.
Give me thy glove, soldier. Look, here is the fellow of it.
’Twas I, indeed, thou promisedst to strike;
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.

FLUELLEN.
An it please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any
martial law in the world.

KING HENRY.
How canst thou make me satisfaction?

WILLIAMS.
All offences, my lord, come from the heart. Never came any from mine
that might offend your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.

WILLIAMS.
Your Majesty came not like yourself. You appear’d to me but as a common
man; witness the night, your garments, your lowliness; and what your
Highness suffer’d under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own
fault and not mine; for had you been as I took you for, I made no
offence; therefore, I beseech your Highness, pardon me.

KING HENRY.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow;
And wear it for an honour in thy cap
Till I do challenge it. Give him his crowns;
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.

FLUELLEN.
By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly.
Hold, there is twelve pence for you; and I pray you to serve God, and
keep you out of prawls, and prabbles, and quarrels, and dissensions,
and, I warrant you, it is the better for you.

WILLIAMS.
I will none of your money.

FLUELLEN.
It is with a good will; I can tell you, it will serve you to mend your
shoes. Come, wherefore should you be so pashful? Your shoes is not so
good. ’Tis a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.

 Enter an English Herald.

KING HENRY.
Now, herald, are the dead numb’red?

HERALD.
Here is the number of the slaught’red French.

KING HENRY.
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?

EXETER.
Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Boucicault:
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.

KING HENRY.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain; of princes, in this number,
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty-six; added to these,
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubb’d knights;
So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;
The master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dauphin,
John, Duke of Alençon, Anthony, Duke of Brabant,
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward, Duke of Bar; of lusty earls,
Grandpré and Roussi, Fauconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship of death!
Where is the number of our English dead?

 [_Herald gives him another paper._]

Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire;
None else of name; and of all other men
But five and twenty.—O God, thy arm was here;
And not to us, but to thy arm alone,
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss
On one part and on the other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine!

EXETER.
’Tis wonderful!

KING HENRY.
Come, go we in procession to the village;
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this or take that praise from God
Which is His only.

FLUELLEN.
Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how many is kill’d?

KING HENRY.
Yes, Captain; but with this acknowledgment,
That God fought for us.

FLUELLEN.
Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.

KING HENRY.
Do we all holy rites.
Let there be sung _Non nobis_ and _Te Deum_,
The dead with charity enclos’d in clay,
And then to Calais; and to England then,
Where ne’er from France arriv’d more happy men.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,
That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Calais; grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth’d sea,
Which like a mighty whiffler ’fore the King
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath,
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city. He forbids it,
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent
Quite from himself to God. But now behold,
In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens!
The mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of th’ antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in;
As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit,
To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him;
As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of England’s stay at home,
The Emperor’s coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them;—and omit
All the occurrences, whatever chanc’d,
Till Harry’s back-return again to France.
There must we bring him; and myself have play’d
The interim, by rememb’ring you ’tis past.
Then brook abridgement, and your eyes advance
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. France. The English camp.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

GOWER.
Nay, that’s right; but why wear you your leek today?
Saint Davy’s day is past.

FLUELLEN.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. I will
tell you ass my friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, scald, beggarly,
lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and yourself and all the world
know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is
come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me
eat my leek. It was in a place where I could not breed no contention
with him; but I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him
once again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.

 Enter Pistol.

GOWER.
Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.

FLUELLEN.
’Tis no matter for his swellings nor his turkey-cocks. God pless you,
Anchient Pistol! you scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you!

PISTOL.
Ha! art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan,
To have me fold up Parca’s fatal web?
Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.

FLUELLEN.
I peseech you heartily, scurfy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my
requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. Because, look
you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and
your digestions does not agree with it, I would desire you to eat it.

PISTOL.
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.

FLUELLEN.
There is one goat for you. [_Strikes him._] Will you be so good, scald
knave, as eat it?

PISTOL.
Base Trojan, thou shalt die.

FLUELLEN.
You say very true, scald knave, when God’s will is. I will desire you
to live in the mean time, and eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce
for it. [_Strikes him._] You call’d me yesterday mountain-squire; but I
will make you today a squire of low degree. I pray you, fall to; if you
can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.

GOWER.
Enough, captain; you have astonish’d him.

FLUELLEN.
I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his
pate four days. Bite, I pray you; it is good for your green wound and
your ploody coxcomb.

PISTOL.
Must I bite?

FLUELLEN.
Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question too, and
ambiguities.

PISTOL.
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge. I eat and eat, I swear—

FLUELLEN.
Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more sauce to your leek? There is
not enough leek to swear by.

PISTOL.
Quiet thy cudgel; thou dost see I eat.

FLUELLEN.
Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. Nay, pray you, throw none
away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions
to see leeks hereafter, I pray you, mock at ’em; that is all.

PISTOL.
Good.

FLUELLEN.
Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.

PISTOL.
Me a groat!

FLUELLEN.
Yes, verily and in truth you shall take it; or I have another leek in
my pocket, which you shall eat.

PISTOL.
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.

FLUELLEN.
If I owe you anything I will pay you in cudgels. You shall be a
woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi’ you, and keep
you, and heal your pate.

 [_Exit._]

PISTOL.
All hell shall stir for this.

GOWER.
Go, go; you are a couterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock at an
ancient tradition, begun upon an honourable respect, and worn as a
memorable trophy of predeceased valour, and dare not avouch in your
deeds any of your words? I have seen you gleeking and galling at this
gentleman twice or thrice. You thought, because he could not speak
English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English
cudgel. You find it otherwise; and henceforth let a Welsh correction
teach you a good English condition. Fare ye well.

 [_Exit._]

PISTOL.
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I, that my Doll is dead i’ the spital
Of malady of France;
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Old I do wax; and from my weary limbs
Honour is cudgell’d. Well, bawd I’ll turn,
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
To England will I steal, and there I’ll steal;
And patches will I get unto these cudgell’d scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. France. A royal palace.

 Enter at one door, King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, Warwick, Gloucester,
 Westmorland, Clarence, Huntingdon and other Lords. At another, Queen
 Isabel, the French King, the Princess Katharine, Alice, and other
 Ladies; the Duke of Burgundy and other French.

KING HENRY.
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!
Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katharine;
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contriv’d,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy;
And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!

FRENCH KING.
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England; fairly met!
So are you, princes English, every one.

QUEEN ISABEL.
So happy be the issue, brother England,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting
As we are now glad to behold your eyes;
Your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French that met them in their bent
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks.
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Have lost their quality; and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.

KING HENRY.
To cry amen to that, thus we appear.

QUEEN ISABEL.
You English princes all, I do salute you.

BURGUNDY.
My duty to you both, on equal love,
Great Kings of France and England! That I have labour’d,
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavours,
To bring your most imperial Majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my office hath so far prevail’d
That, face to face and royal eye to eye,
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me
If I demand, before this royal view,
What rub or what impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chas’d,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in it own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach’d,
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disorder’d twigs; her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery;
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
Losing both beauty and utility;
And as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country;
But grow like savages,—as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood,—
To swearing and stern looks, diffus’d attire,
And everything that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favour
You are assembled; and my speech entreats
That I may know the let, why gentle Peace
Should not expel these inconveniences
And bless us with her former qualities.

KING HENRY.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to the imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands;
Whose tenours and particular effects
You have enschedul’d briefly in your hands.

BURGUNDY.
The King hath heard them; to the which as yet
There is no answer made.

KING HENRY.
Well, then, the peace,
Which you before so urg’d, lies in his answer.

FRENCH KING.
I have but with a cursorary eye
O’erglanc’d the articles. Pleaseth your Grace
To appoint some of your council presently
To sit with us once more, with better heed
To re-survey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.

KING HENRY.
Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King;
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Anything in or out of our demands,
And we’ll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes, or stay here with us?

QUEEN ISABEL.
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.
Haply a woman’s voice may do some good,
When articles too nicely urg’d be stood on.

KING HENRY.
Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us:
She is our capital demand, compris’d
Within the fore-rank of our articles.

QUEEN ISABEL.
She hath good leave.

 [_Exeunt all except Henry, Katharine and Alice._]

KING HENRY.
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
Such as will enter at a lady’s ear
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?

KATHARINE.
Your Majesty shall mock me; I cannot speak your England.

KING HENRY.
O fair Katharine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I
will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue.
Do you like me, Kate?

KATHARINE.
_Pardonnez-moi_, I cannot tell wat is “like me.”

KING HENRY.
An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.

KATHARINE.
_Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable à les anges?_

ALICE.
_Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grâce, ainsi dit-il._

KING HENRY.
I said so, dear Katharine; and I must not blush to affirm it.

KATHARINE.
_O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de tromperies._

KING HENRY.
What says she, fair one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?

ALICE.
_Oui_, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dat is de
Princess.

KING HENRY.
The Princess is the better Englishwoman. I’ faith, Kate, my wooing is
fit for thy understanding. I am glad thou canst speak no better
English; for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king
that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my crown. I know no
ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, “I love you”; then if
you urge me farther than to say, “Do you in faith?” I wear out my suit.
Give me your answer; i’ faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How
say you, lady?

KATHARINE.
_Sauf votre honneur_, me understand well.

KING HENRY.
Marry, if you would put me to verses, or to dance for your sake, Kate,
why you undid me; for the one, I have neither words nor measure, and
for the other I have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure
in strength. If I could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my
saddle with my armour on my back, under the correction of bragging be
it spoken, I should quickly leap into a wife. Or if I might buffet for
my love, or bound my horse for her favours, I could lay on like a
butcher and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off. But, before God, Kate,
I cannot look greenly, nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I have no cunning
in protestation; only downright oaths, which I never use till urg’d,
nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of this temper,
Kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass
for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. I speak
to thee plain soldier. If thou canst love me for this, take me; if not,
to say to thee that I shall die, is true; but for thy love, by the
Lord, no; yet I love thee too. And while thou liv’st, dear Kate, take a
fellow of plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee
right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other places; for these
fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies’
favours, they do always reason themselves out again. What! a speaker is
but a prater: a rhyme is but a ballad. A good leg will fall; a straight
back will stoop; a black beard will turn white; a curl’d pate will grow
bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax hollow; but a good
heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon; or rather the sun and not the
moon; for it shines bright and never changes, but keeps his course
truly. If thou would have such a one, take me; and take me, take a
soldier; take a soldier, take a king. And what say’st thou then to my
love? Speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.

KATHARINE.
Is it possible dat I should love de enemy of France?

KING HENRY.
No; it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate; but,
in loving me, you should love the friend of France; for I love France
so well that I will not part with a village of it, I will have it all
mine; and, Kate, when France is mine and I am yours, then yours is
France and you are mine.

KATHARINE.
I cannot tell wat is dat.

KING HENRY.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French; which I am sure will hang upon my
tongue like a new-married wife about her husband’s neck, hardly to be
shook off. _Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand vous avez le
possession de moi_,—let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my
speed!—_donc votre est France, et vous êtes mienne._ It is as easy for
me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French. I
shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.

KATHARINE.
_Sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il est meilleur que
l’anglais lequel je parle._

KING HENRY.
No, faith, is’t not, Kate; but thy speaking of my tongue, and I thine,
most truly-falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate,
dost thou understand thus much English: canst thou love me?

KATHARINE.
I cannot tell.

KING HENRY.
Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I’ll ask them. Come, I know thou
lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you’ll
question this gentlewoman about me; and I know, Kate, you will to her
dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. But, good
Kate, mock me mercifully; the rather, gentle princess, because I love
thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a saving faith
within me tells me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must
therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou and I,
between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half
English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the
beard? Shall we not? What say’st thou, my fair flower-de-luce?

KATHARINE.
I do not know dat.

KING HENRY.
No; ’tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. Do but now promise,
Kate, you will endeavour for your French part of such a boy; and for my
English moiety, take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer you,
_la plus belle Katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?_

KATHARINE.
Your Majestee ’ave _fausse_ French enough to deceive de most _sage
demoiselle_ dat is _en France_.

KING HENRY.
Now, fie upon my false French! By mine honour, in true English, I love
thee, Kate; by which honour I dare not swear thou lovest me; yet my
blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and
untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew my father’s ambition! He
was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was I created with
a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that, when I come to woo
ladies, I fright them. But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better
I shall appear. My comfort is, that old age, that ill layer up of
beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou hast me, if thou hast
me, at the worst; and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and
better; and therefore tell me, most fair Katharine, will you have me?
Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of your heart with the
looks of an empress; take me by the hand, and say, Harry of England, I
am thine; which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but I
will tell thee aloud, England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is
thine, and Henry Plantagenet is thine; who, though I speak it before
his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the
best king of good fellows. Come, your answer in broken music; for thy
voice is music and thy English broken; therefore, queen of all,
Katharine, break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt thou have me?

KATHARINE.
Dat is as it shall please _le roi mon père_.

KING HENRY.
Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.

KATHARINE.
Den it sall also content me.

KING HENRY.
Upon that I kiss your hand, and call you my queen.

KATHARINE.
_Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne veux point que
vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main d’une—Notre
Seigneur!—indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon
très-puissant seigneur._

KING HENRY.
Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.

KATHARINE.
_Les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leurs noces, il
n’est pas la coutume de France._

KING HENRY.
Madame my interpreter, what says she?

ALICE.
Dat it is not be de fashion _pour les_ ladies of France,—I cannot tell
wat is _baiser en_ Anglish.

KING HENRY.
To kiss.

ALICE.
Your Majestee _entend_ bettre _que moi_.

KING HENRY.
It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are
married, would she say?

ALICE.
_Oui, vraiment._

KING HENRY.
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot
be confined within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are the
makers of manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our places stops
the mouth of all find-faults, as I will do yours, for upholding the
nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss; therefore, patiently
and yielding. [_Kissing her._] You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate;
there is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of
the French council; and they should sooner persuade Harry of England
than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.

 Enter the French Power and the English Lords.

BURGUNDY.
God save your Majesty! My royal cousin, teach you our princess English?

KING HENRY.
I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly I love her; and
that is good English.

BURGUNDY.
Is she not apt?

KING HENRY.
Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth; so that,
having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot
so conjure up the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in his
true likeness.

BURGUNDY.
Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for that. If you
would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in her
in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you blame her
then, being a maid yet ros’d over with the virgin crimson of modesty,
if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing
self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.

KING HENRY.
Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.

BURGUNDY.
They are then excus’d, my lord, when they see not what they do.

KING HENRY.
Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.

BURGUNDY.
I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know
my meaning; for maids, well summer’d and warm kept, are like flies at
Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their eyes; and then they
will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.

KING HENRY.
This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer; and so I shall catch
the fly, your cousin, in the latter end, and she must be blind too.

BURGUNDY.
As love is, my lord, before it loves.

KING HENRY.
It is so; and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who
cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands
in my way.

FRENCH KING.
Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turn’d into a
maid; for they are all girdled with maiden walls that no war hath
entered.

KING HENRY.
Shall Kate be my wife?

FRENCH KING.
So please you.

KING HENRY.
I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her; so the
maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my
will.

FRENCH KING.
We have consented to all terms of reason.

KING HENRY.
Is’t so, my lords of England?

WESTMORLAND.
The king hath granted every article;
His daughter first, and then in sequel all,
According to their firm proposed natures.

EXETER.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this: where your Majesty demands, that
the King of France, having any occasion to write for matter of grant,
shall name your Highness in this form and with this addition, in
French, _Notre très-cher fils Henri, Roi d’Angleterre, Héritier de
France_; and thus in Latin, _Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus,
rex Angliae et haeres Franciae._

FRENCH KING.
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied
But our request shall make me let it pass.

KING HENRY.
I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one article rank with the rest;
And thereupon give me your daughter.

FRENCH KING.
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other’s happiness,
May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction
Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.

LORDS.
Amen!

KING HENRY.
Now, welcome, Kate; and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.

 [_Flourish._]

QUEEN ISABEL.
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there ’twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,
That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate league;
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!

ALL.
Amen!

KING HENRY.
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy, we’ll take your oath,
And all the peers’, for surety of our leagues,
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me;
And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be!

 [_Sennet. Exeunt._]

EPILOGUE.

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,
Our bending author hath pursu’d the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England. Fortune made his sword,
By which the world’s best garden he achieved,
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown’d King
Of France and England, did this king succeed;
Whose state so many had the managing,
That they lost France and made his England bleed:
Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.

 [_Exit._]




THE FIRST PART OF HENRY THE SIXTH




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Westminster Abbey
 Scene II. France. Before Orleans
 Scene III. London. Before the Tower
 Scene IV. Orleans
 Scene V. Before Orleans
 Scene VI. Orleans

 ACT II
 SCENE I. Before Orleans
 SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town
 SCENE III. Auvergne. The Countess’s castle
 SCENE IV. London. The Temple Garden
 SCENE V. The Tower of London

 ACT III
 SCENE I. London. The Parliament House
 SCENE II. France. Before Rouen
 SCENE III. The plains near Rouen
 SCENE IV. Paris. The Palace

 ACT IV
 SCENE I. Paris. The Palace
 SCENE II. Before Bordeaux
 SCENE III. Plains in Gascony
 SCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony
 SCENE V. The English camp near Bordeaux
 SCENE VI. A field of battle
 SCENE VII. Another part of the field

 ACT V
 SCENE I. London. The Palace
 SCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou
 SCENE III. Before Angiers
 SCENE IV. Camp of the Duke of York in Anjou
 SCENE V. London. The royal palace




Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY the Sixth
DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, uncle to the King, and Protector
DUKE OF BEDFORD, uncle to the King, and Regent of France
DUKE OF EXETER, (Thomas Beaufort), great-uncle to the King
BISHOP OF WINCHESTER (Henry Beaufort), great-uncle to the King,
afterwards Cardinal
DUKE OF SOMERSET (John Beaufort)
RICHARD PLANTAGENET, son of Richard, late Earl of Cambridge, afterwards
Duke of York
EARL OF WARWICK
EARL OF SALISBURY
EARL OF SUFFOLK
LORD TALBOT, afterwards Earl of Shrewsbury
JOHN TALBOT, his son
Edmund MORTIMER, Earl of March
SIR JOHN FASTOLF
SIR WILLIAM LUCY
SIR WILLIAM GLANSDALE
SIR THOMAS GARGRAVE
MAYOR of London
WOODVILLE, Lieutenant of the Tower
VERNON, of the White-Rose or York faction
BASSET, of the Red-Rose or Lancaster faction
A LAWYER
Mortimer’s JAILERS

CHARLES, Dauphin, and afterwards King of France
REIGNIER, Duke of Anjou, and titular King of Naples
DUKE OF BURGUNDY
DUKE OF ALENÇON
BASTARD OF ORLEANS
Governor of Paris
MASTER GUNNER of Orleans and BOY, his son
General of the French forces in Bordeaux
A French Sergeant.
A Porter
An old Shepherd, father to Joan la Pucelle

MARGARET, daughter to Reignier, afterwards married to King Henry
COUNTESS OF AUVERGNE
JOAN LA PUCELLE, commonly called Joan of Arc

Lords, Warders of the Tower, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, Messengers,
and Attendants.

Fiends appearing to Joan la Pucelle

SCENE: Partly in England and partly in France




ACT I

SCENE I. Westminster Abbey.


Dead March. Enter the funeral of King Henry the Fifth, attended on by
the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France; the Duke of Gloucester,
Protector; the Duke of Exeter, the Earl of Warwick, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Duke of Somerset with Heralds, &c.

BEDFORD.
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
That have consented unto Henry’s death:
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
England ne’er lost a king of so much worth.

GLOUCESTER.
England ne’er had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command;
His brandish’d sword did blind men with his beams;
His arms spread wider than a dragon’s wings;
His sparkling eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? His deeds exceed all speech.
He ne’er lift up his hand but conquered.

EXETER.
We mourn in black; why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead and never shall revive.
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And Death’s dishonourable victory
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
What! Shall we curse the planets of mishap
That plotted thus our glory’s overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
Conjurers and sorcerers, that, afraid of him,
By magic verses have contriv’d his end?

WINCHESTER.
He was a king bless’d of the King of kings;
Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought:
The Church’s prayers made him so prosperous.

GLOUCESTER.
The Church! Where is it? Had not churchmen pray’d,
His thread of life had not so soon decay’d.
None do you like but an effeminate prince,
Whom like a school-boy you may overawe.

WINCHESTER.
Gloucester, whate’er we like, thou art Protector,
And lookest to command the Prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe
More than God or religious churchmen may.

GLOUCESTER.
Name not religion, for thou lov’st the flesh,
And ne’er throughout the year to church thou go’st,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.

BEDFORD.
Cease, cease these jars, and rest your minds in peace;
Let’s to the altar; heralds, wait on us.
Instead of gold, we’ll offer up our arms,
Since arms avail not, now that Henry’s dead.
Posterity, await for wretched years,
When at their mothers’ moist eyes babes shall suck,
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
And none but women left to wail the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens.
A far more glorious star thy soul will make
Than Julius Caesar or bright—

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My honourable lords, health to you all!
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
Guienne, Champaigne, Rheims, Rouen, Orleans,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.

BEDFORD.
What say’st thou, man, before dead Henry’s corse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.

GLOUCESTER.
Is Paris lost? Is Rouen yielded up?
If Henry were recall’d to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.

EXETER.
How were they lost? What treachery was us’d?

MESSENGER.
No treachery, but want of men and money.
Amongst the soldiers this is muttered:
That here you maintain several factions
And whilst a field should be dispatch’d and fought,
You are disputing of your generals.
One would have lingering wars with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words peace may be obtain’d.
Awake, awake, English nobility!
Let not sloth dim your honours new-begot.
Cropp’d are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
Of England’s coat one half is cut away.

[_He exits._]

EXETER.
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.

BEDFORD.
Me they concern; Regent I am of France.
Give me my steeled coat. I’ll fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
To weep their intermissive miseries.

Enter to them another Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty towns of no import.
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king in Rheims;
The Bastard of Orleans with him is join’d;
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part;
The Duke of Alençon flieth to his side.

[_He exits._]

EXETER.
The Dauphin crowned king! All fly to him!
O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?

GLOUCESTER.
We will not fly but to our enemies’ throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack, I’ll fight it out.

BEDFORD.
Gloucester, why doubt’st thou of my forwardness?
An army have I muster’d in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is overrun.

Enter another Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry’s hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.

WINCHESTER.
What! Wherein Talbot overcame, is’t so?

MESSENGER.
O no, wherein Lord Talbot was o’erthrown.
The circumstance I’ll tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,
Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop,
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed and set upon.
No leisure had he to enrank his men;
He wanted pikes to set before his archers;
Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck’d out of hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
More than three hours the fight continued;
Where valiant Talbot, above human thought,
Enacted wonders with his sword and lance.
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him;
Here, there, and everywhere, enrag’d he slew.
The French exclaim’d the devil was in arms;
All the whole army stood agaz’d on him.
His soldiers, spying his undaunted spirit,
“A Talbot! a Talbot!” cried out amain,
And rush’d into the bowels of the battle.
Here had the conquest fully been seal’d up
If Sir John Fastolf had not play’d the coward.
He, being in the vaward, plac’d behind
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wrack and massacre.
Enclosed were they with their enemies.
A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin’s grace,
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
Whom all France, with their chief assembled strength,
Durst not presume to look once in the face.

BEDFORD.
Is Talbot slain? Then I will slay myself,
For living idly here, in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foemen is betray’d.

MESSENGER.
O no, he lives, but is took prisoner,
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerford;
Most of the rest slaughter’d or took likewise.

BEDFORD.
His ransom there is none but I shall pay.
I’ll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne;
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend;
Four of their lords I’ll change for one of ours.
Farewell, my masters; to my task will I;
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make
To keep our great Saint George’s feast withal.
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.

MESSENGER.
So you had need; for Orleans is besieg’d
The English army is grown weak and faint;
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.

[_He exits._]

EXETER.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,
Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.

BEDFORD.
I do remember it, and here take my leave
To go about my preparation.

[_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
I’ll to the Tower with all the haste I can
To view th’ artillery and munition;
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.

[_Exit._]

EXETER.
To Eltham will I, where the young King is,
Being ordain’d his special governor;
And for his safety there I’ll best devise.

[_Exit._]

WINCHESTER.
Each hath his place and function to attend.
I am left out; for me nothing remains.
But long I will not be Jack out of office.
The King from Eltham I intend to steal,
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. France. Before Orleans

Sound a Flourish. Enter  Charles, Alençon and Reignier, marching with
Drum and Soldiers.

CHARLES.
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side;
Now we are victors; upon us he smiles.
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie near Orleans,
Otherwhiles the famish’d English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.

ALENÇON.
They want their porridge and their fat bull beeves.
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.

REIGNIER.
Let’s raise the siege. Why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear.
Remaineth none but mad-brain’d Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting spend his gall;
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.

CHARLES.
Sound, sound alarum! We will rush on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
When he sees me go back one foot or fly.

[_Exeunt._]

Here alarum; they are beaten back by the English, with great loss.
Re-enter Charles, Alençon and Reignier.

CHARLES.
Who ever saw the like? What men have I!
Dogs, cowards, dastards! I would ne’er have fled
But that they left me ’midst my enemies.

REIGNIER.
Salisbury is a desperate homicide;
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.

ALENÇON.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records,
England all Olivers and Rowlands bred
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean raw-bon’d rascals! Who would e’er suppose
They had such courage and audacity?

CHARLES.
Let’s leave this town; for they are hare-brain’d slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.
Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
The walls they’ll tear down than forsake the siege.

REIGNIER.
I think by some odd gimmers or device
Their arms are set like clocks, still to strike on;
Else ne’er could they hold out so as they do.
By my consent, we’ll even let them alone.

ALENÇON.
Be it so.

Enter the Bastard of Orleans.

BASTARD.
Where’s the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.

CHARLES.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.

BASTARD.
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall’d.
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismay’d, for succour is at hand.
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
Which, by a vision sent to her from heaven
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome.
What’s past and what’s to come she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
For they are certain and unfallible.

CHARLES.
Go, call her in.

[_Exit Bastard._]

But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place;
Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern.
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.

Re-enter the Bastard of Orleans, with Joan la Pucelle.

REIGNIER.
Fair maid, is ’t thou wilt do these wondrous feats?

PUCELLE.
Reignier is ’t thou that thinkest to beguile me?
Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind;
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed, there’s nothing hid from me.
In private will I talk with thee apart.
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.

REIGNIER.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.

PUCELLE.
Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd’s daughter,
My wit untrain’d in any kind of art.
Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to sun’s parching heat display’d my cheeks,
God’s mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a vision full of majesty
Will’d me to leave my base vocation
And free my country from calamity.
Her aid she promised and assured success.
In complete glory she reveal’d herself;
And, whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear rays which she infused on me
That beauty am I blest with which you may see.
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
And I will answer unpremeditated.
My courage try by combat, if thou dar’st,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
Resolve on this; thou shalt be fortunate
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.

CHARLES.
Thou hast astonish’d me with thy high terms.
Only this proof I’ll of thy valour make:
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true;
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.

PUCELLE.
I am prepared. Here is my keen-edg’d sword,
Deck’d with five flower-de-luces on each side,
The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharine’s churchyard,
Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.

CHARLES.
Then come, o’ God’s name; I fear no woman.

PUCELLE.
And while I live, I’ll ne’er fly from a man.

[_Here they fight, and Joan la Pucelle overcomes._]

CHARLES.
Stay, stay thy hands; thou art an Amazon,
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.

PUCELLE.
Christ’s Mother helps me, else I were too weak.

CHARLES.
Whoe’er helps thee, ’tis thou that must help me.
Impatiently I burn with thy desire;
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be.
’Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.

PUCELLE.
I must not yield to any rites of love,
For my profession’s sacred from above.
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.

CHARLES.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.

REIGNIER.
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.

ALENÇON.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock;
Else ne’er could he so long protract his speech.

REIGNIER.
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?

ALENÇON.
He may mean more than we poor men do know.
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.

REIGNIER.
My lord, where are you? What devise you on?
Shall we give over Orleans, or no?

PUCELLE.
Why, no, I say. Distrustful recreants!
Fight till the last gasp; I will be your guard.

CHARLES.
What she says I’ll confirm. We’ll fight it out.

PUCELLE.
Assign’d am I to be the English scourge.
This night the siege assuredly I’ll raise.
Expect Saint Martin’s summer, halcyon’s days,
Since I have entered into these wars.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself
Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.
With Henry’s death the English circle ends;
Dispersed are the glories it included.
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

CHARLES.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philip’s daughters, were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, fall’n down on the earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?

ALENÇON.
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.

REIGNIER.
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours;
Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.

CHARLES.
Presently we’ll try. Come, let’s away about it.
No prophet will I trust if she prove false.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. London. Before the Tower.

Enter the Duke of Gloucester with his Servingmen in blue coats.

GLOUCESTER.
I am come to survey the Tower this day.
Since Henry’s death, I fear, there is conveyance.
Where be these warders that they wait not here?
Open the gates; ’tis Gloucester that calls.

FIRST WARDER.
[_Within_.] Who’s there that knocks so imperiously?

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.

SECOND WARDER.
[_Within_.] Whoe’er he be, you may not be let in.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Villains, answer you so the Lord Protector?

FIRST WARDER.
[_Within_.] The Lord protect him, so we answer him.
We do no otherwise than we are will’d.

GLOUCESTER.
Who willed you? Or whose will stands but mine?
There’s none Protector of the realm but I.
Break up the gates, I’ll be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?

[_Gloucester’s men rush at the Tower gates, and Woodville, the
Lieutenant, speaks within._]

WOODVILLE.
What noise is this? What traitors have we here?

GLOUCESTER.
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates; here’s Gloucester that would enter.

WOODVILLE.
Have patience, noble Duke; I may not open;
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids.
From him I have express commandment
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.

GLOUCESTER.
Faint-hearted Woodville, prizest him ’fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne’er could brook?
Thou art no friend to God or to the King.
Open the gates, or I’ll shut thee out shortly.

SERVINGMEN.
Open the gates unto the Lord Protector,
Or we’ll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.

Enter to the Protector at the Tower gates Winchester and his men in
tawny coats.

WINCHESTER.
How now, ambitious Humphrey! What means this?

GLOUCESTER.
Peel’d priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?

WINCHESTER.
I do, thou most usurping proditor,
And not Protector, of the King or realm.

GLOUCESTER.
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrived’st to murder our dead lord;
Thou that giv’st whores indulgences to sin:
I’ll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal’s hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.

WINCHESTER.
Nay, stand thou back; I will not budge a foot.
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.

GLOUCESTER.
I will not slay thee, but I’ll drive thee back.
Thy scarlet robes, as a child’s bearing-cloth,
I’ll use to carry thee out of this place.

WINCHESTER.
Do what thou dar’st, I beard thee to thy face.

GLOUCESTER.
What, am I dared and bearded to my face?
Draw, men, for all this privileged place.
Blue coats to tawny coats. Priest, beware your beard;
I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly.
Under my feet I’ll stamp thy cardinal’s hat;
In spite of Pope or dignities of church,
Here by the cheeks I’ll drag thee up and down.

WINCHESTER.
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the Pope.

GLOUCESTER.
Winchester goose, I cry, “a rope, a rope!”
Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?
Thee I’ll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep’s array.
Out, tawny coats! Out, scarlet hypocrite!

Here Gloucester’s men beat out the Cardinal’s men, and enter in the
hurly-burly the Mayor of London and his Officers.

MAYOR.
Fie, lords, that you, being supreme magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!

GLOUCESTER.
Peace, Mayor! Thou know’st little of my wrongs.
Here’s Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
Hath here distrain’d the Tower to his use.

WINCHESTER.
Here’s Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
One that still motions war and never peace,
O’ercharging your free purses with large fines;
That seeks to overthrow religion,
Because he is Protector of the realm,
And would have armour here out of the Tower,
To crown himself king and suppress the Prince.

GLOUCESTER.
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.

[_Here they skirmish again._]

MAYOR.
Nought rests for me in this tumultuous strife
But to make open proclamation.
Come, officer, as loud as e’er thou canst, cry.

OFFICER.
All manner of men assembled here in arms this day against God’s peace
and the King’s, we charge and command you, in his Highness’ name, to
repair to your several dwelling-places; and not to wear, handle, or use
any sword, weapon, or dagger, henceforward, upon pain of death.

GLOUCESTER.
Cardinal, I’ll be no breaker of the law;
But we shall meet and break our minds at large.

WINCHESTER.
Gloucester, we will meet, to thy cost, be sure;
Thy heart-blood I will have for this day’s work.

MAYOR.
I’ll call for clubs, if you will not away.
This Cardinal’s more haughty than the devil.

GLOUCESTER.
Mayor, farewell. Thou dost but what thou mayst.

WINCHESTER.
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
For I intend to have it ere long.

[_Exeunt, severally, Gloucester and Winchester with their Servingmen._]

MAYOR.
See the coast clear’d, and then we will depart.
Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!
I myself fight not once in forty year.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Orleans.

Enter, on the walls, a Master Gunner and his Boy.

MASTER GUNNER.
Sirrah, thou know’st how Orleans is besieged,
And how the English have the suburbs won.

BOY.
Father, I know; and oft have shot at them,
Howe’er unfortunate I miss’d my aim.

MASTER GUNNER.
But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me.
Chief master-gunner am I of this town;
Something I must do to procure me grace.
The Prince’s espials have informed me
How the English, in the suburbs close intrench’d,
Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
And thence discover how with most advantage
They may vex us with shot or with assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A piece of ordnance ’gainst it I have placed
And even these three days have I watch’d,
If I could see them.
Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer.
If thou spy’st any, run and bring me word;
And thou shalt find me at the Governor’s.

[_Exit._]

BOY.
Father, I warrant you; take you no care;
I’ll never trouble you if I may spy them.

[_Exit._]

Enter, on the turrets, Salisbury and Talbot, Sir William Glansdale, Sir
Thomas Gargrave and others.

SALISBURY.
Talbot, my life, my joy, again return’d!
How wert thou handled, being prisoner?
Or by what means got’st thou to be releas’d?
Discourse, I prithee, on this turret’s top.

TALBOT.
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Call’d the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
But with a baser man of arms by far
Once in contempt they would have barter’d me,
Which I disdaining scorn’d, and craved death
Rather than I would be so vile-esteem’d.
In fine, redeem’d I was as I desired.
But O, the treacherous Fastolf wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute
If I now had him brought into my power.

SALISBURY.
Yet tell’st thou not how thou wert entertain’d.

TALBOT.
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
In open market-place produced they me
To be a public spectacle to all.
Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
The scarecrow that affrights our children so.
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
And with my nails digg’d stones out of the ground
To hurl at the beholders of my shame.
My grisly countenance made others fly;
None durst come near for fear of sudden death.
In iron walls they deem’d me not secure;
So great fear of my name ’mongst them were spread
That they supposed I could rend bars of steel
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant.
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had,
That walk’d about me every minute while;
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.

Enter the Boy with a linstock.

SALISBURY.
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently.
Now it is supper-time in Orleans.
Here, through this grate, I count each one
And view the Frenchmen how they fortify.
Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee.
Sir Thomas Gargrave and Sir William Glansdale,
Let me have your express opinions
Where is best place to make our battery next.

GARGRAVE.
I think, at the north gate, for there stand lords.

GLANSDALE.
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.

TALBOT.
For aught I see, this city must be famish’d,
Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.

Here they shoot, and Salisbury and Gargrave fall down.

SALISBURY.
O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!

GARGRAVE.
O Lord, have mercy on me, woeful man!

TALBOT.
What chance is this that suddenly hath cross’d us?
Speak, Salisbury; at least, if thou canst speak!
How far’st thou, mirror of all martial men?
One of thy eyes and thy cheek’s side struck off!
Accursed tower, accursed fatal hand
That hath contrived this woeful tragedy!
In thirteen battles Salisbury o’ercame;
Henry the Fifth he first train’d to the wars;
Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,
His sword did ne’er leave striking in the field.
Yet liv’st thou, Salisbury? Though thy speech doth fail,
One eye thou hast to look to heaven for grace.
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!
Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot; nay, look up to him.
Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it.

[_Exeunt some with the body of Gargrave._]

Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort,
Thou shalt not die whiles—
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me,
As who should say “When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French.”
Plantagenet, I will; and, like thee, Nero,
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn.
Wretched shall France be only in thy name.

[_Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens._]

What stir is this? What tumult’s in the heavens?
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, my lord, the French have gather’d head.
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join’d,
A holy prophetess new risen up,
Is come with a great power to raise the siege.

[_Here Salisbury lifteth himself up and groans._]

TALBOT.
Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan;
It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, I’ll be a Salisbury to you.
Pucelle or puzel, dolphin or dogfish,
Your hearts I’ll stamp out with my horse’s heels
And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey we Salisbury into his tent,
And then we’ll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.

[_Alarum. Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Before Orleans.

Here an alarum again, and Talbot pursueth the Dauphin and driveth him;
then enter Joan la Pucelle, driving Englishmen before her, and exit
after them. Then re-enter Talbot.

TALBOT.
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them.
A woman clad in armour chaseth them.

Enter La Pucelle.

Here, here she comes. I’ll have a bout with thee;
Devil or devil’s dam, I’ll conjure thee.
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,
And straightway give thy soul to him thou serv’st.

PUCELLE.
Come, come, ’tis only I that must disgrace thee.

[_Here they fight._]

TALBOT.
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
My breast I’ll burst with straining of my courage,
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder,
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.

[_They fight again._]

PUCELLE.
Talbot, farewell; thy hour is not yet come.
I must go victual Orleans forthwith.

[_A short alarum. Then enter the town with soldiers._]

O’ertake me, if thou canst. I scorn thy strength.
Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men;
Help Salisbury to make his testament.
This day is ours, as many more shall be.

[_Exit._]

TALBOT.
My thoughts are whirled like a potter’s wheel;
I know not where I am, nor what I do.
A witch by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists.
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
Are from their hives and houses driven away.
They call’d us for our fierceness, English dogs;
Now like to whelps we crying run away.

[_A short alarum._]

Hark, countrymen, either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of England’s coat;
Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions’ stead.
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.

[_Alarum. Here another skirmish._]

It will not be! Retire into your trenches.
You all consented unto Salisbury’s death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Pucelle is enter’d into Orleans,
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
O, would I were to die with Salisbury!
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.

[_Exit Talbot. Alarum; retreat._]

SCENE VI. Orleans.

Flourish. Enter on the walls La Pucelle, Charles, Reignier, Alençon and
Soldiers.

PUCELLE.
Advance our waving colours on the walls;
Rescued is Orleans from the English.
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath perform’d her word.

CHARLES.
Divinest creature, Astraea’s daughter,
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis’ gardens
That one day bloom’d and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess!
Recover’d is the town of Orleans.
More blessed hap did ne’er befall our state.

REIGNIER.
Why ring not bells aloud throughout the town?
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
And feast and banquet in the open streets
To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.

ALENÇON.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy
When they shall hear how we have play’d the men.

CHARLES.
’Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
For which I will divide my crown with her,
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier pyramis to her I’ll rear
Than Rhodope’s of Memphis ever was;
In memory of her when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich-jewel’d coffer of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France’s saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally
After this golden day of victory.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Before Orleans.


Enter a Sergeant of a band, with two Sentinels.

SERGEANT.
Sirs, take your places and be vigilant.
If any noise or soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.

FIRST SENTINEL.
Sergeant, you shall.

[_Exit Sergeant._]

Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constrain’d to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.

Enter Talbot, Bedford, Burgundy, and forces, with scaling-ladders.

TALBOT.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach the regions of Artois,
Walloon and Picardy are friends to us,
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted.
Embrace we then this opportunity,
As fitting best to quittance their deceit
Contriv’d by art and baleful sorcery.

BEDFORD.
Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arm’s fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell!

BURGUNDY.
Traitors have never other company.
But what’s that Pucelle whom they term so pure?

TALBOT.
A maid, they say.

BEDFORD.
A maid! And be so martial!

BURGUNDY.
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
If underneath the standard of the French
She carry armour as she hath begun.

TALBOT.
Well, let them practice and converse with spirits.
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.

BEDFORD.
Ascend, brave Talbot; we will follow thee.

TALBOT.
Not all together. Better far, I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways,
That if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.

BEDFORD.
Agreed. I’ll to yond corner.

BURGUNDY.
And I to this.

TALBOT.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty I am bound to both.

SENTINEL.
Arm! Arm! The enemy doth make assault!

[_Cry: “St George,” “A Talbot!”_]

The French leap over the walls in their shirts. Enter several ways the 
Bastard of Orleans, Alençon and Reignier, half ready and half unready.

ALENÇON.
How now, my lords? What, all unready so?

BASTARD.
Unready! Ay, and glad we ’scap’d so well.

REIGNIER.
’Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.

ALENÇON.
Of all exploits since first I follow’d arms
Ne’er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.

BASTARD.
I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.

REIGNIER.
If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him.

ALENÇON.
Here cometh Charles. I marvel how he sped.

Enter Charles and La Pucelle.

BASTARD.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.

CHARLES.
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain,
That now our loss might be ten times so much?

PUCELLE.
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you have my power alike?
Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improvident soldiers, had your watch been good,
This sudden mischief never could have fall’n.

CHARLES.
Duke of Alençon, this was your default,
That, being captain of the watch tonight,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.

ALENÇON.
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.

BASTARD.
Mine was secure.

REIGNIER.
And so was mine, my lord.

CHARLES.
And for myself, most part of all this night,
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
I was employ’d in passing to and fro
About relieving of the sentinels.
Then how or which way should they first break in?

PUCELLE.
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
How or which way; ’tis sure they found some place
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
And now there rests no other shift but this:
To gather our soldiers, scattered and dispersed,
And lay new platforms to endamage them.

Alarum. Enter an  English Soldier, crying “A Talbot! A Talbot!” They
fly, leaving their clothes behind.

SOLDIER.
I’ll be so bold to take what they have left.
The cry of “Talbot” serves me for a sword;
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
Using no other weapon but his name.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town.

Enter Talbot, Bedford, Burgundy, a Captain and others.

BEDFORD.
The day begins to break, and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantle over-veil’d the earth.
Here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit.

[_Retreat sounded._]

TALBOT.
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the market-place,
The middle centre of this cursed town.

Dead March. Enter with the body of Salisbury.

Now have I paid my vow unto his soul;
For every drop of blood was drawn from him
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
And that hereafter ages may behold
What ruin happen’d in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest temple I’ll erect
A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr’d;
Upon the which, that everyone may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death
And what a terror he had been to France.

[_Exit Funeral._]

But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dauphin’s grace,
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his false confederates.

BEDFORD.
’Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Rous’d on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
Leap o’er the walls for refuge in the field.

BURGUNDY.
Myself, as far as I could well discern
For smoke and dusky vapors of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We’ll follow them with all the power we have.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
All hail, my lords! Which of this princely train
Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
So much applauded through the realm of France?

TALBOT.
Here is the Talbot. Who would speak with him?

MESSENGER.
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man
Whose glory fills the world with loud report.

BURGUNDY.
Is it even so? Nay, then I see our wars
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
When ladies crave to be encounter’d with.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.

TALBOT.
Ne’er trust me then; for when a world of men
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a woman’s kindness over-ruled.
And therefore tell her I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.
Will not your honours bear me company?

BEDFORD.
No, truly, it is more than manners will;
And I have heard it said, unbidden guests
Are often welcomest when they are gone.

TALBOT.
Well then, alone, since there’s no remedy,
I mean to prove this lady’s courtesy.
Come hither, Captain. [_Whispers_.] You perceive my mind?

CAPTAIN.
I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Auvergne. The Countess’s castle.

Enter the Countess and her Porter.

COUNTESS.
Porter, remember what I gave in charge;
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.

PORTER.
Madam, I will.

[_Exit._]

COUNTESS.
The plot is laid. If all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus’ death.
Great is the rumour of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account.
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,
To give their censure of these rare reports.

Enter Messenger and Talbot.

MESSENGER.
Madam, according as your ladyship desired,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.

COUNTESS.
And he is welcome. What, is this the man?

MESSENGER.
Madam, it is.

COUNTESS.
Is this the scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much fear’d abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulous and false.
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect,
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.

TALBOT.
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you;
But since your ladyship is not at leisure,
I’ll sort some other time to visit you.

COUNTESS.
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.

MESSENGER.
Stay, my Lord Talbot, for my lady craves
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.

TALBOT.
Marry, for that she’s in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbot’s here.

Enter Porter with keys.

COUNTESS.
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.

TALBOT.
Prisoner! To whom?

COUNTESS.
To me, blood-thirsty lord;
And for that cause I train’d thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs.
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens,
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.

TALBOT.
Ha, ha, ha!

COUNTESS.
Laughest thou, wretch? Thy mirth shall turn to moan.

TALBOT.
I laugh to see your ladyship so fond
To think that you have aught but Talbot’s shadow
Whereon to practice your severity.

COUNTESS.
Why, art not thou the man?

TALBOT.
I am indeed.

COUNTESS.
Then have I substance too.

TALBOT.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself.
You are deceived, my substance is not here;
For what you see is but the smallest part
And least proportion of humanity.
I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch
Your roof were not sufficient to contain ’t.

COUNTESS.
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;
He will be here, and yet he is not here.
How can these contrarieties agree?

TALBOT.
That will I show you presently.

Winds his horn. Drums strike up; a peal of ordnance. Enter Soldiers.

How say you, madam? Are you now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength,
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities and subverts your towns,
And in a moment makes them desolate.

COUNTESS.
Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse.
I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited,
And more than may be gather’d by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.

TALBOT.
Be not dismay’d, fair lady, nor misconster
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done hath not offended me;
Nor other satisfaction do I crave
But only, with your patience, that we may
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have,
For soldiers’ stomachs always serve them well.

COUNTESS.
With all my heart, and think me honoured
To feast so great a warrior in my house.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. The Temple Garden.

Enter the Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and Warwick; Richard Plantagenet,
Vernon and another Lawyer.

PLANTAGENET.
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?

SUFFOLK.
Within the Temple Hall we were too loud;
The garden here is more convenient.

PLANTAGENET.
Then say at once if I maintain’d the truth;
Or else was wrangling Somerset in th’ error?

SUFFOLK.
Faith, I have been a truant in the law
And never yet could frame my will to it;
And therefore frame the law unto my will.

SOMERSET.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.

WARWICK.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth;
Between two blades, which bears the better temper;
Between two horses, which doth bear him best;
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye;
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement;
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.

PLANTAGENET.
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance!
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.

SOMERSET.
And on my side it is so well apparell’d,
So clear, so shining and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind man’s eye.

PLANTAGENET.
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-born gentleman
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.

SOMERSET.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.

WARWICK.
I love no colours, and without all colour
Of base insinuating flattery
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.

SUFFOLK.
I pluck this red rose with young Somerset,
And say withal I think he held the right.

VERNON.
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
The fewest roses are cropp’d from the tree
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.

SOMERSET.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.

PLANTAGENET.
And I.

VERNON.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case,
I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.

SOMERSET.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
And fall on my side so against your will.

VERNON.
If I, my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt
And keep me on the side where still I am.

SOMERSET.
Well, well, come on, who else?

LAWYER.
Unless my study and my books be false,

[_To Somerset._]

The argument you held was wrong in law;
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.

PLANTAGENET.
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?

SOMERSET.
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.

PLANTAGENET.
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses;
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.

SOMERSET.
No, Plantagenet,
’Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.

PLANTAGENET.
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?

SOMERSET.
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?

PLANTAGENET.
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth;
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.

SOMERSET.
Well, I’ll find friends to wear my bleeding roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.

PLANTAGENET.
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.

SUFFOLK.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.

PLANTAGENET.
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.

SUFFOLK.
I’ll turn my part thereof into thy throat.

SOMERSET.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.

WARWICK.
Now, by God’s will, thou wrong’st him, Somerset;
His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward King of England.
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?

PLANTAGENET.
He bears him on the place’s privilege,
Or durst not for his craven heart, say thus.

SOMERSET.
By Him that made me, I’ll maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late king’s days?
And, by his treason, stand’st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood;
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.

PLANTAGENET.
My father was attached, not attainted,
Condemn’d to die for treason, but no traitor;
And that I’ll prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripen’d to my will.
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
I’ll note you in my book of memory,
To scourge you for this apprehension.
Look to it well, and say you are well warn’d.

SOMERSET.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still;
And know us by these colours for thy foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.

PLANTAGENET.
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever and my faction wear,
Until it wither with me to my grave,
Or flourish to the height of my degree.

SUFFOLK.
Go forward, and be chok’d with thy ambition!
And so farewell until I meet thee next.

[_Exit._]

SOMERSET.
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.

[_Exit._]

PLANTAGENET.
How I am braved and must perforce endure it!

WARWICK.
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be wiped out in the next parliament
Call’d for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole,
Will I upon thy party wear this rose.
And here I prophesy: this brawl today,
Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall send between the Red Rose and the White
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.

PLANTAGENET.
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.

VERNON.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.

LAWYER.
And so will I.

PLANTAGENET.
Thanks, gentlemen.
Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The Tower of London.

Enter Mortimer, brought in a chair, and Jailers.

MORTIMER.
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new haled from the rack,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment;
And these gray locks, the pursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent;
Weak shoulders, overborne with burdening grief,
And pithless arms, like to a wither’d vine
That droops his sapless branches to the ground.
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?

FIRST JAILER.
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come.
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber,
And answer was return’d that he will come.

MORTIMER.
Enough. My soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor gentleman, his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had;
And even since then hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of honour and inheritance.
But now the arbitrator of despairs,
Just Death, kind umpire of men’s miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence.
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.

Enter Richard Plantagenet.

FIRST JAILER.
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.

MORTIMER.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?

PLANTAGENET.
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.

MORTIMER.
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp.
O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
And now declare, sweet stem from York’s great stock,
Why didst thou say of late thou wert despised?

PLANTAGENET.
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm,
And, in that ease, I’ll tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew ’twixt Somerset and me;
Among which terms he used his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my father’s death;
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father’s sake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet,
And for alliance’ sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.

MORTIMER.
That cause, fair nephew, that imprison’d me
And hath detain’d me all my flowering youth
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument of his decease.

PLANTAGENET.
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.

MORTIMER.
I will, if that my fading breath permit
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward’s son,
The first-begotten and the lawful heir
Of Edward king, the third of that descent;
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
Endeavour’d my advancement to the throne.
The reason moved these warlike lords to this
Was, for that—young King Richard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body—
I was the next by birth and parentage;
For by my mother I derived am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, third son
To King Edward the Third; whereas he
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
But mark: as in this haughty great attempt
They labored to plant the rightful heir,
I lost my liberty and they their lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge then, derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Again, in pity of my hard distress.
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And have install’d me in the diadem.
But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the title rested, were suppress’d.

PLANTAGENET.
Of which, my lord, your honour is the last.

MORTIMER.
True; and thou seest that I no issue have,
And that my fainting words do warrant death.
Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather.
But yet be wary in thy studious care.

PLANTAGENET.
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me.
But yet methinks, my father’s execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.

MORTIMER.
With silence, nephew, be thou politic;
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
And like a mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy uncle is removing hence,
As princes do their courts when they are cloy’d
With long continuance in a settled place.

PLANTAGENET.
O uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your age!

MORTIMER.
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good;
Only give order for my funeral.
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes,
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!

[_Dies._]

PLANTAGENET.
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,
And like a hermit overpass’d thy days.
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast;
And what I do imagine, let that rest.
Keepers, convey him hence; and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.

[_Exeunt Jailers, bearing out the body of Mortimer._]

Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort.
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offer’d to my house,
I doubt not but with honour to redress;
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make mine ill th’ advantage of my good.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. London. The Parliament House.


Flourish. Enter King, Exeter, Gloucester, the Bishop of Winchester,
Richard Plantagenet, Warwick, and Somerset, Suffolk, and others.
Gloucester offers to put up a bill. Winchester snatches it, tears it.

WINCHESTER.
Com’st thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devised,
Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse
Or aught intend’st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly;
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.

GLOUCESTER.
Presumptuous priest, this place commands my patience,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour’d me.
Think not, although in writing I preferr’d
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.
No, prelate; such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiferous, and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer,
Froward by nature, enemy to peace;
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
A man of thy profession and degree;
And for thy treachery, what’s more manifest,
In that thou laid’st a trap to take my life,
As well at London Bridge as at the Tower?
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts are sifted,
The King, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.

WINCHESTER.
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do, except I be provoked?
No, my good lords, it is not that offends;
It is not that that hath incensed the Duke.
It is because no one should sway but he,
No one but he should be about the King;
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good—

GLOUCESTER.
As good!
Thou bastard of my grandfather!

WINCHESTER.
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another’s throne?

GLOUCESTER.
Am I not Protector, saucy priest?

WINCHESTER.
And am not I a prelate of the church?

GLOUCESTER.
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps,
And useth it to patronage his theft.

WINCHESTER.
Unreverent Gloucester!

GLOUCESTER.
Thou art reverend
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.

WINCHESTER.
Rome shall remedy this.

GLOUCESTER.
Roam thither, then.

WARWICK.
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.

SOMERSET.
Ay, so the bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religious,
And know the office that belongs to such.

WARWICK.
Methinks his lordship should be humbler;
It fitteth not a prelate so to plead.

SOMERSET.
Yes, when his holy state is touch’d so near.

WARWICK.
State holy or unhallow’d, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?

PLANTAGENET.
[_Aside_.] Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Lest it be said, “Speak, sirrah, when you should;
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?”
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.

KING HENRY.
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
The special watchmen of our English weal,
I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity.
O, what a scandal is it to our crown
That two such noble peers as ye should jar!
Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.

[_A noise within, “Down with the tawny-coats!”._]

What tumult’s this?

WARWICK.
An uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Bishop’s men.

[_A noise again, “Stones! stones!”_]

Enter Mayor.

MAYOR.
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the city of London, pity us!
The Bishop and the Duke of Gloucester’s men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Have fill’d their pockets full of pebble stones
And, banding themselves in contrary parts,
Do pelt so fast at one another’s pate
That many have their giddy brains knock’d out;
Our windows are broke down in every street,
And we for fear compell’d to shut our shops.

Enter Servingmen in skirmish with bloody pates.

KING HENRY.
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.
Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Nay, if we be forbidden stones, we’ll fall to it with our teeth.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.

[_Skirmish again._]

GLOUCESTER.
You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
And set this unaccustom’d fight aside.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
My lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Just and upright, and, for your royal birth,
Inferior to none but to his Majesty;
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaughter’d by thy foes.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Ay, and the very parings of our nails
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.

[_Begin again._]

GLOUCESTER.
Stay, stay, I say!
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.

KING HENRY.
O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears, and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a peace
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?

WARWICK.
Yield, my Lord Protector; yield, Winchester;
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief and what murder too,
Hath been enacted through your enmity;
Then be at peace, except ye thirst for blood.

WINCHESTER.
He shall submit, or I will never yield.

GLOUCESTER.
Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
Or I would see his heart out, ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.

WARWICK.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Hath banish’d moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear.
Why look you still so stern and tragical?

GLOUCESTER.
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.

KING HENRY.
Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
That malice was a great and grievous sin;
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
But prove a chief offender in the same?

WARWICK.
Sweet King! The bishop hath a kindly gird.
For shame, my Lord of Winchester, relent!
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?

WINCHESTER.
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.

GLOUCESTER.
[_Aside_.] Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.—
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers,
So help me God, as I dissemble not!

WINCHESTER.
[_Aside_.] So help me God, as I intend it not!

KING HENRY.
O loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,
How joyful am I made by this contract!
Away, my masters, trouble us no more,
But join in friendship, as your lords have done.

FIRST SERVINGMAN.
Content. I’ll to the surgeon’s.

SECOND SERVINGMAN.
And so will I.

THIRD SERVINGMAN.
And I will see what physic the tavern affords.

[_Exeunt Servingmen, Mayor, &c._]

WARWICK.
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your Majesty.

GLOUCESTER.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick. For, sweet prince,
An if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right,
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
And those occasions, uncle, were of force;
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
That Richard be restored to his blood.

WARWICK.
Let Richard be restored to his blood;
So shall his father’s wrongs be recompensed.

WINCHESTER.
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.

KING HENRY.
If Richard will be true, not that alone
But all the whole inheritance I give
That doth belong unto the house of York,
From whence you spring by lineal descent.

PLANTAGENET.
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.

KING HENRY.
Stoop then and set your knee against my foot;
And in reguerdon of that duty done
I girt thee with the valiant sword of York.
Rise, Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created princely Duke of York.

PLANTAGENET.
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your Majesty!

ALL.
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York!

SOMERSET.
[_Aside_.] Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!

GLOUCESTER.
Now will it best avail your Majesty
To cross the seas and to be crown’d in France.
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.

KING HENRY.
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes;
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.

GLOUCESTER.
Your ships already are in readiness.

[_Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but Exeter._]

EXETER.
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love,
And will at last break out into a flame;
As festered members rot but by degree
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe:
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all,
And Henry born at Windsor lose all,
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
His days may finish ere that hapless time.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. France. Before Rouen.

Enter La Pucelle with four Soldiers with sacks upon their backs.

PUCELLE.
These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,
Through which our policy must make a breach.
Take heed, be wary how you place your words;
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
That come to gather money for their corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
I’ll by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Rouen;
Therefore we’ll knock. [_Knocks._]

WATCH.
[_Within_.] _Qui est la?_

PUCELLE.
_Paysans, la pauvres gens de France:_
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.

WATCH.
Enter, go in; the market bell is rung.

PUCELLE.
Now, Rouen, I’ll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.

[_Exeunt._]

Enter Charles, the Bastard of Orleans, Alençon, Reignier and forces.

CHARLES.
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem,
And once again we’ll sleep secure in Rouen.

BASTARD.
Here enter’d Pucelle and her practisants;
Now she is there, how will she specify
Here is the best and safest passage in?

REIGNIER.
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower,
Which, once discern’d, shows that her meaning is:
No way to that, for weakness, which she enter’d.

Enter La Pucelle, on the top, thrusting out a torch burning.

PUCELLE.
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
That joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbonites.

[_Exit._]

BASTARD.
See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
The burning torch, in yonder turret stands.

CHARLES.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!

REIGNIER.
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
Enter and cry, “The Dauphin!” presently,
And then do execution on the watch.

[_Alarum. Exeunt._]

An alarum. Enter Talbot in an excursion.

TALBOT.
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.

[_Exit._]

An alarum. Excursions. Bedford, brought in sick in a chair. Enter
Talbot and Burgundy without: within, La Pucelle, Charles, Bastard,
Alençon, and Reignier on the walls.

PUCELLE.
Good morrow, gallants! Want ye corn for bread?
I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
Before he’ll buy again at such a rate.
’Twas full of darnel. Do you like the taste?

BURGUNDY.
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.

CHARLES.
Your Grace may starve, perhaps, before that time.

BEDFORD.
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!

PUCELLE.
What will you do, good graybeard? Break a lance
And run a tilt at Death within a chair?

TALBOT.
Foul fiend of France and hag of all despite,
Encompass’d with thy lustful paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, I’ll have a bout with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.

PUCELLE.
Are ye so hot? Yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace;
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.

[_The English whisper together in council._]

God speed the Parliament! Who shall be the Speaker?

TALBOT.
Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?

PUCELLE.
Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours or no.

TALBOT.
I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee, Alençon, and the rest;
Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?

ALENÇON.
Seignieur, no.

TALBOT.
Seignieur, hang! Base muleteers of France!
Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls,
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.

PUCELLE.
Away, captains! Let’s get us from the walls,
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.
Goodbye, my lord; we came but to tell you
That we are here.

[_Exeunt from the walls._]

TALBOT.
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbot’s greatest fame!
Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,
Prick’d on by public wrongs sustain’d in France,
Either to get the town again or die.
And I, as sure as English Henry lives,
And as his father here was conqueror,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
Great Coeur-de-lion’s heart was buried,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.

BURGUNDY.
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.

TALBOT.
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.

BEDFORD.
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me.
Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen,
And will be partner of your weal or woe.

BURGUNDY.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.

BEDFORD.
Not to be gone from hence; for once I read
That stout Pendragon in his litter sick
Came to the field and vanquished his foes.
Methinks I should revive the soldiers’ hearts,
Because I ever found them as myself.

TALBOT.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!
Then be it so. Heavens keep old Bedford safe!
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
But gather we our forces out of hand
And set upon our boasting enemy.

[_Exeunt all but Bedford and Attendants._]

An alarum. Excursions. Enter Sir John Fastolf and a Captain.

CAPTAIN.
Whither away, Sir John Fastolf, in such haste?

FASTOLF.
Whither away? To save myself by flight.
We are like to have the overthrow again.

CAPTAIN.
What! Will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?

FASTOLF.
Ay,
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life.

[_Exit._]

CAPTAIN.
Cowardly knight, ill fortune follow thee!

[_Exit._]

Retreat. Excursions. La Pucelle, Alençon and Charles fly.

BEDFORD.
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
For I have seen our enemies’ overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.

[_Bedford dies, and is carried in by two in his chair._]

An alarum. Enter Talbot, Burgundy and the rest.

TALBOT.
Lost, and recover’d in a day again!
This is a double honour, Burgundy.
Yet heavens have glory for this victory!

BURGUNDY.
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble deeds as valour’s monuments.

TALBOT.
Thanks, gentle Duke. But where is Pucelle now?
I think her old familiar is asleep.
Now where’s the Bastard’s braves, and Charles his gleeks?
What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief
That such a valiant company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the town,
Placing therein some expert officers,
And then depart to Paris to the King,
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.

BURGUNDY.
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.

TALBOT.
But yet, before we go, let’s not forget
The noble Duke of Bedford late deceased,
But see his exequies fulfill’d in Rouen.
A braver soldier never couched lance,
A gentler heart did never sway in court;
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
For that’s the end of human misery.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The plains near Rouen.

Enter Charles, the Bastard of Orleans, Alençon, La Pucelle and forces.

PUCELLE.
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered.
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while
And like a peacock sweep along his tail;
We’ll pull his plumes and take away his train,
If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.

CHARLES.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence.
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust

BASTARD.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the world.

ALENÇON.
We’ll set thy statue in some holy place,
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint.
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.

PUCELLE.
Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:
By fair persuasions mix’d with sugar’d words
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.

CHARLES.
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henry’s warriors;
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.

ALENÇON.
For ever should they be expulsed from France,
And not have title of an earldom here.

PUCELLE.
Your honours shall perceive how I will work
To bring this matter to the wished end.

[_Drum sounds afar off._]

Hark! By the sound of drum you may perceive
Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.

[_Here sound an English march._]

There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,
And all the troops of English after him.

[_French march._]

Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.
Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.
Summon a parley; we will talk with him.

[_Trumpets sound a parley._]

CHARLES.
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!

Enter Burgundy.

BURGUNDY.
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?

PUCELLE.
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.

BURGUNDY.
What say’st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.

CHARLES.
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.

PUCELLE.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France,
Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.

BURGUNDY.
Speak on, but be not over-tedious.

PUCELLE.
Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
When death doth close his tender dying eyes,
See, see the pining malady of France;
Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
Which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast.
O, turn thy edged sword another way;
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.
One drop of blood drawn from thy country’s bosom
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
And wash away thy country’s stained spots.

BURGUNDY.
Either she hath bewitch’d me with her words,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.

PUCELLE.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.
Who join’st thou with but with a lordly nation
That will not trust thee but for profit’s sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France,
And fashion’d thee that instrument of ill,
Who then but English Henry will be lord,
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:
Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
And was he not in England prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
They set him free without his ransom paid,
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
See then, thou fight’st against thy countrymen,
And join’st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord;
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.

BURGUNDY.
I am vanquished; these haughty words of hers
Have batter’d me like roaring cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen!
And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace.
My forces and my power of men are yours.
So, farewell, Talbot; I’ll no longer trust thee.

PUCELLE.
[_Aside_.] Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn again.

CHARLES.
Welcome, brave Duke! Thy friendship makes us fresh.

BASTARD.
And doth beget new courage in our breasts.

ALENÇON.
Pucelle hath bravely play’d her part in this,
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.

CHARLES.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Paris. The Palace.

Enter the King, Gloucester, Bishop of Winchester, Exeter, York, Warwick
and Vernon; Suffolk, Somerset, Basset and others. To them, with his
soldiers, Talbot.

TALBOT.
My gracious Prince, and honourable peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
I have awhile given truce unto my wars
To do my duty to my sovereign;
In sign whereof, this arm, that hath reclaim’d
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Twelve cities and seven walled towns of strength,
Beside five hundred prisoners of esteem,
Lets fall his sword before your Highness’ feet,
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
First to my God, and next unto your Grace. [_Kneels_.]

KING HENRY.
Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?

GLOUCESTER.
Yes, if it please your Majesty, my liege.

KING HENRY.
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!
When I was young, as yet I am not old,
I do remember how my father said
A stouter champion never handled sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service, and your toil in war;
Yet never have you tasted our reward,
Or been reguerdon’d with so much as thanks.
Because till now we never saw your face.
Therefore, stand up; and for these good deserts
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury;
And in our coronation take your place.

[_Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but Vernon and Basset._]

VERNON.
Now, sir, to you that were so hot at sea,
Disgracing of these colours that I wear
In honour of my noble Lord of York,
Dar’st thou maintain the former words thou spak’st?

BASSET.
Yes, sir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy tongue
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.

VERNON.
Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.

BASSET.
Why, what is he? As good a man as York.

VERNON.
Hark ye; not so: in witness, take ye that.

[_Strikes him._]

BASSET.
Villain, thou knowest the law of arms is such
That whoso draws a sword, ’tis present death,
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
But I’ll unto his Majesty, and crave
I may have liberty to venge this wrong;
When thou shalt see I’ll meet thee to thy cost.

VERNON.
Well, miscreant, I’ll be there as soon as you;
And, after, meet you sooner than you would.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Paris. The Palace.


Enter the King, Gloucester, Bishop of Winchester, Talbot, Exeter, York,
and Warwick; Suffolk, Somerset, the Governor of Paris, and others.

GLOUCESTER.
Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.

WINCHESTER.
God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!

GLOUCESTER.
Now, Governor of Paris, take your oath,
That you elect no other king but him;
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practices against his state:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!

Enter Sir John Fastolf.

FASTOLF.
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,
To haste unto your coronation,
A letter was deliver’d to my hands,
Writ to your Grace from th’ Duke of Burgundy.

TALBOT.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
I vow’d, base knight, when I did meet thee next,
To tear the Garter from thy craven’s leg, [_Plucking it off_.]
Which I have done, because unworthily
Thou wast installed in that high degree.
Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest.
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
When but in all I was six thousand strong
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty squire did run away;
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men;
Myself and divers gentlemen beside
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
This ornament of knighthood, yea or no?

GLOUCESTER.
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain, and a leader.

TALBOT.
When first this Order was ordain’d, my lords,
Knights of the Garter were of noble birth,
Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars;
Not fearing death nor shrinking for distress,
But always resolute in most extremes.
He then that is not furnish’d in this sort
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Profaning this most honourable Order,
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.

KING HENRY.
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear’st thy doom!
Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight;
Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.

[_Exit Fastolf._]

And now, my Lord Protector, view the letter
Sent from our uncle, Duke of Burgundy.

GLOUCESTER.
What means his Grace, that he hath changed his style?
No more but, plain and bluntly, “To the King”!
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What’s here? [_Reads_] “I have, upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my country’s wrack,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
And join’d with Charles, the rightful King of France.”
O monstrous treachery! Can this be so,
That in alliance, amity, and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?

KING HENRY.
What! Doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?

GLOUCESTER.
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.

KING HENRY.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?

GLOUCESTER.
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.

KING HENRY.
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
And give him chastisement for this abuse.
How say you, my lord, are you not content?

TALBOT.
Content, my liege! Yes, but that I am prevented,
I should have begg’d I might have been employ’d.

KING HENRY.
Then gather strength and march unto him straight;
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason,
And what offence it is to flout his friends.

TALBOT.
I go, my lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.

[_Exit._]

Enter Vernon and Basset.

VERNON.
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.

BASSET.
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.

YORK.
This is my servant; hear him, noble prince.

SOMERSET.
And this is mine, sweet Henry, favour him.

KING HENRY.
Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.
Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
And wherefore crave you combat, or with whom?

VERNON.
With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.

BASSET.
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.

KING HENRY.
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
First let me know, and then I’ll answer you.

BASSET.
Crossing the sea from England into France,
This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,
Upbraided me about the rose I wear,
Saying the sanguine colour of the leaves
Did represent my master’s blushing cheeks
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
About a certain question in the law
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him;
With other vile and ignominious terms.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defence of my lord’s worthiness,
I crave the benefit of law of arms.

VERNON.
And that is my petition, noble lord;
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him,
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Bewray’d the faintness of my master’s heart.

YORK.
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?

SOMERSET.
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne’er so cunningly you smother it.

KING HENRY.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
Such factious emulations shall arise!
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.

YORK.
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your Highness shall command a peace.

SOMERSET.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.

YORK.
There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.

VERNON.
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.

BASSET.
Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.

GLOUCESTER.
Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!
And perish ye, with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the King and us?
And you, my lords, methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections,
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.

EXETER.
It grieves his Highness. Good my lords, be friends.

KING HENRY.
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.
And you, my lords, remember where we are:
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation;
If they perceive dissension in our looks,
And that within ourselves we disagree,
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To willful disobedience, and rebel!
Beside, what infamy will there arise
When foreign princes shall be certified
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henry’s peers and chief nobility
Destroy’d themselves and lost the realm of France!
O, think upon the conquest of my father,
My tender years, and let us not forgo
That for a trifle that was bought with blood!
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
I see no reason if I wear this rose,

[_Putting on a red rose._]

That anyone should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset than York.
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
As well they may upbraid me with my crown
Because, forsooth, the King of Scots is crown’d.
But your discretions better can persuade
Than I am able to instruct or teach;
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
To be our Regent in these parts of France;
And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;
And like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Go cheerfully together and digest
Your angry choler on your enemies.
Ourself, my Lord Protector, and the rest
After some respite will return to Calais;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be presented, by your victories,
With Charles, Alençon, and that traitorous rout.

[_Flourish. Exeunt all but York, Warwick, Exeter and Vernon._]

WARWICK.
My Lord of York, I promise you the King
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.

YORK.
And so he did; but yet I like it not,
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.

WARWICK.
Tush, that was but his fancy; blame him not;
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.

YORK.
An if I wist he did—but let it rest;
Other affairs must now be managed.

[_Exeunt all but Exeter._]

EXETER.
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice;
For, had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen decipher’d there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
But howsoe’er, no simple man that sees
This jarring discord of nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
This factious bandying of their favourites,
But sees it doth presage some ill event.
’Tis much when scepters are in children’s hands;
But more when envy breeds unkind division:
There comes the ruin, there begins confusion.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. Before Bordeaux.

Enter Talbot with trump and drum.

TALBOT.
Go to the gates of Bordeaux, trumpeter.
Summon their general unto the wall.

Trumpet sounds. Enter  General and others aloft.

English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
Servant in arms to Harry King of England;
And thus he would: Open your city gates,
Be humble to us, call my sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient subjects,
And I’ll withdraw me and my bloody power.
But if you frown upon this proffer’d peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean Famine, quartering Steel, and climbing Fire,
Who in a moment even with the earth
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.

GENERAL.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
Our nation’s terror and their bloody scourge!
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
On us thou canst not enter but by death;
For, I protest, we are well fortified
And strong enough to issue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee.
On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch’d
To wall thee from the liberty of flight;
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress
But Death doth front thee with apparent spoil,
And pale Destruction meets thee in the face.
Ten thousand French have ta’en the sacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Lo, there thou stand’st, a breathing valiant man
Of an invincible unconquer’d spirit.
This is the latest glory of thy praise
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;
For ere the glass, that now begins to run,
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,
Shall see thee wither’d, bloody, pale, and dead.

[_Drum afar off._]

Hark, hark, the Dauphin’s drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul,
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.

[_Exeunt General, etc._]

TALBOT.
He fables not; I hear the enemy.
Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
O, negligent and heedless discipline!
How are we park’d and bounded in a pale,
A little herd of England’s timorous deer,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!
If we be English deer, be then in blood;
Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay.
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
God and Saint George, Talbot and England’s right,
Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Plains in Gascony.

Enter a Messenger that meets York. Enter York with trumpet and many
soldiers

YORK.
Are not the speedy scouts return’d again
That dogg’d the mighty army of the Dauphin?

MESSENGER.
They are return’d, my lord, and give it out
That he is march’d to Bordeaux with his power,
To fight with Talbot. As he march’d along,
By your espials were discovered
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
Which join’d with him and made their march for Bordeaux.

[_Exit._]

YORK.
A plague upon that villain Somerset
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen that were levied for this siege!
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am louted by a traitor villain
And cannot help the noble chevalier.
God comfort him in this necessity!
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.

Enter Sir William Lucy.

LUCY.
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waist of iron,
And hemm’d about with grim destruction.
To Bordeaux, warlike Duke! To Bordeaux, York!
Else farewell, Talbot, France, and England’s honour.

YORK.
O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot’s place!
So should we save a valiant gentleman
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep
That thus we die while remiss traitors sleep.

LUCY.
O, send some succour to the distress’d lord!

YORK.
He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;
We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get,
All long of this vile traitor Somerset.

LUCY.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot’s soul,
And on his son young John, who two hours since
I met in travel toward his warlike father.
This seven years did not Talbot see his son;
And now they meet where both their lives are done.

YORK.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
Away! Vexation almost stops my breath,
That sunder’d friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy, farewell. No more my fortune can
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,
Long all of Somerset and his delay.

[_Exit, with his soldiers._]

LUCY.
Thus, while the vulture of sedition
Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
The conquest of our scarce-cold conqueror,
That ever-living man of memory,
Henry the Fifth. Whiles they each other cross,
Lives, honours, lands, and all hurry to loss.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony.

Enter Somerset with his army; a Captain of Talbot’s with him.

SOMERSET.
It is too late; I cannot send them now.
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted. All our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with. The over-daring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure.
York set him on to fight and die in shame
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.

CAPTAIN.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our o’er-match’d forces forth for aid.

Enter Sir William Lucy.

SOMERSET.
How now, Sir William, whither were you sent?

LUCY.
Whither, my lord? From bought and sold Lord Talbot,
Who, ring’d about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset
To beat assailing Death from his weak legions;
And whiles the honourable captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,
And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,
You, his false hopes, the trust of England’s honour,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succours that should lend him aid,
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alençon, Reignier, compass him about,
And Talbot perisheth by your default.

SOMERSET.
York set him on; York should have sent him aid.

LUCY.
And York as fast upon your Grace exclaims,
Swearing that you withhold his levied host
Collected for this expedition.

SOMERSET.
York lies; he might have sent and had the horse.
I owe him little duty, and less love,
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.

LUCY.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapp’d the noble-minded Talbot.
Never to England shall he bear his life,
But dies betray’d to fortune by your strife.

SOMERSET.
Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight.
Within six hours they will be at his aid.

LUCY.
Too late comes rescue; he is ta’en or slain,
For fly he could not if he would have fled;
And fly would Talbot never, though he might.

SOMERSET.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!

LUCY.
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The English camp near Bordeaux.

Enter Talbot and John his son.

TALBOT.
O young John Talbot, I did send for thee
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
That Talbot’s name might be in thee revived
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
But—O malignant and ill-boding stars!—
Now thou art come unto a feast of death,
A terrible and unavoided danger.
Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
And I’ll direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight. Come, dally not, be gone.

JOHN TALBOT.
Is my name Talbot? And am I your son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
Dishonour not her honourable name,
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say, he is not Talbot’s blood,
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.

TALBOT.
Fly, to revenge my death if I be slain.

JOHN TALBOT.
He that flies so will ne’er return again.

TALBOT.
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.

JOHN TALBOT.
Then let me stay and, father, do you fly.
Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death the French can little boast;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;
But mine it will, that no exploit have done.
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear;
But if I bow, they’ll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay
If the first hour I shrink and run away.
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.

TALBOT.
Shall all thy mother’s hopes lie in one tomb?

JOHN TALBOT.
Ay, rather than I’ll shame my mother’s womb.

TALBOT.
Upon my blessing, I command thee go.

JOHN TALBOT.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.

TALBOT.
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.

JOHN TALBOT.
No part of him but will be shame in me.

TALBOT.
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.

JOHN TALBOT.
Yes, your renowned name; shall flight abuse it?

TALBOT.
Thy father’s charge shall clear thee from that stain.

JOHN TALBOT.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.

TALBOT.
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
My age was never tainted with such shame.

JOHN TALBOT.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be sever’d from your side
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide.
Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
For live I will not, if my father die.

TALBOT.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
Come, side by side together live and die,
And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. A field of battle.

Alarum. Excursions, wherein Talbot’s son is hemmed about, and Talbot
rescues him.

TALBOT.
Saint George and victory! Fight, soldiers, fight!
The Regent hath with Talbot broke his word,
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath;
I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.

JOHN TALBOT.
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
The life thou gav’st me first was lost and done,
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of fate,
To my determined time thou gav’st new date.

TALBOT.
When from the Dauphin’s crest thy sword struck fire,
It warm’d thy father’s heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Quicken’d with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
Beat down Alençon, Orleans, Burgundy,
And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The ireful Bastard Orleans, that drew blood
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And, interchanging blows, I quickly shed
Some of his bastard blood, and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus: “Contaminated, base,
And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine,
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy.”
Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father’s care,
Art thou not weary, John? How dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
Now thou art seal’d the son of chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead;
The help of one stands me in little stead.
O, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small boat!
If I today die not with Frenchmen’s rage,
Tomorrow I shall die with mickle age.
By me they nothing gain an if I stay;
’Tis but the short’ning of my life one day.
In thee thy mother dies, our household’s name,
My death’s revenge, thy youth, and England’s fame.
All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.

JOHN TALBOT.
The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart;
These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fall and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shame’s scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbot’s son.
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot’s foot.

TALBOT.
Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,
Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet.
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father’s side,
And, commendable proved, let’s die in pride.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another part of the field.

Alarum. Excursions. Enter old Talbot led by a Servant.

TALBOT.
Where is my other life? Mine own is gone.
O, where’s young Talbot? Where is valiant John?
Triumphant Death, smear’d with captivity,
Young Talbot’s valour makes me smile at thee.
When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,
His bloody sword he brandish’d over me,
And like a hungry lion did commence
Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience;
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Tendering my ruin and assail’d of none,
Dizzy-ey’d fury and great rage of heart
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clustering battle of the French;
And in that sea of blood my boy did drench
His over-mounting spirit; and there died
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.

SERVANT.
O my dear lord, lo where your son is borne!

Enter soldiers, with the body of young Talbot.

TALBOT.
Thou antic Death, which laugh’st us here to scorn,
Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
In thy despite shall scape mortality.
O thou whose wounds become hard-favour’d Death,
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
Brave Death by speaking, whether he will or no;
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.
Poor boy, he smiles, methinks, as who should say,
Had Death been French, then Death had died today.
Come, come, and lay him in his father’s arms;
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbot’s grave.

[_Dies._]

Enter Charles, Alençon, Burgundy, Bastard, La Pucelle and forces.

CHARLES.
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.

BASTARD.
How the young whelp of Talbot’s, raging-wood,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen’s blood!

PUCELLE.
Once I encounter’d him, and thus I said:
“Thou maiden youth, be vanquish’d by a maid.”
But with a proud majestical high scorn
He answer’d thus: “Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a giglot wench.”
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.

BURGUNDY.
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight.
See, where he lies inhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms.

BASTARD.
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
Whose life was England’s glory, Gallia’s wonder.

CHARLES.
O, no, forbear! For that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.

Enter Sir William Lucy and a French Herald.

LUCY.
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin’s tent,
To know who hath obtain’d the glory of the day.

CHARLES.
On what submissive message art thou sent?

LUCY.
Submission, Dauphin! ’Tis a mere French word.
We English warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta’en,
And to survey the bodies of the dead.

CHARLES.
For prisoners ask’st thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek’st.

LUCY.
But where’s the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Created for his rare success in arms
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the noble Order of Saint George,
Worthy Saint Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marshal to Henry the Sixth
Of all his wars within the realm of France?

PUCELLE.
Here’s a silly stately style indeed!
The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles
Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.

LUCY.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchman’s only scourge,
Your kingdom’s terror and black Nemesis?
O, were mine eye-balls into bullets turn’d,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
O, that I could but call these dead to life!
It were enough to fright the realm of France.
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
And give them burial as beseems their worth.

PUCELLE.
I think this upstart is old Talbot’s ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
For God’s sake, let him have them; to keep them here,
They would but stink and putrify the air.

CHARLES.
Go, take their bodies hence.

LUCY.
I’ll bear them hence;
But from their ashes shall be rear’d
A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.

CHARLES.
So we be rid of them, do with them what thou wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vein.
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot’s slain.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. London. The Palace.


Sennet. Enter King, Gloucester and Exeter.

KING HENRY.
Have you perused the letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac?

GLOUCESTER.
I have, my lord; and their intent is this:
They humbly sue unto your Excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.

KING HENRY.
How doth your Grace affect their motion?

GLOUCESTER.
Well, my good lord, and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And stablish quietness on every side.

KING HENRY.
Ay, marry, uncle, for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among professors of one faith.

GLOUCESTER.
Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
A man of great authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.

KING HENRY.
Marriage, uncle! Alas, my years are young!
And fitter is my study and my books
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
Yet call th’ ambassadors; and, as you please,
So let them have their answers every one.
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to God’s glory and my country’s weal.

Enter Winchester in Cardinal’s habit, a  Legate and two Ambassadors.

EXETER.
What, is my Lord of Winchester install’d
And call’d unto a cardinal’s degree?
Then I perceive that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy:
“If once he come to be a cardinal,
He’ll make his cap co-equal with the crown.”

KING HENRY.
My Lords Ambassadors, your several suits
Have been consider’d and debated on.
Your purpose is both good and reasonable;
And therefore are we certainly resolved
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.

GLOUCESTER.
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
I have inform’d his Highness so at large,
As liking of the lady’s virtuous gifts,
Her beauty and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be England’s Queen.

KING HENRY.
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.
And so, my Lord Protector, see them guarded
And safely brought to Dover; where inshipp’d,
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.

[_Exeunt all but Winchester and Legate._]

WINCHESTER.
Stay my lord legate; you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be deliver’d to his Holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.

LEGATE.
I will attend upon your lordship’s leisure.

WINCHESTER.
[_Aside_.] Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That neither in birth or for authority,
The Bishop will be overborne by thee.
I’ll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
Or sack this country with a mutiny.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou.

Enter Charles, Burgundy, Alençon, Bastard, Reignier, La Pucelle and
forces.

CHARLES.
These news, my lords, may cheer our drooping spirits:
’Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
And turn again unto the warlike French.

ALENÇON.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.

PUCELLE.
Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us;
Else ruin combat with their palaces!

Enter Scout.

SCOUT.
Success unto our valiant general,
And happiness to his accomplices!

CHARLES.
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.

SCOUT.
The English army, that divided was
Into two parties, is now conjoin’d in one,
And means to give you battle presently.

CHARLES.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is;
But we will presently provide for them.

BURGUNDY.
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there.
Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.

PUCELLE.
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine;
Let Henry fret and all the world repine.

CHARLES.
Then on, my lords; and France be fortunate!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before Angiers.

Alarum. Excursions. Enter La Pucelle.

PUCELLE.
The Regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help, ye charming spells and periapts;
And ye choice spirits that admonish me,
And give me signs of future accidents. [_Thunder_]
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Appear and aid me in this enterprise.

Enter Fiends.

This speed and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustom’d diligence to me.
Now, ye familiar spirits that are cull’d
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.

[_They walk and speak not._]

O, hold me not with silence over-long!
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
I’ll lop a member off and give it you
In earnest of a further benefit,
So you do condescend to help me now.

[_They hang their heads._]

No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense if you will grant my suit.

[_They shake their heads._]

Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul; my body, soul and all,
Before that England give the French the foil.

[_They depart._]

See, they forsake me. Now the time is come
That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
And let her head fall into England’s lap.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with.
Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.

[_Exit._]

Excursions. Burgundy and York fight hand to hand. The French fly.  La
Pucelle is taken.

YORK.
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast.
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devil’s grace!
See, how the ugly witch doth bend her brows,
As if with Circe she would change my shape!

PUCELLE.
Chang’d to a worser shape thou canst not be.

YORK.
O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man;
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

PUCELLE.
A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee!
And may ye both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!

YORK.
Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue!

PUCELLE.
I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.

YORK.
Curse, miscreant, when thou com’st to the stake.

[_Exeunt._]

Alarum. Enter Suffolk with Margaret in his hand.

SUFFOLK.
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.

[_Gazes on her._]

O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly!
For I will touch thee but with reverent hands,
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou? Say, that I may honour thee.

MARGARET.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
The King of Naples, whosoe’er thou art.

SUFFOLK.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call’d.
Be not offended, nature’s miracle,
Thou art allotted to be ta’en by me.
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
Yet, if this servile usage once offend,
Go and be free again as Suffolk’s friend.

[_She is going._]

O, stay! I have no power to let her pass;
My hand would free her, but my heart says no.
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak.
I’ll call for pen and ink, and write my mind.
Fie, de la Pole, disable not thyself;
Hast not a tongue? Is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a woman’s sight?
Ay, beauty’s princely majesty is such
Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.

MARGARET.
Say, Earl of Suffolk, if thy name be so,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.

SUFFOLK.
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,
Before thou make a trial of her love?

MARGARET.
Why speak’st thou not? What ransom must I pay?

SUFFOLK.
She’s beautiful, and therefore to be woo’d;
She is a woman, therefore to be won.

MARGARET.
Wilt thou accept of ransom, yea, or no?

SUFFOLK.
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife;
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?

MARGARET.
I were best leave him, for he will not hear.

SUFFOLK.
There all is marr’d; there lies a cooling card.

MARGARET.
He talks at random; sure, the man is mad.

SUFFOLK.
And yet a dispensation may be had.

MARGARET.
And yet I would that you would answer me.

SUFFOLK.
I’ll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why, for my king. Tush, that’s a wooden thing!

MARGARET.
He talks of wood. It is some carpenter.

SUFFOLK.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these realms.
But there remains a scruple in that too;
For though her father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,
And our nobility will scorn the match.

MARGARET.
Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?

SUFFOLK.
It shall be so, disdain they ne’er so much.
Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.

MARGARET.
What though I be enthrall’d? He seems a knight,
And will not any way dishonour me.

SUFFOLK.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.

MARGARET.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French;
And then I need not crave his courtesy.

SUFFOLK.
Sweet madam, give me hearing in a cause.

MARGARET.
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.

SUFFOLK.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?

MARGARET.
I cry you mercy, ’tis but _quid_ for _quo_.

SUFFOLK.
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?

MARGARET.
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Than is a slave in base servility;
For princes should be free.

SUFFOLK.
And so shall you,
If happy England’s royal king be free.

MARGARET.
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?

SUFFOLK.
I’ll undertake to make thee Henry’s queen,
To put a golden scepter in thy hand
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my—

MARGARET.
What?

SUFFOLK.
His love.

MARGARET.
I am unworthy to be Henry’s wife.

SUFFOLK.
No, gentle madam, I unworthy am
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice myself.
How say you, madam, are ye so content?

MARGARET.
An if my father please, I am content.

SUFFOLK.
Then call our captains and our colours forth.
And, madam, at your father’s castle walls
We’ll crave a parley, to confer with him.

A parley sounded. Enter Reignier on the walls.

See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!

REIGNIER.
To whom?

SUFFOLK.
To me.

REIGNIER.
Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a soldier, and unapt to weep
Or to exclaim on fortune’s fickleness.

SUFFOLK.
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
Consent, and for thy honour give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,
Whom I with pain have woo’d and won thereto;
And this her easy-held imprisonment
Hath gain’d thy daughter princely liberty.

REIGNIER.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?

SUFFOLK.
Fair Margaret knows
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.

REIGNIER.
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
To give thee answer of thy just demand.

[_Exit from the walls._]

SUFFOLK.
And here I will expect thy coming.

Trumpets sound. Enter Reignier, below.

REIGNIER.
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories.
Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.

SUFFOLK.
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,
Fit to be made companion with a king.
What answer makes your Grace unto my suit?

REIGNIER.
Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
To be the princely bride of such a lord,
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
My daughter shall be Henry’s, if he please.

SUFFOLK.
That is her ransom; I deliver her;
And those two counties I will undertake
Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.

REIGNIER.
And I again, in Henry’s royal name,
As deputy unto that gracious king,
Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.

SUFFOLK.
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,
Because this is in traffic of a king.
[_Aside_.] And yet, methinks, I could be well content
To be mine own attorney in this case.
I’ll over then to England with this news,
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
So, farewell, Reignier; set this diamond safe
In golden palaces, as it becomes.

REIGNIER.
I do embrace thee as I would embrace
The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.

MARGARET.
Farewell, my lord; good wishes, praise, and prayers
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret. [_Going_].

SUFFOLK.
Farewell, sweet madam; but hark you, Margaret,
No princely commendations to my king?

MARGARET.
Such commendations as becomes a maid,
A virgin and his servant, say to him.

SUFFOLK.
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.
But, madam, I must trouble you again:
No loving token to his Majesty?

MARGARET.
Yes, my good lord; a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the King.

SUFFOLK.
And this withal. [_Kisses her_.]

MARGARET.
That for thyself. I will not so presume
To send such peevish tokens to a king.

[_Exeunt Reignier and Margaret._]

SUFFOLK.
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay;
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth.
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise.
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
And natural graces that extinguish art;
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
That, when thou com’st to kneel at Henry’s feet,
Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Camp of the Duke of York in Anjou.

Enter York, Warwick and others.

YORK.
Bring forth that sorceress condemn’d to burn.

Enter La Pucelle, guarded, and a Shepherd.

SHEPHERD.
Ah, Joan, this kills thy father’s heart outright!
Have I sought every country far and near,
And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I’ll die with thee!

PUCELLE.
Decrepit miser, base ignoble wretch!
I am descended of a gentler blood.
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.

SHEPHERD.
Out, out! My lords, as please you, ’tis not so;
I did beget her, all the parish knows.
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.

WARWICK.
Graceless, wilt thou deny thy parentage?

YORK.
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.

SHEPHERD.
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh;
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear.
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.

PUCELLE.
Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn’d this man
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.

SHEPHERD.
’Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck’dst her breast
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field,
I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee!
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
O, burn her, burn her! Hanging is too good.

[_Exit._]

YORK.
Take her away, for she hath lived too long,
To fill the world with vicious qualities.

PUCELLE.
First, let me tell you whom you have condemn’d:
Not one begotten of a shepherd swain,
But issued from the progeny of kings;
Virtuous and holy, chosen from above,
By inspiration of celestial grace,
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked spirits.
But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
Stain’d with the guiltless blood of innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
A virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste and immaculate in very thought;
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.

YORK.
Ay, ay; away with her to execution!

WARWICK.
And hark ye, sirs; because she is a maid,
Spare for no faggots, let there be enow.
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.

PUCELLE.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:
I am with child, ye bloody homicides.
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.

YORK.
Now heaven forfend! The holy maid with child?

WARWICK.
The greatest miracle that e’er ye wrought!
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?

YORK.
She and the Dauphin have been juggling.
I did imagine what would be her refuge.

WARWICK.
Well, go to; we’ll have no bastards live,
Especially since Charles must father it.

PUCELLE.
You are deceived; my child is none of his.
It was Alençon that enjoy’d my love.

YORK.
Alençon, that notorious Machiavel!
It dies and if it had a thousand lives.

PUCELLE.
O, give me leave, I have deluded you.
’Twas neither Charles nor yet the Duke I named,
But Reignier, King of Naples, that prevail’d.

WARWICK.
A married man! That’s most intolerable.

YORK.
Why, here’s a girl! I think she knows not well—
There were so many—whom she may accuse.

WARWICK.
It’s sign she hath been liberal and free.

YORK.
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure!
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee.
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.

PUCELLE.
Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
Upon the country where you make abode;
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till mischief and despair
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!

[_Exit, guarded._]

YORK.
Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of hell!

Enter Bishop of Winchester as Cardinal, attended.

WINCHESTER.
Lord Regent, I do greet your Excellence
With letters of commission from the King.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Approacheth to confer about some matter.

YORK.
Is all our travail turn’d to this effect?
After the slaughter of so many peers,
So many captains, gentlemen and soldiers,
That in this quarrel have been overthrown
And sold their bodies for their country’s benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the towns,
By treason, falsehood, and by treachery,
Our great progenitors had conquered?
O, Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with grief
The utter loss of all the realm of France.

WARWICK.
Be patient, York; if we conclude a peace,
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.

Enter Charles, Alençon, Bastard, Reignier and others.

CHARLES.
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
That peaceful truce shall be proclaim’d in France,
We come to be informed by yourselves
What the conditions of that league must be.

YORK.
Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
The hollow passage of my poison’d voice
By sight of these our baleful enemies.

WINCHESTER.
Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion and of lenity,
To ease your country of distressful war,
And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
You shall become true liegemen to his crown.
And, Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
To pay him tribute and submit thyself,
Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,
And still enjoy the regal dignity.

ALENÇON.
Must he be then as shadow of himself?
Adorn his temples with a coronet,
And yet, in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.

CHARLES.
’Tis known already that I am possess’d
With more than half the Gallian territories,
And therein reverenced for their lawful king.
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish’d,
Detract so much from that prerogative
As to be call’d but viceroy of the whole?
No, lord ambassador, I’ll rather keep
That which I have than, coveting for more,
Be cast from possibility of all.

YORK.
Insulting Charles! Hast thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league,
And, now the matter grows to compromise,
Stand’st thou aloof upon comparison?
Either accept the title thou usurp’st,
Of benefit proceeding from our king
And not of any challenge of desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.

REIGNIER.
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy
To cavil in the course of this contract.
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.

ALENÇON.
To say the truth, it is your policy
To save your subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in hostility;
And therefore take this compact of a truce,
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.

WARWICK.
How say’st thou, Charles? Shall our condition stand?

CHARLES.
It shall; only reserv’d you claim no interest
In any of our towns of garrison.

YORK.
Then swear allegiance to his Majesty,
As thou art knight, never to disobey
Nor be rebellious to the crown of England,
Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.

[_Charles and the rest give tokens of fealty._]

So, now dismiss your army when ye please;
Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. London. The royal palace.

Enter Suffolk in conference with the King, Gloucester and Exeter.

KING HENRY.
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl,
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish’d me.
Her virtues graced with external gifts
Do breed love’s settled passions in my heart,
And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts
Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her renown
Either to suffer shipwreck or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her love.

SUFFOLK.
Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale
Is but a preface of her worthy praise;
The chief perfections of that lovely dame,
Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
Would make a volume of enticing lines,
Able to ravish any dull conceit;
And, which is more, she is not so divine,
So full replete with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind
She is content to be at your command;
Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents,
To love and honour Henry as her lord.

KING HENRY.
And otherwise will Henry ne’er presume.
Therefore, my Lord Protector, give consent
That Margaret may be England’s royal queen.

GLOUCESTER.
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
You know, my lord, your Highness is betroth’d
Unto another lady of esteem.
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
And not deface your honour with reproach?

SUFFOLK.
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths;
Or one that, at a triumph having vow’d
To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
By reason of his adversary’s odds.
A poor earl’s daughter is unequal odds,
And therefore may be broke without offence.

GLOUCESTER.
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?
Her father is no better than an earl,
Although in glorious titles he excel.

SUFFOLK.
Yes, my lord, her father is a king,
The King of Naples and Jerusalem;
And of such great authority in France
As his alliance will confirm our peace,
And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.

GLOUCESTER.
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.

EXETER.
Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.

SUFFOLK.
A dower, my lords? Disgrace not so your king,
That he should be so abject, base, and poor,
To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.
Henry is able to enrich his queen,
And not to seek a queen to make him rich;
So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship;
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Must be companion of his nuptial bed.
And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
Most of all these reasons bindeth us
In our opinions she should be preferr’d.
For what is wedlock forced but a hell,
An age of discord and continual strife?
Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss,
And is a pattern of celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her fit for none but for a king;
Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,
More than in women commonly is seen,
Will answer our hope in issue of a king;
For Henry, son unto a conqueror,
Is likely to beget more conquerors,
If with a lady of so high resolve
As is fair Margaret he be link’d in love.
Then yield, my lords; and here conclude with me
That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.

KING HENRY.
Whether it be through force of your report,
My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any passion of inflaming love,
I cannot tell; but this I am assured,
I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore shipping; post, my lord, to France;
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the seas to England and be crown’d
King Henry’s faithful and anointed queen.
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone, I say; for till you do return,
I rest perplexed with a thousand cares.
And you, good uncle, banish all offence.
If you do censure me by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so conduct me where, from company,
I may revolve and ruminate my grief.

[_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.

[_Exeunt Gloucester and Exeter._]

SUFFOLK.
Thus Suffolk hath prevail’d; and thus he goes,
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Troyan did.
Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the King;
But I will rule both her, the King, and realm.

[_Exit._]




THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. London. The palace
 Scene II. The Duke of Gloucester’s House
 Scene III. London. The palace
 Scene IV. Gloucester’s Garden

 ACT II
 SCENE I. Saint Albans
 SCENE II. London. The Duke of York’s Garden
 SCENE III. A Hall of Justice
 SCENE IV. A Street

 ACT III
 SCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund’s
 SCENE II. Bury St. Edmund’s. A Room of State
 SCENE III. A Bedchamber

 ACT IV
 SCENE I. The Coast of Kent
 SCENE II. Blackheath
 SCENE III. Another part of Blackheath
 SCENE IV. London. The Palace
 SCENE V. London. The Tower
 SCENE VI. London. Cannon Street
 SCENE VII. London. Smithfield
 SCENE VIII. Southwark
 SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle
 SCENE X. Kent. Iden’s Garden

 ACT V
 SCENE I. Fields between Dartford and Blackheath
 SCENE II. Saint Albans
 SCENE III. Fields near Saint Albans




Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY THE SIXTH
MARGARET, Queen to King Henry
Humphrey, Duke of GLOUCESTER, his uncle
ELEANOR, Duchess of Gloucester
CARDINAL Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, great-uncle to the King

DUKE OF SOMERSET
DUKE OF SUFFOLK
DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
LORD CLIFFORD
YOUNG CLIFFORD, his son
VAUX

Richard Plantagenet, Duke of YORK
EDWARD and RICHARD, his sons
EARL OF SALISBURY
EARL OF WARWICK

THOMAS HORNER, an armourer
PETER THUMP, his man
JOHN HUME, a priest
JOHN SOUTHWELL, a priest
Margery JOURDAIN, a witch
ROGER BOLINGBROKE, a conjurer
SIMPCOX, an impostor
Wife to Simpcox
Mayor of Saint Albans
SIR JOHN STANLEY
Two Murderers
A LIEUTENANT
MASTER
Master’s-Mate
Walter WHITMORE
Two Gentlemen, prisoners with Suffolk

Jack CADE, a rebel
George BEVIS
John HOLLAND
DICK the butcher
SMITH the weaver
MICHAEL, etc., followers of Cade
CLERK of Chartham
SIR HUMPHREY STAFFORD
WILLIAM STAFFORD, his brother
LORD SCALES
LORD SAYE
MATTHEW GOUGH
Alexander IDEN, a Kentish gentleman

Lords, Ladies, and Attendants, Petitioners, Aldermen, a Herald, a
Beadle, Sheriff, and Officers, Citizens, Prentices, Falconers, Guards,
Soldiers, Messengers, &c.

A Spirit

SCENE: England.




ACT I

SCENE I. London. The palace


Flourish of trumpets, then hautboys. Enter the King, Gloucester,
Salisbury, Warwick, and Cardinal Beaufort on the one side; the Queen,
Suffolk, York, Somerset and Buckingham on the other.

SUFFOLK.
As by your high imperial Majesty
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As procurator to your excellence,
To marry Princess Margaret for your grace,
So, in the famous ancient city Tours,
In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne, and Alençon,
Seven earls, twelve barons, and twenty reverend bishops,
I have performed my task and was espoused,
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England and her lordly peers,
Deliver up my title in the Queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent:
The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,
The fairest queen that ever king received.

KING HENRY.
Suffolk, arise.—Welcome, Queen Margaret.
I can express no kinder sign of love
Than this kind kiss.—O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!
For Thou hast given me in this beauteous face
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Great King of England and my gracious lord,
The mutual conference that my mind hath had
By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
In courtly company or at my beads,
With you, mine alderliefest sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my King
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
And overjoy of heart doth minister.

KING HENRY.
Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech,
Her words yclad with wisdom’s majesty,
Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys,
Such is the fulness of my heart’s content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.

ALL.
[_Kneeling_.] Long live Queen Margaret, England’s happiness!

QUEEN MARGARET.
We thank you all.

[_Flourish._]

SUFFOLK.
My Lord Protector, so it please your grace,
Here are the articles of contracted peace
Between our sovereign and the French king Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.

GLOUCESTER.
[_Reads_.] Imprimis, _it is agreed between the French king Charles and
William de la Pole, Marquess of Suffolk, ambassador for Henry, King of
England, that the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret, daughter
unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia, and Jerusalem, and crown her
Queen of England ere the thirtieth of May next ensuing._ Item, _that
the duchy of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be released and
delivered to the King her father_—

[_Lets the paper fall._]

KING HENRY.
Uncle, how now?

GLOUCESTER.
Pardon me, gracious lord.
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart
And dimmed mine eyes, that I can read no further.

KING HENRY.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.

CARDINAL.
[_Reads_.] Item, _it is further agreed between them, that the duchies
of Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered to the King her
father, and she sent over of the King of England’s own proper cost and
charges, without having any dowry._

KING HENRY.
They please us well.—Lord Marquess, kneel down.
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk,
And girt thee with the sword.—Cousin of York,
We here discharge your grace from being regent
I’ th’ parts of France, till term of eighteen months
Be full expired.—Thanks, uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick;
We thank you all for this great favour done
In entertainment to my princely Queen.
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her coronation be performed.

[_Exeunt King, Queen and Suffolk._]

GLOUCESTER.
Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,
Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
What! Did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valour, coin, and people, in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field,
In winter’s cold and summer’s parching heat,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits
To keep by policy what Henry got?
Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy?
Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,
With all the learned council of the realm,
Studied so long, sat in the council house
Early and late, debating to and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And had his highness in his infancy
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes?
And shall these labours and these honours die?
Shall Henry’s conquest, Bedford’s vigilance,
Your deeds of war, and all our counsel die?
O peers of England, shameful is this league!
Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,
Blotting your names from books of memory,
Razing the characters of your renown,
Defacing monuments of conquered France,
Undoing all, as all had never been!

CARDINAL.
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,
This peroration with such circumstance?
For France, ’tis ours; and we will keep it still.

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, uncle, we will keep it if we can,
But now it is impossible we should.
Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.

SALISBURY.
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
These counties were the keys of Normandy!
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?

WARWICK.
For grief that they are past recovery;
For, were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.
Anjou and Maine! Myself did win them both,
Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer;
And are the cities that I got with wounds
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
_Mort Dieu!_

YORK.
For Suffolk’s duke, may he be suffocate,
That dims the honour of this warlike isle!
France should have torn and rent my very heart
Before I would have yielded to this league.
I never read but England’s kings have had
Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives;
And our King Henry gives away his own,
To match with her that brings no vantages.

GLOUCESTER.
A proper jest, and never heard before,
That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth
For costs and charges in transporting her!
She should have staid in France, and starved in France,
Before—

CARDINAL.
My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot.
It was the pleasure of my lord the King.

GLOUCESTER.
My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind.
’Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,
But ’tis my presence that doth trouble ye.
Rancour will out. Proud prelate, in thy face
I see thy fury. If I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings.—
Lordings, farewell; and say, when I am gone,
I prophesied France will be lost ere long.

[_Exit._]

CARDINAL.
So, there goes our Protector in a rage.
’Tis known to you he is mine enemy,
Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me, to the King.
Consider, lords, he is the next of blood
And heir apparent to the English crown.
Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west,
There’s reason he should be displeased at it.
Look to it, lords. Let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts; be wise and circumspect.
What though the common people favour him,
Calling him “Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester,”
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,
“Jesu maintain your royal excellence!”
With “God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!”
I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss,
He will be found a dangerous Protector.

BUCKINGHAM.
Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,
He being of age to govern of himself?
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
We’ll quickly hoist Duke Humphrey from his seat.

CARDINAL.
This weighty business will not brook delay;
I’ll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.

[_Exit._]

SOMERSET.
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey’s pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal;
His insolence is more intolerable
Than all the princes’ in the land beside.
If Gloucester be displaced, he’ll be Protector.

BUCKINGHAM.
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be Protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.

[_Exeunt Buckingham and Somerset._]

SALISBURY.
Pride went before; 	Ambition follows him.
While these do labour for their own preferment,
Behoves it us to labour for the realm.
I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester,
Did bear him like a noble gentleman.
Oft have I seen the haughty Cardinal,
More like a soldier than a man o’ th’ church,
As stout and proud as he were lord of all,
Swear like a ruffian and demean himself
Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.—
Warwick my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping,
Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey.—
And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil discipline,
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou wert regent for our sovereign,
Have made thee feared and honoured of the people.
Join we together for the public good,
In what we can to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk and the Cardinal,
With Somerset’s and Buckingham’s ambition;
And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey’s deeds
While they do tend the profit of the land.

WARWICK.
So God help Warwick, as he loves the land
And common profit of his country!

YORK.
And so says York, [_Aside_.] for he hath greatest cause.

SALISBURY.
Then let’s make haste away and look unto the main.

WARWICK.
Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost,
That Maine which by main force Warwick did win,
And would have kept so long as breath did last!
Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France, or else be slain.

[_Exeunt Warwick and Salisbury._]

YORK.
Anjou and Maine are given to the French;
Paris is lost; the state of Normandy
Stands on a tickle point now they are gone.
Suffolk concluded on the articles,
The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased
To change two dukedoms for a duke’s fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all. What is’t to them?
’Tis thine they give away, and not their own.
Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage,
And purchase friends, and give to courtesans,
Still revelling like lords till all be gone;
Whileas the silly owner of the goods
Weeps over them, and wrings his hapless hands,
And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared and all is borne away,
Ready to starve and dare not touch his own.
So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue,
While his own lands are bargained for and sold.
Methinks the realms of England, France, and Ireland
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood
As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt
Unto the prince’s heart of Calydon.
Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England’s soil.
A day will come when York shall claim his own;
And therefore I will take the Nevilles’ parts,
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
And when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
For that’s the golden mark I seek to hit.
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist,
Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown.
Then, York, be still awhile till time do serve.
Watch thou and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state;
Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love
With his new bride and England’s dear-bought Queen,
And Humphrey with the peers be fallen at jars.
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,
And in my standard bear the arms of York,
To grapple with the house of Lancaster;
And force perforce I’ll make him yield the crown,
Whose bookish rule hath pulled fair England down.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. The Duke of Gloucester’s House

Enter Duke Humphrey of Gloucester and his wife Eleanor.

ELEANOR.
Why droops my lord, like over-ripened corn
Hanging the head at Ceres’ plenteous load?
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the favours of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What seest thou there? King Henry’s diadem,
Enchased with all the honours of the world?
If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face,
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold.
What, is’t too short? I’ll lengthen it with mine;
And, having both together heaved it up,
We’ll both together lift our heads to heaven,
And never more abase our sight so low
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.

GLOUCESTER.
O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord,
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.
And may that hour when I imagine ill
Against my King and nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
My troublous dreams this night doth make me sad.

ELEANOR.
What dreamed my lord? Tell me, and I’ll requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my morning’s dream.

GLOUCESTER.
Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,
Was broke in twain; by whom I have forgot,
But, as I think, it was by th’ Cardinal,
And on the pieces of the broken wand
Were placed the heads of Edmund, Duke of Somerset
And William de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream; what it doth bode, God knows.

ELEANOR.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester’s grove
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet Duke:
Methought I sat in seat of majesty
In the cathedral church of Westminster
And in that chair where kings and queens are crowned,
Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneeled to me
And on my head did set the diadem.

GLOUCESTER.
Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright.
Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,
Art thou not second woman in the realm,
And the Protector’s wife, beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering treachery
To tumble down thy husband and thyself
From top of honour to disgrace’s feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more!

ELEANOR.
What, what, my lord! Are you so choleric
With Eleanor for telling but her dream?
Next time I’ll keep my dreams unto myself,
And not be checked.

GLOUCESTER.
Nay, be not angry, I am pleased again.

Enter Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My Lord Protector, ’tis his highness’ pleasure
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Albans,
Whereas the King and Queen do mean to hawk.

GLOUCESTER.
I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?

ELEANOR.
Yes, my good lord, I’ll follow presently.

[_Exeunt Gloucester and Messenger._]

Follow I must; I cannot go before
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks
And smooth my way upon their headless necks;
And, being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortune’s pageant.—
Where are you there? Sir John! Nay, fear not, man,
We are alone; here’s none but thee and I.

Enter Hume.

HUME.
Jesus preserve your royal majesty!

ELEANOR.
What sayst thou? Majesty! I am but grace.

HUME.
But, by the grace of God, and Hume’s advice,
Your grace’s title shall be multiplied.

ELEANOR.
What sayst thou, man? Hast thou as yet conferred
With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,
With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
And will they undertake to do me good?

HUME.
This they have promised, to show your highness
A spirit raised from depth of underground,
That shall make answer to such questions
As by your Grace shall be propounded him.

ELEANOR.
It is enough, I’ll think upon the questions.
When from Saint Albans we do make return,
We’ll see these things effected to the full.
Here, Hume, take this reward; make merry, man,
With thy confederates in this weighty cause.

[_Exit._]

HUME.
Hume must make merry with the Duchess’ gold.
Marry, and shall. But, how now, Sir John Hume!
Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum;
The business asketh silent secrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch;
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.
Yet have I gold flies from another coast.
I dare not say, from the rich cardinal
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,
Yet I do find it so. For, to be plain,
They, knowing Dame Eleanor’s aspiring humour,
Have hired me to undermine the Duchess
And buzz these conjurations in her brain.
They say “A crafty knave does need no broker”,
Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal’s broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
Well, so its stands; and thus, I fear, at last
Hume’s knavery will be the Duchess’ wrack,
And her attainture will be Humphrey’s fall.
Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. London. The palace

Enter Peter and Petitioners.

1 PETITIONER.
My masters, let’s stand close. My Lord Protector will come this way by
and by, and then we may deliver our supplications in the quill.

2 PETITIONER.
Marry, the Lord protect him, for he’s a good man! Jesu bless him!

Enter Suffolk and Queen.

1 PETITIONER.
Here he comes, methinks, and the Queen with him. I’ll be the first,
sure.

2 PETITIONER.
Come back, fool! This is the Duke of Suffolk and not my Lord Protector.

SUFFOLK.
How now, fellow; wouldst anything with me?

1 PETITIONER.
I pray, my lord, pardon me, I took ye for my Lord Protector.

QUEEN MARGARET.
[_Reading_.] “To my Lord Protector.” Are your supplications to his
lordship? Let me see them. What is thine?

1 PETITIONER.
Mine is, an ’t please your grace, against John Goodman, my Lord
Cardinal’s man, for keeping my house and lands, and wife and all, from
me.

SUFFOLK.
Thy wife too! That’s some wrong, indeed.—What’s yours?—What’s here!
[_Reads_.] _Against the Duke of Suffolk for enclosing the commons of
Melford._ How now, sir knave!

2 PETITIONER.
Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.

PETER.
[_Giving his petition_.] Against my master, Thomas Horner, for saying
that the Duke of York was rightful heir to the crown.

QUEEN MARGARET.
What sayst thou? Did the Duke of York say he was rightful heir to the
crown?

PETER.
That my master was? No, forsooth, my master said that he was, and that
the King was an usurper.

SUFFOLK.
Who is there?

Enter Servant.

Take this fellow in, and send for his master with a pursuivant
presently.—We’ll hear more of your matter before the King.

[_Exit Servant with Peter._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
And as for you, that love to be protected
Under the wings of our Protector’s grace,
Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.

[_Tears the supplications._]

Away, base cullions!—Suffolk, let them go.

ALL.
Come, let’s be gone.

[_Exeunt._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
Is this the fashion in the court of England?
Is this the government of Britain’s isle,
And this the royalty of Albion’s king?
What, shall King Henry be a pupil still
Under the surly Gloucester’s governance?
Am I a queen in title and in style,
And must be made a subject to a duke?
I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours
Thou ran’st atilt in honour of my love
And stol’st away the ladies’ hearts of France,
I thought King Henry had resembled thee
In courage, courtship, and proportion.
But all his mind is bent to holiness,
To number Ave-Maries on his beads.
His champions are the prophets and apostles,
His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,
His study is his tilt-yard, and his loves
Are brazen images of canonized saints.
I would the college of the cardinals
Would choose him pope and carry him to Rome
And set the triple crown upon his head!
That were a state fit for his holiness.

SUFFOLK.
Madam, be patient. As I was cause
Your highness came to England, so will I
In England work your grace’s full content.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Beside the haughty Protector, have we Beaufort
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York; and not the least of these
But can do more in England than the King.

SUFFOLK.
And he of these that can do most of all
Cannot do more in England than the Nevilles;
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Not all these lords do vex me half so much
As that proud dame, the Lord Protector’s wife.
She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey’s wife.
Strangers in court do take her for the Queen.
She bears a duke’s revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our poverty.
Shall I not live to be avenged on her?
Contemptuous base-born callet as she is,
She vaunted ’mongst her minions t’ other day
The very train of her worst wearing gown
Was better worth than all my father’s lands
Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.

SUFFOLK.
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her
And placed a quire of such enticing birds
That she will light to listen to the lays
And never mount to trouble you again.
So let her rest; and, madam, list to me,
For I am bold to counsel you in this:
Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the lords
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
Will make but little for his benefit.
So, one by one, we’ll weed them all at last,
And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.

Sound a sennet. Enter the King, Gloucester, Cardinal Beaufort,
Somerset, Buckingham, Salisbury, York, Warwick and the Duchess of
Gloucester.

KING HENRY.
For my part, noble lords, I care not which;
Or Somerset or York, all’s one to me.

YORK.
If York have ill demeaned himself in France,
Then let him be denied the regentship.

SOMERSET.
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
Let York be regent; I will yield to him.

WARWICK.
Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that; York is the worthier.

CARDINAL.
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.

WARWICK.
The Cardinal’s not my better in the field.

BUCKINGHAM.
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.

WARWICK.
Warwick may live to be the best of all.

SALISBURY.
Peace, son!—And show some reason, Buckingham,
Why Somerset should be preferred in this.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Because the King, forsooth, will have it so.

GLOUCESTER.
Madam, the King is old enough himself
To give his censure. These are no women’s matters.

QUEEN MARGARET.
If he be old enough, what needs your grace
To be Protector of his excellence?

GLOUCESTER.
Madam, I am Protector of the realm,
And at his pleasure will resign my place.

SUFFOLK.
Resign it then, and leave thine insolence.
Since thou wert king—as who is king but thou?—
The commonwealth hath daily run to wrack,
The Dauphin hath prevailed beyond the seas,
And all the peers and nobles of the realm
Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.

CARDINAL.
The commons hast thou racked; the clergy’s bags
Are lank and lean with thy extortions.

SOMERSET.
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife’s attire
Have cost a mass of public treasury.

BUCKINGHAM.
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders hath exceeded law,
And left thee to the mercy of the law.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Thy sale of offices and towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.

[_Exit Gloucester. The Queen drops her fan._]

Give me my fan. What minion! Can ye not?

[_She gives the Duchess a box on the ear._]

I cry your mercy, madam; was it you?

ELEANOR.
Was’t I! Yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman.
Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
I’d set my ten commandments in your face.

KING HENRY.
Sweet aunt, be quiet; ’twas against her will.

ELEANOR.
Against her will! Good King, look to ’t in time;
She’ll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby.
Though in this place most master wear no breeches,
She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.

[_Exit._]

BUCKINGHAM.
Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds.
She’s tickled now; her fume needs no spurs,
She’ll gallop far enough to her destruction.

[_Exit._]

Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
Now, lords, my choler being overblown
With walking once about the quadrangle,
I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.
As for your spiteful false objections,
Prove them, and I lie open to the law;
But God in mercy so deal with my soul
As I in duty love my king and country!
But, to the matter that we have in hand:
I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man
To be your regent in the realm of France.

SUFFOLK.
Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.

YORK.
I’ll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride;
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
My Lord of Somerset will keep me here
Without discharge, money, or furniture,
Till France be won into the Dauphin’s hands.
Last time, I danced attendance on his will
Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost.

WARWICK.
That can I witness, and a fouler fact
Did never traitor in the land commit.

SUFFOLK.
Peace, headstrong Warwick!

WARWICK.
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?

Enter Horner the armourer and his man Peter, guarded.

SUFFOLK.
Because here is a man accused of treason.
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!

YORK.
Doth anyone accuse York for a traitor?

KING HENRY.
What mean’st thou, Suffolk? Tell me, what are these?

SUFFOLK.
Please it your majesty, this is the man
That doth accuse his master of high treason.
His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York
Was rightful heir unto the English crown,
And that your majesty was an usurper.

KING HENRY.
Say, man, were these thy words?

HORNER.
An ’t shall please your majesty, I never said nor thought any such
matter. God is my witness, I am falsely accused by the villain.

PETER.
By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them to me in the garret one
night as we were scouring my Lord of York’s armour.

YORK.
Base dunghill villain and mechanical,
I’ll have thy head for this thy traitor’s speech!—
I do beseech your royal majesty,
Let him have all the rigour of the law.

HORNER.
Alas, my lord, hang me if ever I spake the words. My accuser is my
prentice; and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he
did vow upon his knees he would be even with me. I have good witness of
this, therefore I beseech your majesty, do not cast away an honest man
for a villain’s accusation.

KING HENRY.
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?

GLOUCESTER.
This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be regent o’er the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion;
And let these have a day appointed them
For single combat in convenient place,
For he hath witness of his servant’s malice.
This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey’s doom.

SOMERSET.
I humbly thank your royal Majesty.

HORNER.
And I accept the combat willingly.

PETER.
Alas, my lord, I cannot fight; for God’s sake, pity my case! The spite
of man prevaileth against me. O Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never
be able to fight a blow. O Lord, my heart!

GLOUCESTER.
Sirrah, or you must fight or else be hanged.

KING HENRY.
Away with them to prison; and the day
Of combat shall be the last of the next month.
Come, Somerset, we’ll see thee sent away.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Gloucester’s Garden

Enter the Witch Margery Jourdain, the two Priests, Hume, Southwell and
Bolingbroke.

HUME.
Come, my masters. The duchess, I tell you, expects performance of your
promises.

BOLINGBROKE.
Master Hume, we are therefore provided. Will her ladyship behold and
hear our exorcisms?

HUME.
Ay, what else? Fear you not her courage.

BOLINGBROKE.
I have heard her reported to be a woman of an invincible spirit. But it
shall be convenient, Master Hume, that you be by her aloft while we be
busy below; and so, I pray you go, in God’s name, and leave us.

[_Exit Hume._]

Mother Jourdain, be you prostrate and grovel on the earth. John
Southwell, read you; and let us to our work.

Enter Duchess aloft, Hume following.

ELEANOR.
Well said, my masters; and welcome all. To this gear, the sooner the
better.

BOLINGBROKE.
Patience, good lady; wizards know their times.
Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
The time of night when Troy was set on fire,
The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl,
And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves;
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madam, sit you and fear not. Whom we raise
We will make fast within a hallowed verge.

[_Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the circle;
Bolingbroke or Southwell reads_ “Conjuro te”, _etc. It thunders and
lightens terribly; then the Spirit riseth._]

SPIRIT.
_Adsum_.

M. JOURDAIN.
Asnath,
By the eternal God, whose name and power
Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask;
For till thou speak thou shalt not pass from hence.

SPIRIT.
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!

BOLINGBROKE.
[_Reads_.] _First of the King: what shall of him become?_

SPIRIT.
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
But him outlive and die a violent death.

[_As the Spirit speaks, Southwell writes the answer._]

BOLINGBROKE.
[_Reads_.] _What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?_

SPIRIT.
By water shall he die and take his end.

BOLINGBROKE.
[_Reads_.] _What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?_

SPIRIT.
Let him shun castles.
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.

BOLINGBROKE.
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!
False fiend, avoid!

[_Thunder and lightning. Exit Spirit._]

Enter the Duke of York and the Duke of Buckingham with their Guard, and
Sir Humphrey Stafford, and break in.

YORK.
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
Beldam, I think we watched you at an inch.
What, madam, are you there? The King and commonweal
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains.
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdoned for these good deserts.

ELEANOR.
Not half so bad as thine to England’s king,
Injurious duke, that threatest where’s no cause.

BUCKINGHAM.
True, madam, none at all. What call you this?
Away with them! Let them be clapped up close
And kept asunder.—You, madam, shall with us.—
Stafford, take her to thee.

[_Exit Stafford._]

[_Exeunt above, Duchess and Hume, guarded._]

We’ll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
All, away!

[_Exeunt guard with  Jourdain, Southwell, Bolingbroke, etc._]

YORK.
Lord Buckingham, methinks you watched her well.
A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon!
Now, pray, my lord, let’s see the devil’s writ.
What have we here?
[_Reads_.] _The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose.
But him outlive and die a violent death._
Why, this is just
_Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse._
Well, to the rest:
_Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun castles;
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand._
Come, come, my lords, these oracles
Are hardly attained, and hardly understood.
The King is now in progress towards Saint Albans,
With him the husband of this lovely lady.
Thither go these news as fast as horse can carry them.
A sorry breakfast for my Lord Protector.

BUCKINGHAM.
Your Grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.

YORK.
At your pleasure, my good lord.

[_Exit Buckingham._]

Who’s within there, ho!

Enter a Servingman.

Invite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To sup with me tomorrow night. Away!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Saint Albans


Enter the King, Queen, Gloucester, Cardinal and Suffolk with Falconers
hallooing.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook
I saw not better sport these seven years’ day;
Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.

KING HENRY.
But what a point, my lord, your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flew above the rest!
To see how God in all His creatures works!
Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.

SUFFOLK.
No marvel, an it like your majesty,
My Lord Protector’s hawks do tower so well;
They know their master loves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughts above his falcon’s pitch.

GLOUCESTER.
My lord, ’tis but a base ignoble mind
That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.

CARDINAL.
I thought as much. He would be above the clouds.

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven?

KING HENRY.
The treasury of everlasting joy.

CARDINAL.
Thy heaven is on earth; thine eyes and thoughts
Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart,
Pernicious Protector, dangerous peer,
That smooth’st it so with king and commonweal!

GLOUCESTER.
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory?
_Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?_
Churchmen so hot? Good uncle, hide such malice.
With such holiness can you do it?

SUFFOLK.
No malice, sir; no more than well becomes
So good a quarrel and so bad a peer.

GLOUCESTER.
As who, my lord?

SUFFOLK.
Why, as you, my lord,
An ’t like your lordly Lord Protectorship.

GLOUCESTER.
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.

QUEEN MARGARET.
And thy ambition, Gloucester.

KING HENRY.
I prithee, peace, good queen,
And whet not on these furious peers;
For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.

CARDINAL.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make
Against this proud Protector, with my sword!

GLOUCESTER.
[_Aside to Cardinal_.] Faith, holy uncle, would ’twere come to that!

CARDINAL.
[_Aside to Gloucester_.] Marry, when thou dar’st.

GLOUCESTER.
[_Aside to Cardinal_.] Make up no factious numbers for the matter,
In thine own person answer thy abuse.

CARDINAL.
[_Aside to Gloucester_.] Ay, where thou dar’st not peep; an if thou
dar’st,
This evening, on the east side of the grove.

KING HENRY.
How now, my lords?

CARDINAL.
Believe me, cousin Gloucester,
Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport.—[_Aside to Gloucester_.]
Come with thy two-hand sword.

GLOUCESTER.
True, uncle.
[_Aside to Cardinal_.] Are ye advised? The east side of the grove?

CARDINAL.
[_Aside to Gloucester_.] I am with you.

KING HENRY.
Why, how now, uncle Gloucester?

GLOUCESTER.
Talking of hawking; nothing else, my lord.
[_Aside to Cardinal_.] Now, by God’s mother, priest,
I’ll shave your crown for this,
Or all my fence shall fail.

CARDINAL.
[_Aside to Gloucester_.] _Medice, teipsum._—
Protector, see to ’t well, protect yourself.

KING HENRY.
The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords.
How irksome is this music to my heart!
When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?
I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.

Enter a Townsman of Saint Albans, crying, “A miracle!”

GLOUCESTER.
What means this noise?
Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?

TOWNSMAN.
A miracle! A miracle!

SUFFOLK.
Come to the King, and tell him what miracle.

TOWNSMAN.
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban’s shrine,
Within this half hour, hath received his sight,
A man that ne’er saw in his life before.

KING HENRY.
Now, God be praised, that to believing souls
Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair!

Enter the Mayor of Saint Albans and his brethren, bearing Simpcox
between two in a chair, Simpcox’s Wife following.

CARDINAL.
Here comes the townsmen on procession,
To present your highness with the man.

KING HENRY.
Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.

GLOUCESTER.
Stand by, my masters. Bring him near the King.
His highness’ pleasure is to talk with him.

KING HENRY.
Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?

SIMPCOX.
Born blind, an ’t please your grace.

WIFE.
Ay, indeed, was he.

SUFFOLK.
What woman is this?

WIFE.
His wife, an ’t like your worship.

GLOUCESTER.
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have better told.

KING HENRY.
Where wert thou born?

SIMPCOX.
At Berwick in the north, an ’t like your grace.

KING HENRY.
Poor soul, God’s goodness hath been great to thee.
Let never day nor night unhallowed pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Tell me, good fellow, cam’st thou here by chance,
Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?

SIMPCOX.
God knows, of pure devotion; being called
A hundred times and oftener, in my sleep,
By good Saint Alban, who said “Simpcox, come,
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.”

WIFE.
Most true, forsooth; and many time and oft
Myself have heard a voice to call him so.

CARDINAL.
What, art thou lame?

SIMPCOX.
Ay, God Almighty help me!

SUFFOLK.
How cam’st thou so?

SIMPCOX.
A fall off of a tree.

WIFE.
A plum-tree, master.

GLOUCESTER.
How long hast thou been blind?

SIMPCOX.
O, born so, master.

GLOUCESTER.
What, and wouldst climb a tree?

SIMPCOX.
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.

WIFE.
Too true; and bought his climbing very dear.

GLOUCESTER.
Mass, thou lov’dst plums well, that wouldst venture so.

SIMPCOX.
Alas, good master, my wife desired some damsons,
And made me climb, with danger of my life.

GLOUCESTER.
A subtle knave! But yet it shall not serve.—
Let me see thine eyes. Wink now. Now open them.
In my opinion yet thou seest not well.

SIMPCOX.
Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint Alban.

GLOUCESTER.
Sayst thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?

SIMPCOX.
Red, master, red as blood.

GLOUCESTER.
Why, that’s well said. What colour is my gown of?

SIMPCOX.
Black, forsooth, coal-black as jet.

KING HENRY.
Why, then, thou know’st what colour jet is of?

SUFFOLK.
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.

GLOUCESTER.
But cloaks and gowns before this day, a many.

WIFE.
Never before this day in all his life.

GLOUCESTER.
Tell me, sirrah, what’s my name?

SIMPCOX.
Alas, master, I know not.

GLOUCESTER.
What’s his name?

SIMPCOX.
I know not.

GLOUCESTER.
Nor his?

SIMPCOX.
No, indeed, master.

GLOUCESTER.
What’s thine own name?

SIMPCOX.
Sander Simpcox, an if it please you, master.

GLOUCESTER.
Then, Sander, sit there, the lyingest knave in Christendom. If thou
hadst been born blind, thou mightst as well have known all our names as
thus to name the several colours we do wear. Sight may distinguish of
colours; but suddenly to nominate them all, it is impossible.—My lords,
Saint Alban here hath done a miracle; and would ye not think his
cunning to be great that could restore this cripple to his legs again?

SIMPCOX.
O master, that you could!

GLOUCESTER.
My masters of Saint Albans, have you not beadles in your town, and
things called whips?

MAYOR.
Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.

GLOUCESTER.
Then send for one presently.

MAYOR.
Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.

[_Exit a Townsman._]

GLOUCESTER.
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by.—Now, sirrah, if you mean to save
yourself from whipping, leap me over this stool and run away.

SIMPCOX.
Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone.
You go about to torture me in vain.

Enter a Beadle with whips.

GLOUCESTER.
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs.
Sirrah beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.

BEADLE.
I will, my lord.—Come on, sirrah; off with your doublet quickly.

SIMPCOX.
Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.

[_After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs
away; and they follow and cry, “A miracle!”_]

KING HENRY.
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?

QUEEN MARGARET.
It made me laugh to see the villain run.

GLOUCESTER.
Follow the knave, and take this drab away.

WIFE.
Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.

GLOUCESTER.
Let them be whipped through every market town
Till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.

[_Exeunt Wife, Beadle, Mayor, etc._]

CARDINAL.
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle today.

SUFFOLK.
True, made the lame to leap and fly away.

GLOUCESTER.
But you have done more miracles than I.
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.

Enter Buckingham.

KING HENRY.
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM.
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector’s wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practised dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry’s life and death,
And other of your highness’ Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.

CARDINAL.
[_Aside to Gloucester_.] And so, my Lord Protector, by this means
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
This news, I think, hath turned your weapon’s edge;
’Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.

GLOUCESTER.
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart.
Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers,
And, vanquished as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest groom.

KING HENRY.
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!

QUEEN MARGARET.
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest,
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.

GLOUCESTER.
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal
How I have loved my king and commonweal;
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands.
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is; but if she have forgot
Honour and virtue, and conversed with such
As like to pitch defile nobility,
I banish her my bed and company
And give her as a prey to law and shame
That hath dishonoured Gloucester’s honest name.

KING HENRY.
Well, for this night we will repose us here;
Tomorrow toward London back again,
To look into this business thoroughly,
And call these foul offenders to their answers,
And poise the cause in Justice’ equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. London. The Duke of York’s Garden

Enter York, Salisbury and Warwick.

YORK.
Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended, give me leave
In this close walk to satisfy myself
In craving your opinion of my title,
Which is infallible, to England’s crown.

SALISBURY.
My lord, I long to hear it at full.

WARWICK.
Sweet York, begin; and if thy claim be good,
The Nevilles are thy subjects to command.

YORK.
Then thus:
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester;
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Who after Edward the Third’s death reigned as king,
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Crowned by the name of Henry the Fourth,
Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came,
And him to Pomfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.

WARWICK.
Father, the Duke hath told the truth;
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.

YORK.
Which now they hold by force and not by right;
For Richard, the first son’s heir, being dead,
The issue of the next son should have reigned.

SALISBURY.
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.

YORK.
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
I claim the crown, had issue, Philippa, a daughter,
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.
Edmund had issue, Roger, Earl of March;
Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne, and Eleanor.

SALISBURY.
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
But to the rest.

YORK.
His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir unto the crown,
Married Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was son
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third’s fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom; she was heir
To Roger, Earl of March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippa,
Sole daughter unto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the issue of the elder son
Succeed before the younger, I am king.

WARWICK.
What plain proceeding is more plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; York claims it from the third.
Till Lionel’s issue fails, his should not reign;
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And in this private plot be we the first
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
With honour of his birthright to the crown.

BOTH.
Long live our sovereign Richard, England’s king!

YORK.
We thank you, lords. But I am not your king
Till I be crowned, and that my sword be stained
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
And that’s not suddenly to be performed,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days—
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk’s insolence,
At Beaufort’s pride, at Somerset’s ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the crew of them,
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey.
’Tis that they seek; and they, in seeking that,
Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.

SALISBURY.
My lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.

WARWICK.
My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.

YORK.
And, Neville, this I do assure myself:
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England but the king.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A Hall of Justice

Sound trumpets. Enter the King, the Queen, Gloucester, York, Suffolk
and Salisbury; the Duchess of Gloucester, Margery Jourdain, Southwell,
Hume and Bolingbroke under guard.

KING HENRY.
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester’s wife.
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great;
Receive the sentence of the law for sins
Such as by God’s book are adjudged to death.
You four, from hence to prison back again;
From thence unto the place of execution.
The witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
You, madam, for you are more nobly born,
Despoiled of your honour in your life,
Shall, after three days’ open penance done,
Live in your country here in banishment,
With Sir John Stanley in the Isle of Man.

ELEANOR.
Welcome is banishment; welcome were my death.

GLOUCESTER.
Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee.
I cannot justify whom the law condemns.

[_Exeunt Duchess and the other prisoners, guarded._]

Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!—
I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace, and mine age would ease.

KING HENRY.
Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester. Ere thou go,
Give up thy staff. Henry will to himself
Protector be; and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide, and lantern to my feet.
And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved
Than when thou wert Protector to thy king.

QUEEN MARGARET.
I see no reason why a king of years
Should be to be protected like a child.
God and King Henry govern England’s realm!
Give up your staff, sir, and the King his realm.

GLOUCESTER.
My staff? Here, noble Henry, is my staff.
As willingly do I the same resign
As e’er thy father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good King. When I am dead and gone,
May honourable peace attend thy throne.

[_Exit._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Why, now is Henry King and Margaret Queen,
And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim. Two pulls at once;
His lady banished, and a limb lopped off.
This staff of honour raught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be, in Henry’s hand.

SUFFOLK.
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanor’s pride dies in her youngest days.

YORK.
Lords, let him go.—Please it your majesty,
This is the day appointed for the combat,
And ready are the appellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
So please your highness to behold the fight.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, good my lord; for purposely therefore
Left I the court to see this quarrel tried.

KING HENRY.
I’ God’s name, see the lists and all things fit.
Here let them end it, and God defend the right!

YORK.
I never saw a fellow worse bested,
Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,
The servant of his armourer, my lords.

Enter at one door Horner the armourer, and his Neighbours, drinking to
him so much that he is drunk; and he enters with a drum before him and
his staff with a sandbag fastened to it; and at the other door Peter,
his man, with a drum and sandbag, and Prentices  drinking to him.

1 NEIGHBOUR.
Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of sack; and fear not,
neighbour, you shall do well enough.

2 NEIGHBOUR.
And here, neighbour, here’s a cup of charneco.

3 NEIGHBOUR.
And here’s a pot of good double beer, neighbour. Drink, and fear not
your man.

HORNER.
Let it come, i’ faith, and I’ll pledge you all; and a fig for Peter!

1 PRENTICE.
Here, Peter, I drink to thee, and be not afraid.

2 PRENTICE.
Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master. Fight for credit of the
prentices.

PETER.
I thank you all. Drink, and pray for me, I pray you, for I think I have
taken my last draught in this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give
thee my apron; and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer; and here, Tom,
take all the money that I have. O Lord bless me! I pray God, for I am
never able to deal with my master, he hath learnt so much fence
already.

SALISBURY.
Come, leave your drinking and fall to blows.
Sirrah, what’s thy name?

PETER.
Peter, forsooth.

SALISBURY.
Peter? What more?

PETER.
Thump.

SALISBURY.
Thump! Then see thou thump thy master well.

HORNER.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man’s instigation, to
prove him a knave and myself an honest man; and touching the Duke of
York, I will take my death I never meant him any ill, nor the King, nor
the Queen; and therefore, Peter, have at thee with a downright blow!

YORK.
Dispatch! This knave’s tongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets. Alarum to the combatants!

[_They fight, and Peter strikes him down._]

HORNER.
Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.

[_Dies._]

YORK.
Take away his weapon.—Fellow, thank God and the good wine in thy
master’s way.

PETER.
O God, have I overcome mine enemies in this presence? O Peter, thou
hast prevailed in right!

KING HENRY.
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight,
For by his death we do perceive his guilt.
And God in justice hath revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully.
Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.

[_Sound a flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Street

Enter Gloucester and his Servingmen in mourning cloaks.

GLOUCESTER.
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
And after summer evermore succeeds
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold;
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what’s o’clock?

SERVINGMEN.
Ten, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
To watch the coming of my punished duchess.
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face
With envious looks, laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud chariot wheels
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
But, soft! I think she comes; and I’ll prepare
My tear-stained eyes to see her miseries.

Enter the Duchess of Gloucester in a white sheet, and a taper burning
in her hand; with Sir John Stanley, the Sheriff, and Officers.

SERVINGMEN.
So please your Grace, we’ll take her from the sheriff.

GLOUCESTER.
No, stir not for your lives; let her pass by.

ELEANOR.
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!

GLOUCESTER.
Be patient, gentle Nell, forget this grief.

ELEANOR.
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
And thou a prince, Protector of this land,
Methinks I should not thus be led along,
Mailed up in shame, with papers on my back,
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trowest thou that e’er I’ll look upon the world,
Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?
No, dark shall be my light and night my day;
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Sometimes I’ll say, I am Duke Humphrey’s wife,
And he a prince and ruler of the land;
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.
But be thou mild and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will.
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings;
And fly thou how thou canst, they’ll tangle thee.
But fear not thou until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.

GLOUCESTER.
Ah, Nell, forbear! Thou aimest all awry.
I must offend before I be attainted;
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away,
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell.
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience;
These few days’ wonder will be quickly worn.

Enter a Herald.

HERALD.
I summon your grace to his majesty’s parliament,
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.

GLOUCESTER.
And my consent ne’er asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.

[_Exit Herald._]

My Nell, I take my leave; and, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceed the King’s commission.

SHERIFF.
An ’t please your grace, here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.

GLOUCESTER.
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?

STANLEY.
So am I given in charge, may ’t please your grace.

GLOUCESTER.
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
You use her well. The world may laugh again,
And I may live to do you kindness if
You do it her. And so, Sir John, farewell.

ELEANOR.
What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell?

GLOUCESTER.
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.

[_Exeunt Gloucester and Servingmen._]

ELEANOR.
Art thou gone too? All comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me; my joy is death;
Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard,
Because I wished this world’s eternity.
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence,
I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
Only convey me where thou art commanded.

STANLEY.
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
There to be used according to your state.

ELEANOR.
That’s bad enough, for I am but reproach;
And shall I then be used reproachfully?

STANLEY.
Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey’s lady;
According to that state you shall be used.

ELEANOR.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.

SHERIFF.
It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.

ELEANOR.
Ay, ay, farewell; thy office is discharged.
Come, Stanley, shall we go?

STANLEY.
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire you for our journey.

ELEANOR.
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet,
No, it will hang upon my richest robes
And show itself, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way, I long to see my prison.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund’s


Sound a sennet. Enter the King, the Queen, Cardinal Beaufort, Suffolk,
York, Buckingham, Salisbury and Warwick to the Parliament.

KING HENRY.
I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come.
’Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,
Whate’er occasion keeps him from us now.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Can you not see, or will ye not observe
The strangeness of his altered countenance?
With what a majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We know the time since he was mild and affable;
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his knee,
That all the court admired him for submission.
But meet him now, and be it in the morn
When everyone will give the time of day,
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin,
But great men tremble when the lion roars;
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
First note that he is near you in descent,
And should you fall, he is the next will mount.
Me seemeth then it is no policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your royal person
Or be admitted to your Highness’ Council.
By flattery hath he won the commons’ hearts;
And when he please to make commotion,
’Tis to be feared they all will follow him.
Now ’tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;
Suffer them now, and they’ll o’ergrow the garden
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, can it a woman’s fear;
Which fear if better reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe and say I wronged the Duke.
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation if you can,
Or else conclude my words effectual.

SUFFOLK.
Well hath your highness seen into this Duke;
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your grace’s tale.
The Duchess by his subornation,
Upon my life, began her devilish practices;
Or, if he were not privy to those faults,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent,
As next the King he was successive heir,
And such high vaunts of his nobility—
Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick Duchess
By wicked means to frame our sovereign’s fall.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,
And in his simple show he harbours treason.
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.

CARDINAL.
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Devise strange deaths for small offences done?

YORK.
And did he not, in his protectorship,
Levy great sums of money through the realm
For soldiers’ pay in France, and never sent it?
By means whereof the towns each day revolted.

BUCKINGHAM.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humphrey.

KING HENRY.
My lords, at once: the care you have of us
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot
Is worthy praise; but, shall I speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
From meaning treason to our royal person
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove.
The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ah, what’s more dangerous than this fond affiance?
Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrowed,
For he’s disposed as the hateful raven.
Is he a lamb? His skin is surely lent him,
For he’s inclined as is the ravenous wolves.
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.

Enter Somerset.

SOMERSET.
All health unto my gracious sovereign!

KING HENRY.
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?

SOMERSET.
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you; all is lost.

KING HENRY.
Cold news, Lord Somerset; but God’s will be done.

YORK.
[_Aside_.] Cold news for me, for I had hope of France
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud,
And caterpillars eat my leaves away;
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.

Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
All happiness unto my lord the King!
Pardon, my liege, that I have staid so long.

SUFFOLK.
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art.
I do arrest thee of high treason here.

GLOUCESTER.
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush,
Nor change my countenance for this arrest.
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.
The purest spring is not so free from mud
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign.
Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?

YORK.
’Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,
And, being Protector, stayed the soldiers’ pay,
By means whereof his highness hath lost France.

GLOUCESTER.
Is it but thought so? What are they that think it?
I never robbed the soldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
So help me God, as I have watched the night,
Ay, night by night, in studying good for England!
That doit that e’er I wrested from the King,
Or any groat I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my trial day!
No, many a pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy commons,
Have I dispursed to the garrisons
And never asked for restitution.

CARDINAL.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.

GLOUCESTER.
I say no more than truth, so help me God!

YORK.
In your protectorship you did devise
Strange tortures for offenders never heard of,
That England was defamed by tyranny.

GLOUCESTER.
Why, ’tis well known that, whiles I was Protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me;
For I should melt at an offender’s tears,
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
Unless it were a bloody murderer,
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment.
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the felon or what trespass else.

SUFFOLK.
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered;
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
I do arrest you in his highness’ name,
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
To keep until your further time of trial.

KING HENRY.
My Lord of Gloucester, ’tis my special hope
That you will clear yourself from all suspense.
My conscience tells me you are innocent.

GLOUCESTER.
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous.
Virtue is choked with foul ambition,
And charity chased hence by rancour’s hand;
Foul subornation is predominant,
And equity exiled your highness’ land.
I know their complot is to have my life;
And if my death might make this island happy
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness.
But mine is made the prologue to their play;
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
Beaufort’s red sparkling eyes blab his heart’s malice,
And Suffolk’s cloudy brow his stormy hate;
Sharp Buckingham unburdens with his tongue
The envious load that lies upon his heart;
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm I have plucked back,
By false accuse doth level at my life.
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head
And with your best endeavour have stirred up
My liefest liege to be mine enemy.
Ay, all of you have laid your heads together—
Myself had notice of your conventicles—
And all to make away my guiltless life.
I shall not want false witness to condemn me,
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt.
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
“A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.”

CARDINAL.
My liege, his railing is intolerable.
If those that care to keep your royal person
From treason’s secret knife and traitor’s rage
Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at,
And the offender granted scope of speech,
’Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.

SUFFOLK.
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though clerkly couched,
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations to o’erthrow his state?

QUEEN MARGARET.
But I can give the loser leave to chide.

GLOUCESTER.
Far truer spoke than meant. I lose, indeed.
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false!
And well such losers may have leave to speak.

BUCKINGHAM.
He’ll wrest the sense and hold us here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.

CARDINAL.
Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.

GLOUCESTER.
Ah, thus King Henry throws away his crutch
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.
Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear were false; ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.

[_Exit Gloucester, guarded._]

KING HENRY.
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best
Do, or undo, as if ourself were here.

QUEEN MARGARET.
What, will your highness leave the parliament?

KING HENRY.
Ay, Margaret; my heart is drowned with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,
My body round engirt with misery;
For what’s more miserable than discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey, in thy face I see
The map of honour, truth, and loyalty;
And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
That e’er I proved thee false or feared thy faith.
What louring star now envies thy estate
That these great lords and Margaret our Queen
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
Thou never didst them wrong nor no man wrong.
And as the butcher takes away the calf
And binds the wretch and beats it when it strains,
Bearing it to the bloody slaughterhouse,
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence;
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do naught but wail her darling’s loss,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucester’s case
With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimmed eyes
Look after him, and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
His fortunes I will weep and ’twixt each groan
Say “Who’s a traitor? Gloucester he is none.”

[_Exeunt all but Queen, Cardinal Beaufort, Suffolk and York; Somerset
remains apart._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun’s hot beams.
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Too full of foolish pity; and Gloucester’s show
Beguiles him, as the mournful crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers,
Or as the snake, rolled in a flowering bank,
With shining checkered slough, doth sting a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I—
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good—
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
To rid us from the fear we have of him.

CARDINAL.
That he should die is worthy policy,
But yet we want a colour for his death.
’Tis meet he be condemned by course of law.

SUFFOLK.
But, in my mind, that were no policy.
The King will labour still to save his life,
The commons haply rise to save his life,
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.

YORK.
So that, by this, you would not have him die.

SUFFOLK.
Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!

YORK.
’Tis York that hath more reason for his death.
But, my Lord Cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls:
Were ’t not all one an empty eagle were set
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite,
As place Duke Humphrey for the King’s Protector?

QUEEN MARGARET.
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.

SUFFOLK.
Madam, ’tis true; and were ’t not madness then
To make the fox surveyor of the fold,
Who being accused a crafty murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over
Because his purpose is not executed?
No, let him die in that he is a fox,
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Before his chaps be stained with crimson blood,
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him;
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking, ’tis no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Thrice-noble Suffolk, ’tis resolutely spoke.

SUFFOLK.
Not resolute, except so much were done,
For things are often spoke and seldom meant;
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his priest.

CARDINAL.
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due orders for a priest.
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
And I’ll provide his executioner.
I tender so the safety of my liege.

SUFFOLK.
Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.

QUEEN MARGARET.
And so say I.

YORK.
And I. And now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.

Enter a Post.

POST.
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain
To signify that rebels there are up
And put the Englishmen unto the sword.
Send succours, lords, and stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow uncurable;
For, being green, there is great hope of help.

CARDINAL.
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?

YORK.
That Somerset be sent as regent thither.
’Tis meet that lucky ruler be employed;
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.

SOMERSET.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the regent there instead of me,
He never would have stayed in France so long.

YORK.
No, not to lose it all as thou hast done.
I rather would have lost my life betimes
Than bring a burden of dishonour home
By staying there so long till all were lost.
Show me one scar charactered on thy skin;
Men’s flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with.
No more, good York. Sweet Somerset, be still.
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse than his.

YORK.
What, worse than naught? Nay, then a shame take all!

SOMERSET.
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!

CARDINAL.
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.
Th’ uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen.
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
Collected choicely, from each county some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen?

YORK.
I will, my lord, so please his majesty.

SUFFOLK.
Why, our authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms.
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.

YORK.
I am content. Provide me soldiers, lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.

SUFFOLK.
A charge, Lord York, that I will see performed.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.

CARDINAL.
No more of him; for I will deal with him
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
And so break off; the day is almost spent.
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.

YORK.
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristol I expect my soldiers;
For there I’ll ship them all for Ireland.

SUFFOLK.
I’ll see it truly done, my Lord of York.

[_Exeunt all but York._]

YORK.
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt to resolution.
Be that thou hop’st to be, or what thou art
Resign to death; it is not worth th’ enjoying.
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man
And find no harbour in a royal heart.
Faster than springtime showers comes thought on thought,
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
My brain, more busy than the labouring spider
Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, ’tis politicly done,
To send me packing with an host of men;
I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
Who, cherished in your breasts, will sting your hearts.
’Twas men I lacked, and you will give them me;
I take it kindly, yet be well assured
You put sharp weapons in a madman’s hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
I will stir up in England some black storm
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuit on my head,
Like to the glorious sun’s transparent beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
And for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as full well he can,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
And fought so long till that his thighs with darts
Were almost like a sharp-quilled porpentine;
And in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
Full often, like a shag-haired crafty kern,
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
And undiscovered come to me again
And given me notice of their villainies.
This devil here shall be my substitute;
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble.
By this I shall perceive the commons’ mind,
How they affect the house and claim of York.
Say he be taken, racked, and tortured,
I know no pain they can inflict upon him
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Say that he thrive, as ’tis great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my strength
And reap the harvest which that rascal sowed.
For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. Bury St. Edmund’s. A Room of State

Enter two or three Murderers running over the stage, from the murder of
Duke Humphrey.

1 MURDERER.
Run to my Lord of Suffolk; let him know
We have dispatched the Duke as he commanded.

2 MURDERER.
O that it were to do! What have we done?
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?

Enter Suffolk.

1 MURDERER.
Here comes my lord.

SUFFOLK.
Now, sirs, have you dispatched this thing?

1 MURDERER.
Ay, my good lord, he’s dead.

SUFFOLK.
Why, that’s well said. Go, get you to my house;
I will reward you for this venturous deed.
The King and all the peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?

1 MURDERER.
’Tis, my good lord.

SUFFOLK.
Away, be gone!

[_Exeunt Murderers._]

Sound trumpets. Enter the King, the Queen, Cardinal Beaufort, Somerset
with attendants.

KING HENRY.
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight;
Say we intend to try his grace today
If he be guilty, as ’tis published.

SUFFOLK.
I’ll call him presently, my noble lord.

[_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,
Proceed no straiter ’gainst our uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence of good esteem
He be approved in practice culpable.

QUEEN MARGARET.
God forbid any malice should prevail
That faultless may condemn a nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!

KING HENRY.
I thank thee, Meg; these words content me much.

Enter Suffolk.

How now? Why look’st thou pale? Why tremblest thou?
Where is our uncle? What’s the matter, Suffolk?

SUFFOLK.
Dead in his bed, my lord; Gloucester is dead.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Marry, God forfend!

CARDINAL.
God’s secret judgment! I did dream tonight
The Duke was dumb and could not speak a word.

[_The King swoons._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
How fares my lord? Help, lords! the King is dead.

SOMERSET.
Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!

SUFFOLK.
He doth revive again. Madam, be patient.

KING HENRY.
O heavenly God!

QUEEN MARGARET.
How fares my gracious lord?

SUFFOLK.
Comfort, my sovereign! Gracious Henry, comfort!

KING HENRY.
What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a raven’s note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words;
Lay not thy hands on me. Forbear, I say!
Their touch affrights me as a serpent’s sting.
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
Upon thy eyeballs murderous tyranny
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding.
Yet do not go away; come, basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight.
For in the shade of death I shall find joy,
In life but double death, now Gloucester’s dead.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the Duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death.
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the noble Duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow friends.
It may be judged I made the Duke away;
So shall my name with slander’s tongue be wounded
And princes’ courts be filled with my reproach.
This get I by his death. Ay me, unhappy!
To be a queen, and crowned with infamy!

KING HENRY.
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!

QUEEN MARGARET.
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper. Look on me.
What, art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn Queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester’s tomb?
Why, then, Dame Margaret was ne’er thy joy.
Erect his statue and worship it,
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh wracked upon the sea
And twice by awkward wind from England’s bank
Drove back again unto my native clime?
What boded this, but well forewarning wind
Did seem to say “Seek not a scorpion’s nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind shore?”
What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves
And bid them blow towards England’s blessed shore
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock?
Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee.
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drowned on shore
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness.
The splitting rocks cowered in the sinking sands
And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
I stood upon the hatches in the storm,
And when the dusky sky began to rob
My earnest-gaping sight of thy land’s view,
I took a costly jewel from my neck—
A heart it was, bound in with diamonds—
And threw it towards thy land. The sea received it,
And so I wished thy body might my heart.
And even with this I lost fair England’s view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart,
And called them blind and dusky spectacles,
For losing ken of Albion’s wished coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolk’s tongue,
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His father’s acts commenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witched like her? Or thou not false like him?
Ay me, I can no more! Die, Margaret,
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.

Noise within. Enter Warwick, Salisbury and many Commons.

WARWICK.
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murdered
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort’s means.
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, scatter up and down
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Myself have calmed their spleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.

KING HENRY.
That he is dead, good Warwick, ’tis too true;
But how he died God knows, not Henry.
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.

WARWICK.
That shall I do, my liege.—Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitude till I return.

[_Warwick exits through one door; Salisbury and Commons exit through
another._]

KING HENRY.
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,
My thoughts that labour to persuade my soul
Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey’s life.
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
For judgment only doth belong to Thee.
Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling;
But all in vain are these mean obsequies.
And to survey his dead and earthy image,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?

Enter Warwick and others, bearing Gloucester’s body on a bed.

WARWICK.
Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.

KING HENRY.
That is to see how deep my grave is made,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace;
For seeing him, I see my life in death.

WARWICK.
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon Him
To free us from His Father’s wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.

SUFFOLK.
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?

WARWICK.
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale, and bloodless,
Being all descended to the labouring heart,
Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aidance ’gainst the enemy,
Which with the heart there cools and ne’er returneth
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
But see, his face is black and full of blood,
His eyeballs further out than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly like a strangled man;
His hair upreared, his nostrils stretched with struggling,
His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped
And tugged for life and was by strength subdued.
Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking;
His well-proportioned beard made rough and rugged,
Like to the summer’s corn by tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he was murdered here;
The least of all these signs were probable.

SUFFOLK.
Why, Warwick, who should do the Duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection,
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.

WARWICK.
But both of you were vowed Duke Humphrey’s foes,
And you, forsooth, had the good Duke to keep.
’Tis like you would not feast him like a friend,
And ’tis well seen he found an enemy.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As guilty of Duke Humphrey’s timeless death.

WARWICK.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh
And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
But will suspect ’twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttock’s nest
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where’s your knife?
Is Beaufort termed a kite? Where are his talons?

SUFFOLK.
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men,
But here’s a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
That slanders me with murder’s crimson badge.
Say, if thou dar’st, proud Lord of Warwickshire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey’s death.

[_Exeunt Cardinal, Somerset and others._]

WARWICK.
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?

QUEEN MARGARET.
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit,
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.

WARWICK.
Madam, be still, with reverence may I say;
For every word you speak in his behalf
Is slander to your royal dignity.

SUFFOLK.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanour!
If ever lady wronged her lord so much,
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some stern untutored churl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art,
And never of the Nevilles’ noble race.

WARWICK.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereign’s presence makes me mild,
I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech
And say it was thy mother that thou meant’st,
That thou thyself wast born in bastardy;
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!

SUFFOLK.
Thou shalt be waking while I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dar’st go with me.

WARWICK.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence.
Unworthy though thou art, I’ll cope with thee
And do some service to Duke Humphrey’s ghost.

[_Exeunt Suffolk and Warwick._]

KING HENRY.
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, though locked up in steel,
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.

[_A noise within._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
What noise is this?

Enter Suffolk and Warwick with their weapons drawn.

KING HENRY.
Why, how now, lords? Your wrathful weapons drawn
Here in our presence? Dare you be so bold?
Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?

SUFFOLK.
The traitorous Warwick with the men of Bury
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.

Enter Salisbury.

SALISBURY.
[_To the Commons, entering_.]
Sirs, stand apart; the King shall know your mind.—
Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
Or banished fair England’s territories,
They will by violence tear him from your palace
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died;
They say, in him they fear your highness’ death;
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
They say, in care of your most royal person,
That if your highness should intend to sleep
And charge that no man should disturb your rest,
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue,
That slyly glided towards your majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked,
Lest, being suffered in that harmful slumber,
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal.
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, whe’er you will or no,
From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed and fatal sting
Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say, is shamefully bereft of life.

COMMONS.
[_Within_.] An answer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury!

SUFFOLK.
’Tis like the commons, rude unpolished hinds,
Could send such message to their sovereign.
But you, my lord, were glad to be employed,
To show how quaint an orator you are.
But all the honour Salisbury hath won
Is that he was the lord ambassador
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the King.

COMMONS.
[_Within_.] An answer from the King, or we will all break in!

KING HENRY.
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me,
I thank them for their tender loving care;
And had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat.
For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state by Suffolk’s means.
And therefore, by His majesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air
But three days longer, on the pain of death.

[_Exit Salisbury._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!

KING HENRY.
Ungentle Queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say; if thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word;
But when I swear, it is irrevocable.
If, after three days’ space, thou here be’st found
On any ground that I am ruler of,
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me;
I have great matters to impart to thee.

[_Exeunt all but Queen and Suffolk._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
Heart’s discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company!
There’s two of you; the devil make a third!
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!

SUFFOLK.
Cease, gentle Queen, these execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Has thou not spirit to curse thine enemies?

SUFFOLK.
A plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse them?
Could curses kill, as doth the mandrake’s groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words;
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint;
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract;
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
And even now my burdened heart would break
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress-trees!
Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks;
Their softest touch as smart as lizards’ stings!
Their music frightful as the serpent’s hiss,
And boding screech-owls make the consort full!
All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell—

QUEEN MARGARET.
Enough, sweet Suffolk; thou torment’st thyself,
And these dread curses, like the sun ’gainst glass,
Or like an overcharged gun, recoil
And turns the force of them upon thyself.

SUFFOLK.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now, by the ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a winter’s night,
Though standing naked on a mountain top
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.

QUEEN MARGARET.
O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tears;
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place
To wash away my woeful monuments.
O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
’Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,
Adventure to be banished myself;
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go; speak not to me, even now be gone!
O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemned
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee.

SUFFOLK.
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
’Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence.
A wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company;
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
With every several pleasure in the world;
And where thou art not, desolation.
I can no more. Live thou to joy thy life,
Myself no joy in nought but that thou liv’st.

Enter Vaux.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?

VAUX.
To signify unto his majesty
That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,
Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.
Sometime he talks as if Duke Humphrey’s ghost
Were by his side; sometime he calls the King
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul.
And I am sent to tell his majesty
That even now he cries aloud for him.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Go tell this heavy message to the King.

[_Exit Vaux._]

Ay me! What is this world? What news are these!
But wherefore grieve I at an hour’s poor loss,
Omitting Suffolk’s exile, my soul’s treasure?
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears,
Theirs for the earth’s increase, mine for my sorrows’?
Now get thee hence. The King, thou know’st, is coming;
If thou be found by me thou art but dead.

SUFFOLK.
If I depart from thee, I cannot live;
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
Dying with mother’s dug between its lips;
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth.
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To die by thee were but to die in jest;
From thee to die were torture more than death.
O, let me stay, befall what may befall!

QUEEN MARGARET.
Away! Though parting be a fretful corrosive,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk! Let me hear from thee,
For whereso’er thou art in this world’s globe
I’ll have an Iris that shall find thee out.

SUFFOLK.
I go.

QUEEN MARGARET.
And take my heart with thee.

SUFFOLK.
A jewel, locked into the woefull’st cask
That ever did contain a thing of worth.
Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we.
This way fall I to death.

QUEEN MARGARET.
This way for me.

[_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE III. A Bedchamber

Enter the King, Salisbury and Warwick, to the Cardinal in bed.

KING HENRY.
How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.

CARDINAL.
If thou be’st Death, I’ll give thee England’s treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou wilt let me live and feel no pain.

KING HENRY.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life
Where death’s approach is seen so terrible!

WARWICK.
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.

CARDINAL.
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? Where should he die?
Can I make men live, whe’er they will or no?
O, torture me no more! I will confess.
Alive again? Then show me where he is.
I’ll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair; look, look, it stands upright,
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.

KING HENRY.
O Thou eternal mover of the heavens,
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
That lays strong siege unto this wretch’s soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair!

WARWICK.
See how the pangs of death do make him grin!

SALISBURY.
Disturb him not; let him pass peaceably.

KING HENRY.
Peace to his soul, if God’s good pleasure be!
Lord Cardinal, if thou think’st on heaven’s bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!

WARWICK.
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.

KING HENRY.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close,
And let us all to meditation.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Coast of Kent


Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a Lieutenant, Suffolk,
disguised, a prisoner. The Master, a Master’s Mate, Walter Whitmore,
and prisoners.

LIEUTENANT.
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea;
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night,
Who, with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Clip dead men’s graves and from their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore.
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee,
And thou that art his mate, make boot of this;
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.

1 GENTLEMAN.
What is my ransom, master? Let me know.

MASTER.
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.

MATE.
And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.

LIEUTENANT.
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
Cut both the villains’ throats—for die you shall.
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!

1 GENTLEMAN.
I’ll give it, sir, and therefore spare my life.

2 GENTLEMAN.
And so will I, and write home for it straight.

WHITMORE.
[_To Suffolk_.] I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it shalt thou die;
And so should these, if I might have my will.

LIEUTENANT.
Be not so rash; take ransom, let him live.

SUFFOLK.
Look on my George; I am a gentleman.
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.

WHITMORE.
And so am I; my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now! Why starts thou? What, doth death affright?

SUFFOLK.
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
A cunning man did calculate my birth
And told me that by water I should die.
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.

WHITMORE.
Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not.
Never yet did base dishonour blur our name
But with our sword we wiped away the blot.
Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimed a coward through the world!

SUFFOLK.
Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.

WHITMORE.
The Duke of Suffolk, muffled up in rags?

SUFFOLK.
Ay, but these rags are no part of the Duke.
Jove sometime went disguised, and why not I?

LIEUTENANT.
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.

SUFFOLK.
Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry’s blood,
The honourable blood of Lancaster,
Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
Hast thou not kissed thy hand and held my stirrup?
Bareheaded plodded by my foot-cloth mule,
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneeled down at the board,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee crestfallen,
Ay, and allay thus thy abortive pride.
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.

WHITMORE.
Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?

LIEUTENANT.
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.

SUFFOLK.
Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.

LIEUTENANT.
Convey him hence, and on our longboat’s side
Strike off his head.

SUFFOLK.
Thou dar’st not, for thy own.

LIEUTENANT.
Yes, poll!

SUFFOLK.
Pole!

LIEUTENANT.
Pool! Sir Pool! Lord!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks;
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For swallowing the treasure of the realm.
Thy lips that kissed the Queen shall sweep the ground;
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey’s death
Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again.
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell,
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
By devilish policy art thou grown great
And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged
With gobbets of thy mother’s bleeding heart.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France,
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevilles all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee are rising up in arms.
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
And lofty, proud, encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colours
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
Under the which is writ “_Invitis nubibus_.”
The commons here in Kent are up in arms;
And, to conclude, reproach and beggary
Is crept into the palace of our King,
And all by thee.—Away! Convey him hence.

SUFFOLK.
O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
Small things make base men proud. This villain here,
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate.
Drones suck not eagles’ blood but rob beehives.
It is impossible that I should die
By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
Thy words move rage and not remorse in me.
I go of message from the Queen to France;
I charge thee waft me safely ’cross the Channel.

LIEUTENANT.
Walter.

WHITMORE.
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.

SUFFOLK.
_Pene gelidus timor occupat artus_.
It is thee I fear.

WHITMORE.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now? Now will ye stoop?

1 GENTLEMAN.
My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.

SUFFOLK.
Suffolk’s imperial tongue is stern and rough,
Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.
Far be it we should honour such as these
With humble suit. No, rather let my head
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
Save to the God of heaven and to my King;
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
Than stand uncovered to the vulgar groom.
True nobility is exempt from fear;
More can I bear than you dare execute.

LIEUTENANT.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.

SUFFOLK.
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,
That this my death may never be forgot!
Great men oft die by vile Bezonians.
A Roman sworder and banditto slave
Murdered sweet Tully; Brutus’ bastard hand
Stabbed Julius Caesar; savage islanders
Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.

[_Exeunt Whitmore and others with Suffolk._]

LIEUTENANT.
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart.
Therefore come you with us, and let him go.

[_Exeunt all but the 1 Gentleman._]

Enter Whitmore with Suffolk’s body and head.

WHITMORE.
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Until the Queen his mistress bury it.

[_Exit._]

1 GENTLEMAN.
O barbarous and bloody spectacle!
His body will I bear unto the King.
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends;
So will the Queen, that living held him dear.

[_Exit with the body._]

SCENE II. Blackheath

Enter George Bevis and John Holland.

BEVIS.
Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath; they have been up
these two days.

HOLLAND.
They have the more need to sleep now, then.

BEVIS.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress the commonwealth,
and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.

HOLLAND.
So he had need, for ’tis threadbare. Well, I say it was never merry
world in England since gentlemen came up.

BEVIS.
O miserable age! Virtue is not regarded in handicraftsmen.

HOLLAND.
The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.

BEVIS.
Nay, more, the King’s Council are no good workmen.

HOLLAND.
True; and yet it is said, “Labour in thy vocation,” which is as much to
say as, “Let the magistrates be labouring men;” and therefore should we
be magistrates.

BEVIS.
Thou hast hit it; for there’s no better sign of a brave mind than a
hard hand.

HOLLAND.
I see them! I see them! There’s Best’s son, the tanner of Wingham.

BEVIS.
He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make dog’s leather of.

HOLLAND.
And Dick the butcher.

BEVIS.
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity’s throat cut like a
calf.

HOLLAND.
And Smith the weaver.

BEVIS.
Argo, their thread of life is spun.

HOLLAND.
Come, come, let’s fall in with them.

Drum. Enter Cade, Dick the Butcher, Smith the Weaver and a  Sawyer with
infinite numbers carrying long staves.

CADE.
We, John Cade, so termed of our supposed father—

DICK.
[_Aside_.] Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.

CADE.
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with the spirit of
putting down kings and princes. Command silence.

DICK.
Silence!

CADE.
My father was a Mortimer—

DICK.
[_Aside_.] He was an honest man and a good bricklayer.

CADE.
My mother a Plantagenet—

DICK.
[_Aside_.] I knew her well; she was a midwife.

CADE.
My wife descended of the Lacies—

DICK.
[_Aside_.] She was indeed a pedler’s daughter, and sold many laces.

SMITH.
[_Aside_.] But now of late, not able to travel with her furred pack,
she washes bucks here at home.

CADE.
Therefore am I of an honourable house.

DICK.
[_Aside_.] Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable; and there was he
born, under a hedge, for his father had never a house but the cage.

CADE.
Valiant I am.

SMITH.
[_Aside_.] He must needs; for beggary is valiant.

CADE.
I am able to endure much.

DICK.
[_Aside_.] No question of that; for I have seen him whipped three
market-days together.

CADE.
I fear neither sword nor fire.

SMITH.
[_Aside_.] He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of proof.

DICK.
[_Aside_.] But methinks he should stand in fear of fire, being burnt i’
th’ hand for stealing of sheep.

CADE.
Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows reformation. There
shall be in England seven halfpenny loaves sold for a penny; the
three-hooped pot shall have ten hoops, and I will make it felony to
drink small beer. All the realm shall be in common, and in Cheapside
shall my palfrey go to grass. And when I am king, as king I will be—

ALL.
God save your majesty!

CADE.
I thank you, good people.—There shall be no money; all shall eat and
drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one livery, that they
may agree like brothers and worship me their lord.

DICK.
The first thing we do, let’s kill all the lawyers.

CADE.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that of the
skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment; that parchment,
being scribbled o’er, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings, but I
say ’tis the bee’s wax; for I did but seal once to a thing, and I was
never mine own man since. How now? Who’s there?

Enter some, bringing in the Clerk of Chartham.

SMITH.
The clerk of Chartham. He can write and read and cast account.

CADE.
O, monstrous!

SMITH.
We took him setting of boys’ copies.

CADE.
Here’s a villain!

SMITH.
H’as a book in his pocket with red letters in ’t.

CADE.
Nay, then, he is a conjurer.

DICK.
Nay, he can make obligations and write court-hand.

CADE.
I am sorry for ’t. The man is a proper man, of mine honour; unless I
find him guilty, he shall not die.—Come hither, sirrah, I must examine
thee. What is thy name?

CLERK.
Emmanuel.

DICK.
They use to write it on the top of letters. ’Twill go hard with you.

CADE.
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? Or hast thou a mark to
thyself, like a honest, plain-dealing man?

CLERK.
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up that I can write my
name.

ALL.
He hath confessed. Away with him! He’s a villain and a traitor.

CADE.
Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen and inkhorn about his neck.

[_Exit one with the Clerk._]

Enter Michael.

MICHAEL.
Where’s our general?

CADE.
Here I am, thou particular fellow.

MICHAEL.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are hard by, with
the King’s forces.

CADE.
Stand, villain, stand, or I’ll fell thee down. He shall be encountered
with a man as good as himself. He is but a knight, is he?

MICHAEL.
No.

CADE.
To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
[_Kneels_.] Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
[_Rises_.] Now have at him!

Enter Sir Humphrey Stafford and his Brother with Drum and soldiers.

STAFFORD.
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Marked for the gallows, lay your weapons down;
Home to your cottages, forsake this groom.
The King is merciful, if you revolt.

BROTHER.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward. Therefore yield, or die.

CADE.
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not.
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign,
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.

STAFFORD.
Villain, thy father was a plasterer,
And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?

CADE.
And Adam was a gardener.

BROTHER.
And what of that?

CADE.
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence’ daughter, did he not?

STAFFORD.
Ay, sir.

CADE.
By her he had two children at one birth.

BROTHER.
That’s false.

CADE.
Ay, there’s the question; but I say ’tis true.
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stolen away,
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age.
His son am I; deny it if you can.

DICK.
Nay, ’tis too true; therefore he shall be King.

SMITH.
Sir, he made a chimney in my father’s house, and the bricks are alive
at this day to testify it; therefore deny it not.

STAFFORD.
And will you credit this base drudge’s words,
That speaks he knows not what?

ALL.
Ay, marry, will we; therefore get ye gone.

BROTHER.
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.

CADE.
[_Aside_.] He lies, for I invented it myself.—Go to, sirrah, tell the
King from me that, for his father’s sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose
time boys went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content he shall
reign, but I’ll be Protector over him.

DICK.
And furthermore, we’ll have the Lord Saye’s head for selling the
dukedom of Maine.

CADE.
And good reason, for thereby is England mained and fain to go with a
staff, but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that
that Lord Saye hath gelded the commonwealth and made it an eunuch; and
more than that, he can speak French, and therefore he is a traitor.

STAFFORD.
O gross and miserable ignorance!

CADE.
Nay, answer if you can. The Frenchmen are our enemies; go to, then, I
ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
counsellor, or no?

ALL.
No, no, and therefore we’ll have his head.

BROTHER.
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the army of the King.

STAFFORD.
Herald, away, and throughout every town
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade;
That those which fly before the battle ends
May, even in their wives’ and children’s sight,
Be hanged up for example at their doors.
And you that be the King’s friends, follow me.

[_Exeunt the two Staffords and soldiers._]

CADE.
And you that love the commons follow me.
Now show yourselves men; ’tis for liberty.
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,
For they are thrifty honest men and such
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.

DICK.
They are all in order and march toward us.

CADE.
But then are we in order when we are most out of order. Come, march
forward.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of Blackheath

[Alarums to the fight, wherein both the Staffords are slain. Enter Cade
and the rest.

CADE.
Where’s Dick, the butcher of Ashford?

DICK.
Here, sir.

CADE.
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behaved’st thyself
as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughterhouse. Therefore thus will
I reward thee: the Lent shall be as long again as it is, and thou shalt
have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking one.

DICK.
I desire no more.

CADE.
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This monument of the
victory will I bear. [_putting on Sir Humphrey’s brigandine_] And the
bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels till I do come to London,
where we will have the Mayor’s sword borne before us.

DICK.
If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and let out the
prisoners.

CADE.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let’s march towards London.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. The Palace

Enter the King with a supplication, and the Queen with Suffolk’s head,
the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Saye.

QUEEN MARGARET.
[_Aside_.] Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind
And makes it fearful and degenerate;
Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep and look on this?
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast;
But where’s the body that I should embrace?

BUCKINGHAM.
What answer makes your grace to the rebels’ supplication?

KING HENRY.
I’ll send some holy bishop to entreat,
For God forbid so many simple souls
Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade their general.
But stay, I’ll read it over once again.

QUEEN MARGARET.
[_Aside_.] Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent
That were unworthy to behold the same?

KING HENRY.
Lord Saye, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.

SAYE.
Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his.

KING HENRY.
How now, madam?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk’s death?
I fear me, love, if that I had been dead,
Thou wouldst not have mourned so much for me.

QUEEN MARGARET.
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.

Enter a Messenger.

KING HENRY.
How now, what news? Why com’st thou in such haste?

MESSENGER.
The rebels are in Southwark; fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence’ house,
And calls your grace usurper openly,
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
His army is a ragged multitude
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless.
Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother’s death
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
They call false caterpillars, and intend their death.

KING HENRY.
O graceless men! They know not what they do.

BUCKINGHAM.
My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
Until a power be raised to put them down.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!

KING HENRY.
Lord Saye, the traitors hate thee;
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.

SAYE.
So might your grace’s person be in danger.
The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
And therefore in this city will I stay
And live alone as secret as I may.

Enter another Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Jack Cade hath gotten London Bridge;
The citizens fly and forsake their houses.
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the city and your royal court.

BUCKINGHAM.
Then linger not, my lord; away, take horse!

KING HENRY.
Come, Margaret. God, our hope, will succour us.

QUEEN MARGARET.
[_Aside_.] My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.

KING HENRY.
Farewell, my lord. Trust not the Kentish rebels.

BUCKINGHAM.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betrayed.

SAYE.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. London. The Tower

Enter Lord Scales upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three
Citizens below.

SCALES.
How now? Is Jack Cade slain?

1 CITIZEN.
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have won the Bridge,
killing all those that withstand them. The Lord Mayor craves aid of
your honour from the Tower to defend the city from the rebels.

SCALES.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
But I am troubled here with them myself;
The rebels have assayed to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Gough.
Fight for your king, your country, and your lives!
And so farewell, for I must hence again.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. London. Cannon Street

Enter Jack Cade and the rest, and strikes his staff on London Stone.

CADE.
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting upon London Stone,
I charge and command that, of the city’s cost, the Pissing Conduit run
nothing but claret wine this first year of our reign. And now
henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls me other than Lord
Mortimer.

Enter a Soldier, running.

SOLDIER.
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!

CADE.
Knock him down there.

[_They kill him._]

DICK.
If this fellow be wise, he’ll never call ye Jack Cade more. I think he
hath a very fair warning. My lord, there’s an army gathered together in
Smithfield.

CADE.
Come then, let’s go fight with them. But first, go and set London
Bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn down the Tower too. Come, let’s
away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. London. Smithfield

Alarums. Matthew Gough is slain, and all the rest. Then enter Jack Cade
with his company.

CADE.
So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy; others to th’ Inns of
Court; down with them all.

DICK.
I have a suit unto your lordship.

CADE.
Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.

DICK.
Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.

HOLLAND.
[_Aside_.] Mass, ’twill be sore law, then; for he was thrust in the
mouth with a spear, and ’tis not whole yet.

SMITH.
[_Aside_.] Nay, John, it will be stinking law, for his breath stinks
with eating toasted cheese.

CADE.
I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn all the records of
the realm. My mouth shall be the parliament of England.

HOLLAND.
[_Aside_.] Then we are like to have biting statutes, unless his teeth
be pulled out.

CADE.
And henceforward all things shall be in common.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, a prize, a prize! Here’s the Lord Saye, which sold the towns
in France; he that made us pay one-and-twenty fifteens, and one
shilling to the pound, the last subsidy.

Enter George Bevis with the Lord Saye.

CADE.
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah, thou say, thou serge,
nay, thou buckram lord! Now art thou within point-blank of our
jurisdiction regal. What canst thou answer to my majesty for giving up
of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the Dauphin of France? Be it known
unto thee by these presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I
am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art.
Thou hast most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in
erecting a grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no
other books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to
be used, and, contrary to the King, his crown, and dignity, thou hast
built a paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men
about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and such abominable
words as no Christian ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed
justices of peace, to call poor men before them about matters they were
not able to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in prison, and because
they could not read, thou hast hanged them, when indeed only for that
cause they have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride on a
foot-cloth, dost thou not?

SAYE.
What of that?

CADE.
Marry, thou ought’st not to let thy horse wear a cloak when honester
men than thou go in their hose and doublets.

DICK.
And work in their shirt too; as myself, for example, that am a butcher.

SAYE.
You men of Kent—

DICK.
What say you of Kent?

SAYE.
Nothing but this; ’tis _bona terra, mala gens_.

CADE.
Away with him, away with him! He speaks Latin.

SAYE.
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termed the civil’st place of all this isle.
Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
Yet to recover them would lose my life.
Justice with favour have I always done;
Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never.
When have I aught exacted at your hands
Kent to maintain the King, the realm, and you?
Large gifts have I bestowed on learned clerks,
Because my book preferred me to the King.
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me.
This tongue hath parleyed unto foreign kings
For your behoof—

CADE.
Tut, when struck’st thou one blow in the field?

SAYE.
Great men have reaching hands; oft have I struck
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.

GEORGE.
O monstrous coward! What, to come behind folks?

SAYE.
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.

CADE.
Give him a box o’ th’ ear, and that will make ’em red again.

SAYE.
Long sitting to determine poor men’s causes
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.

CADE.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of hatchet.

DICK.
Why dost thou quiver, man?

SAYE.
The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.

CADE.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, “I’ll be even with you.” I’ll
see if his head will stand steadier on a pole or no. Take him away, and
behead him.

SAYE.
Tell me, wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth or honour? Speak.
Are my chests filled up with extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!

CADE.
[_Aside_.] I feel remorse in myself with his words, but I’ll bridle it.
He shall die, an it be but for pleading so well for his life. Away with
him! He has a familiar under his tongue; he speaks not i’ God’s name.
Go, take him away, I say, and strike off his head presently; and then
break into his son-in-law’s house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his
head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.

ALL.
It shall be done.

SAYE.
Ah, countrymen, if when you make your prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.

CADE.
Away with him! And do as I command ye.

[_Exeunt some with Lord Saye._]

The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head on his shoulders
unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a maid be married but she
shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they have it. Men shall hold of me
_in capite;_ and we charge and command that their wives be as free as
heart can wish or tongue can tell.

DICK.
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up commodities upon our
bills?

CADE.
Marry, presently.

ALL.
O, brave!

Enter one with the heads.

CADE.
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they loved well
when they were alive. Now part them again, lest they consult about the
giving up of some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the spoil of
the city until night; for with these borne before us instead of maces
will we ride through the streets, and at every corner have them kiss.
Away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Southwark

Alarum and retreat. Enter Cade and all his rabblement.

CADE.
Up Fish Street! Down Saint Magnus’ Corner! Kill and knock down! Throw
them into Thames! [_Sound a parley_.] What noise is this I hear? Dare
any be so bold to sound retreat or parley when I command them kill?

Enter Buckingham and old Clifford attended.

BUCKINGHAM.
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
Unto the commons, whom thou hast misled,
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.

CLIFFORD.
What say ye, countrymen? Will ye relent
And yield to mercy whilst ’tis offered you,
Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
Who loves the King and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say “God save his Majesty!”
Who hateth him and honours not his father,
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.

ALL.
God save the King! God save the King!

CADE.
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? And you, base peasants,
do ye believe him? Will you needs be hanged with your pardons about
your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates, that
you should leave me at the White Hart in Southwark? I thought ye would
never have given out these arms till you had recovered your ancient
freedom; but you are all recreants and dastards, and delight to live in
slavery to the nobility. Let them break your backs with burdens, take
your houses over your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before
your faces. For me, I will make shift for one, and so God’s curse light
upon you all!

ALL.
We’ll follow Cade! We’ll follow Cade!

CLIFFORD.
Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you’ll go with him?
Will he conduct you through the heart of France
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to,
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
Were ’t not a shame that whilst you live at jar
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
Should make a start o’er seas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in this civil broil
I see them lording it in London streets,
Crying “_Villiago!_” unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman’s mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost!
Spare England, for it is your native coast.
Henry hath money, you are strong and manly;
God on our side, doubt not of victory.

ALL.
A Clifford! A Clifford! We’ll follow the King and Clifford.

CADE.
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this multitude? The
name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred mischiefs and makes
them leave me desolate. I see them lay their heads together to surprise
me. My sword make way for me, for here is no staying.—In despite of the
devils and hell, have through the very middest of you! And heavens and
honour be witness that no want of resolution in me, but only my
followers’ base and ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my
heels.

[_Exit._]

BUCKINGHAM.
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;
And he that brings his head unto the King
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.

[_Exeunt some of them._]

Follow me, soldiers; we’ll devise a mean
To reconcile you all unto the King.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle

Sound trumpets. Enter King, Queen and Somerset on the terrace, aloft.

KING HENRY.
Was ever king that joyed an earthly throne
And could command no more content than I?
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
But I was made a king at nine months old.
Was never subject longed to be a king
As I do long and wish to be a subject.

Enter Buckingham and old Clifford.

BUCKINGHAM.
Health and glad tidings to your majesty!

KING HENRY.
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired to make him strong?

Enter below multitudes with halters about their necks.

CLIFFORD.
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield,
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your highness’ doom of life or death.

KING HENRY.
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives
And showed how well you love your prince and country.
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind.
And so, with thanks and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several countries.

ALL.
God save the King! God save the King!

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Please it your grace to be advertised
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puissant and a mighty power
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
His arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor.

KING HENRY.
Thus stands my state, ’twixt Cade and York distressed,
Like to a ship that, having scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calmed and boarded with a pirate.
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed,
And now is York in arms to second him.
I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,
And ask him what’s the reason of these arms.
Tell him I’ll send Duke Edmund to the Tower.—
And, Somerset, we will commit thee thither,
Until his army be dismissed from him.

SOMERSET.
My lord, I’ll yield myself to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my country good.

KING HENRY.
In any case, be not too rough in terms,
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.

BUCKINGHAM.
I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
As all things shall redound unto your good.

KING HENRY.
Come, wife, let’s in, and learn to govern better;
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE X. Kent. Iden’s Garden

Enter Cade.

CADE.
Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a sword and yet am ready to
famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and durst not peep
out, for all the country is laid for me; but now am I so hungry that if
I might have a lease of my life for a thousand years, I could stay no
longer. Wherefore, o’er a brick wall have I climbed into this garden,
to see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another while, which is not
amiss to cool a man’s stomach this hot weather. And I think this word
“sallet” was born to do me good; for many a time, but for a sallet, my
brain-pan had been cleft with a brown bill; and many a time, when I
have been dry and bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a
quart pot to drink in; and now the word “sallet” must serve me to feed
on.

Enter Iden and his men.

IDEN.
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my father left me
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others’ waning,
Or gather wealth, I care not with what envy;
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.

CADE.
Here’s the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering
his fee-simple without leave.—Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me and get
a thousand crowns of the King by carrying my head to him; but I’ll make
thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow my sword like a great pin,
ere thou and I part.

IDEN.
Why, rude companion, whatsoe’er thou be,
I know thee not; why, then, should I betray thee?
Is ’t not enough to break into my garden
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?

CADE.
Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was broached, and beard
thee too. Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five days, yet come
thou and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead as a
doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.

IDEN.
Nay, it shall ne’er be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famished man.
Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks.
Set limb to limb and thou art far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon.
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Thy grave is digged already in the earth.
As for words, whose greatness answers words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.

CADE.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard! Steel, if
thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly-boned clown in chines of
beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou mayst
be turned to hobnails.

[_Here they fight and Cade falls._]

O, I am slain! Famine and no other hath slain me. Let ten thousand
devils come against me, and give me but the ten meals I have lost, and
I’d defy them all. Wither, garden; and be henceforth a burying place to
all that do dwell in this house, because the unconquered soul of Cade
is fled.

IDEN.
Is’t Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o’er my tomb when I am dead.
Ne’er shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou shalt wear it as a herald’s coat
To emblaze the honour that thy master got.

CADE.
Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell Kent from me she hath
lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be cowards; for I, that
never feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.

[_Dies._]

IDEN.
How much thou wrong’st me, heaven be my judge.
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.

[_Exit._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Fields between Dartford and Blackheath


Enter York and his army of Irish, with drum and colours.

YORK.
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right
And pluck the crown from feeble Henry’s head.
Ring, bells, aloud; burn, bonfires, clear and bright,
To entertain great England’s lawful king.
Ah, _sancta majestas_, who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that knows not how to rule.
This hand was made to handle nought but gold.
I cannot give due action to my words
Except a sword or sceptre balance it.
A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul,
On which I’ll toss the fleur-de-luce of France.

Enter Buckingham.

Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me?
The King hath sent him, sure. I must dissemble.

BUCKINGHAM.
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.

YORK.
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?

BUCKINGHAM.
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
To know the reason of these arms in peace;
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.

YORK.
[_Aside_.] Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great.
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms;
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better born than is the King,
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts.
But I must make fair weather yet awhile,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong.—
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while;
My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his grace and to the state.

BUCKINGHAM.
That is too much presumption on thy part;
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.

YORK.
Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?

BUCKINGHAM.
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.

YORK.
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all; disperse yourselves;
Meet me tomorrow in Saint George’s field,
You shall have pay and everything you wish.

[_Exeunt Soldiers._]

And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealty and love,
I’ll send them all as willing as I live.
Lands, goods, horse, armour, anything I have
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.

BUCKINGHAM.
York, I commend this kind submission.
We twain will go into his highness’ tent.

Enter King and Attendants.

KING HENRY.
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?

YORK.
In all submission and humility
York doth present himself unto your highness.

KING HENRY.
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?

YORK.
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence
And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.

Enter Iden with Cade’s head.

IDEN.
If one so rude and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a king,
Lo, I present your grace a traitor’s head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.

KING HENRY.
The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage, being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?

IDEN.
I was, an ’t like your majesty.

KING HENRY.
How art thou called? And what is thy degree?

IDEN.
Alexander Iden, that’s my name;
A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his King.

BUCKINGHAM.
So please it you, my lord, ’twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.

KING HENRY.
Iden, kneel down. [_He kneels_.] Rise up a knight.
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.

IDEN.
May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
And never live but true unto his liege!

[_Rises._]

Enter Queen and Somerset.

KING HENRY.
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the Queen.
Go, bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.

QUEEN MARGARET.
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and front him to his face.

YORK.
How now? Is Somerset at liberty?
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
False king, why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
“King” did I call thee? No, thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which dar’st not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.
That head of thine doth not become a crown;
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer’s staff,
And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles’ spear,
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up
And with the same to act controlling laws.
Give place! By heaven, thou shalt rule no more
O’er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.

SOMERSET.
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital treason ’gainst the King and crown.
Obey, audacious traitor, kneel for grace.

YORK.
Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail.

[_Exit Attendant._]

I know, ere they will have me go to ward,
They’ll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Call hither Clifford; bid him come amain,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.

[_Exit Buckingham._]

YORK.
O blood-bespotted Neapolitan,
Outcast of Naples, England’s bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their father’s bail; and bane to those
That for my surety will refuse the boys!

Enter Edward and Richard.

See where they come; I’ll warrant they’ll make it good.

Enter old Clifford and his Son.

QUEEN MARGARET.
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.

CLIFFORD.
Health and all happiness to my lord the King.

[_Rises._]

YORK.
I thank thee, Clifford. Say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look.
We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again.
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.

CLIFFORD.
This is my king, York, I do not mistake;
But thou mistakes me much to think I do.
To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?

KING HENRY.
Ay, Clifford; a bedlam and ambitious humour
Makes him oppose himself against his king.

CLIFFORD.
He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.

QUEEN MARGARET.
He is arrested, but will not obey;
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.

YORK.
Will you not, sons?

EDWARD.
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.

RICHARD.
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.

CLIFFORD.
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!

YORK.
Look in a glass, and call thy image so.
I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
That with the very shaking of their chains
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs.
Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.

Enter the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury.

CLIFFORD.
Are these thy bears? We’ll bait thy bears to death
And manacle the bearherd in their chains,
If thou dar’st bring them to the baiting-place.

RICHARD.
Oft have I seen a hot o’erweening cur
Run back and bite because he was withheld,
Who, being suffered with the bear’s fell paw,
Hath clapped his tail between his legs and cried;
And such a piece of service will you do
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.

CLIFFORD.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!

YORK.
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.

CLIFFORD.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.

KING HENRY.
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son!
What, wilt thou on thy deathbed play the ruffian,
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
If it be banished from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
And shame thine honourable age with blood?
Why art thou old, and want’st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame, in duty bend thy knee to me
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.

SALISBURY.
My lord, I have considered with myself
The title of this most renowned duke,
And in my conscience do repute his grace
The rightful heir to England’s royal seat.

KING HENRY.
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?

SALISBURY.
I have.

KING HENRY.
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?

SALISBURY.
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgin’s chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her customed right,
And have no other reason for this wrong
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?

QUEEN MARGARET.
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.

KING HENRY.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.

YORK.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
I am resolved for death or dignity.

CLIFFORD.
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.

WARWICK.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.

CLIFFORD.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm
Than any thou canst conjure up today;
And that I’ll write upon thy burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.

WARWICK.
Now, by my father’s badge, old Neville’s crest,
The rampant bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day I’ll wear aloft my burgonet,
As on a mountain top the cedar shows
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.

CLIFFORD.
And from thy burgonet I’ll rend thy bear
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the bearherd that protects the bear.

YOUNG CLIFFORD.
And so to arms, victorious father,
To quell the rebels and their complices.

RICHARD.
Fie, charity, for shame! Speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ tonight.

YOUNG CLIFFORD.
Foul stigmatic, that’s more than thou canst tell.

RICHARD.
If not in heaven, you’ll surely sup in hell.

[_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE II. Saint Albans

The sign of the Castle Inn is displayed. Alarums to the battle. Enter
Warwick.

WARWICK.
Clifford of Cumberland, ’tis Warwick calls;
An if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And dead men’s cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me!
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.

Enter York.

How now, my noble lord? What, all afoot?

YORK.
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
But match to match I have encountered him
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.

Enter old Clifford.

WARWICK.
Of one or both of us the time is come.

YORK.
Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.

WARWICK.
Then, nobly, York; ’tis for a crown thou fight’st.
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive today,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassailed.

[_Exit._]

CLIFFORD.
What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?

YORK.
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.

CLIFFORD.
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that ’tis shown ignobly and in treason.

YORK.
So let it help me now against thy sword
As I in justice and true right express it!

CLIFFORD.
My soul and body on the action both!

YORK.
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.

[_They fight and Clifford falls._]

CLIFFORD.
_La fin couronne les oeuvres._

[_Dies._]

YORK.
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!

[_Exit._]

Enter young Clifford.

YOUNG CLIFFORD.
Shame and confusion! All is on the rout,
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love; nor he that loves himself
Hath not essentially but by circumstance,
The name of valour. [_Sees his dead father_.] O, let the vile world end
And the premised flames of the last day
Knit earth and heaven together!
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and petty sounds
To cease! Wast thou ordained, dear father,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The silver livery of advised age,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
My heart is turned to stone, and while ’tis mine
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares;
No more will I their babes; tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire,
And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbets will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absyrtus did.
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.

[_He takes him up on his back._]

Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford’s house;
As did Aeneas old Anchises bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders;
But then Aeneas bare a living load,
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.

[_Exit, bearing off his father._]

Enter Richard and Somerset to fight. Somerset is killed.

RICHARD.
So, lie thou there;
For underneath an alehouse’ paltry sign,
The Castle in Saint Albans, Somerset
Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper; heart, be wrathful still!
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.

[_Exit._]

Fight. Excursions. Enter King, Queen and others.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Away, my lord! You are slow, for shame, away!

KING HENRY.
Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay.

QUEEN MARGARET.
What are you made of? You’ll nor fight nor fly.
Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defence
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.

[_Alarum afar off._]

If you be ta’en, we then should see the bottom
Of all our fortunes; but if we haply scape,
As well we may, if not through your neglect,
We shall to London get, where you are loved
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
May readily be stopped.

Enter young Clifford.

YOUNG CLIFFORD.
But that my heart’s on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly;
But fly you must; uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away, for your relief! And we will live
To see their day and them our fortune give.
Away, my lord, away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Fields near Saint Albans

Alarum. Retreat. Enter York, Richard, Warwick and Soldiers with drum
and colours.

YORK.
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions and all brush of time,
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.

RICHARD.
My noble father,
Three times today I holp him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him; thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act;
But still, where danger was, still there I met him,
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.

Enter Salisbury.

Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought today.

SALISBURY.
By th’ mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard.
God knows how long it is I have to live,
And it hath pleased him that three times today
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have;
’Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repairing nature.

YORK.
I know our safety is to follow them;
For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
To call a present court of parliament.
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?

WARWICK.
After them? Nay, before them, if we can.
Now, by my hand, lords, ’twas a glorious day.
Saint Albans battle won by famous York
Shall be eternized in all age to come.
Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all;
And more such days as these to us befall!

[_Exeunt._]




THE THIRD PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. London. The Parliament House
 Scene II. Sandal Castle
 Scene III. Plains near Sandal Castle
 Scene IV. The Same

 ACT II
 Scene I. A plain near Mortimer’s Cross in Herefordshire
 Scene II. Before York
 Scene III. A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in Yorkshire
 Scene IV. Another Part of the Field
 Scene V. Another Part of the Field
 Scene VI. Another Part of the Field

 ACT III
 Scene I. A Forest in the North of England
 Scene II. The Palace
 Scene III. France. The King’s Palace

 ACT IV
 Scene I. London. The Palace
 Scene II. A Plain in Warwickshire
 Scene III. Edward’s Camp near Warwick
 Scene IV. London. The Palace
 Scene V. A park near Middleham Castle in Yorkshire
 Scene VI. London. The Tower
 Scene VII. Before York
 Scene VIII. London. The Palace

 ACT V
 Scene I. Coventry
 Scene II. A Field of Battle near Barnet
 Scene III. Another Part of the Field
 Scene IV. Plains near Tewkesbury
 Scene V. Another part of the Field
 Scene VI. London. The Tower
 Scene VII. London. The Palace




Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY the Sixth
QUEEN MARGARET
PRINCE EDWARD, Prince of Wales, his son
DUKE OF SOMERSET
DUKE OF EXETER
EARL OF OXFORD
EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND
EARL OF WESTMORELAND
LORD CLIFFORD
RICHARD PLANTAGENET, Duke of York
EDWARD, Earl of March, afterwards King Edward IV., his son
GEORGE, afterwards Duke of Clarence, his son
RICHARD, afterwards Duke of Gloucester, his son
EDMUND, Earl of Rutland, his son
DUKE OF NORFOLK
MARQUESS OF MONTAGUE
EARL OF WARWICK
EARL OF PEMBROKE
LORD HASTINGS
LORD STAFFORD
SIR JOHN MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
SIR HUGH MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
LADY GREY, afterwards Queen Elizabeth to Edward IV
EARL RIVERS, brother to Lady Grey
HENRY, Earl of Richmond, a youth
SIR WILLIAM STANLEY
SIR JOHN MONTGOMERY
SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE
KING LEWIS the Eleventh, King of France
BONA, sister to the French Queen
Tutor to Rutland
Mayor of York
Lieutenant of the Tower
A Nobleman
Two Keepers
A Huntsman
A Son that has killed his father
A Father that has killed his son

Soldiers, Attendants, Messengers, Watchmen, etc.

SCENE: England and France




ACT I

SCENE I. London. The Parliament House


Alarum. Enter Duke of York, Edward, Richard, Norfolk, Montague, Warwick
and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.

WARWICK.
I wonder how the King escaped our hands.

YORK.
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slyly stole away and left his men;
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheered up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford, and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle’s front, and breaking in,
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

EDWARD.
Lord Stafford’s father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerous;
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow.
That this is true, father, behold his blood.

[_Showing his bloody sword._]

MONTAGUE.
And, brother, here’s the Earl of Wiltshire’s blood,

[_To York, showing his._]

Whom I encountered as the battles joined.

RICHARD.
Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.

[_Throwing down the Duke of Somerset’s head._]

YORK.
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your Grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?

NORFOLK.
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!

RICHARD.
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry’s head.

WARWICK.
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat. Possess it, York,
For this is thine, and not King Henry’s heirs’.

YORK.
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
For hither we have broken in by force.

NORFOLK.
We’ll all assist you; he that flies shall die.

YORK.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk. Stay by me, my lords;
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

WARWICK.
And when the King comes, offer him no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

[_They retire._]

YORK.
The Queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council.
By words or blows here let us win our right.

RICHARD.
Armed as we are, let’s stay within this house.

WARWICK.
The bloody parliament shall this be called,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us bywords to our enemies.

YORK.
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute.
I mean to take possession of my right.

WARWICK.
Neither the King, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing if Warwick shake his bells.
I’ll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares.
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.

[_Warwick leads York to the throne, who seats himself._]

Flourish. Enter King Henry, Clifford, Northumberland, Westmoreland,
Exeter and the rest, all wearing the red rose.

KING HENRY.
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
Backed by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father,
And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vowed revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites, and his friends.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!

CLIFFORD.
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

WESTMORELAND.
What, shall we suffer this? Let’s pluck him down.
My heart for anger burns. I cannot brook it.

KING HENRY.
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.

CLIFFORD.
Patience is for poltroons, such as he.
He durst not sit there had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Well hast thou spoken, cousin. Be it so.

KING HENRY.
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

EXETER.
But when the Duke is slain, they’ll quickly fly.

KING HENRY.
Far be the thought of this from Henry’s heart,
To make a shambles of the Parliament House!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.

[_They advance to the Duke._]

Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.

YORK.
I am thine.

EXETER.
For shame, come down. He made thee Duke of York.

YORK.
’Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.

EXETER.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

WARWICK.
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.

CLIFFORD.
Whom should he follow but his natural king?

WARWICK.
True, Clifford, that’s Richard, Duke of York.

KING HENRY.
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?

YORK.
It must and shall be so. Content thyself.

WARWICK.
Be Duke of Lancaster. Let him be king.

WESTMORELAND.
He is both King and Duke of Lancaster;
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.

WARWICK.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
Marched through the city to the palace gates.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

WESTMORELAND.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsmen, and thy friends, I’ll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father’s veins.

CLIFFORD.
Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.

WARWICK.
Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless threats!

YORK.
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

KING HENRY.
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop,
And seized upon their towns and provinces.

WARWICK.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.

KING HENRY.
The Lord Protector lost it, and not I.
When I was crowned I was but nine months old.

RICHARD.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper’s head.

EDWARD.
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.

MONTAGUE.
Good brother, as thou lov’st and honourest arms,
Let’s fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.

RICHARD.
Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.

YORK.
Sons, peace!

KING HENRY.
Peace thou, and give King Henry leave to speak.

WARWICK.
Plantagenet shall speak first. Hear him, lords,
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.

KING HENRY.
Think’st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No. First shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England, to our heart’s great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title’s good, and better far than his.

WARWICK.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.

KING HENRY.
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.

YORK.
’Twas by rebellion against his king.

KING HENRY.
[_Aside_.] I know not what to say; my title’s weak.
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?

YORK.
What then?

KING HENRY.
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resigned the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

YORK.
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.

WARWICK.
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrained,
Think you ’twere prejudicial to his crown?

EXETER.
No, for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

KING HENRY.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?

EXETER.
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

YORK.
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?

EXETER.
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

KING HENRY.
[_Aside_.] All will revolt from me and turn to him.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay’st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

WARWICK.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Thou art deceived. ’Tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.

CLIFFORD.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence.
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!

KING HENRY.
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!

YORK.
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?

WARWICK.
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.

[_He stamps with his foot, and the Soldiers show themselves._]

KING HENRY.
My Lord of Warwick, hear but one word:
Let me for this my lifetime reign as king.

YORK.
Confirm the crown to me, and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv’st.

KING HENRY.
I am content. Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

CLIFFORD.
What wrong is this unto the Prince your son!

WARWICK.
What good is this to England and himself!

WESTMORELAND.
Base, fearful, and despairing Henry!

CLIFFORD.
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!

WESTMORELAND.
I cannot stay to hear these articles.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Nor I.

CLIFFORD.
Come, cousin, let us tell the Queen these news.

WESTMORELAND.
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!

CLIFFORD.
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised!

[_Exeunt Westmoreland, Northumberland and Clifford._]

WARWICK.
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

EXETER.
They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.

KING HENRY.
Ah, Exeter!

WARWICK.
Why should you sigh, my lord?

KING HENRY.
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may, [_To York._] I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.

YORK.
This oath I willingly take and will perform.

[_Coming from the throne._]

WARWICK.
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet, embrace him.

KING HENRY.
And long live thou, and these thy forward sons!

YORK.
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

EXETER.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!

Sennet. Here they come down.

YORK.
Farewell, my gracious lord. I’ll to my castle.

WARWICK.
And I’ll keep London with my soldiers.

NORFOLK.
And I to Norfolk with my followers.

MONTAGUE.
And I unto the sea from whence I came.

[_Exeunt York and his Sons, Warwick, Norfolk, Montague and their
Soldiers._]

KING HENRY.
And I with grief and sorrow to the court.

Enter Queen Margaret and the Prince of Wales.

EXETER.
Here comes the Queen, whose looks bewray her anger.
I’ll steal away.

KING HENRY.
Exeter, so will I.

[_Going._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.

KING HENRY.
Be patient, gentle Queen, and I will stay.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man, would I had died a maid,
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father.
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourished him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Father, you cannot disinherit me.
If you be king, why should not I succeed?

KING HENRY.
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son.
The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforced me.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Enforced thee! Art thou King, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch,
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me,
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Calais;
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have tossed me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou prefer’st thy life before thine honour.
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repealed
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let’s away:
Our army is ready; come, we’ll after them.

KING HENRY.
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Thou hast spoke too much already. Get thee gone.

KING HENRY.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, to be murdered by his enemies.

PRINCE EDWARD.
When I return with victory from the field
I’ll see your Grace. Till then I’ll follow her.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.

[_Exeunt Queen Margaret and the Prince._]

KING HENRY.
Poor queen! How love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful Duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son.
The loss of those three lords torments my heart.
I’ll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.

EXETER.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Sandal Castle

Enter Edward, Richard and Montague.

RICHARD.
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

EDWARD.
No, I can better play the orator.

MONTAGUE.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.

Enter the Duke of York.

YORK.
Why, how now, sons and brother, at a strife?
What is your quarrel? How began it first?

EDWARD.
No quarrel, but a slight contention.

YORK.
About what?

RICHARD.
About that which concerns your Grace and us:
The crown of England, father, which is yours.

YORK.
Mine, boy? Not till King Henry be dead.

RICHARD.
Your right depends not on his life or death.

EDWARD.
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now.
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.

YORK.
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.

EDWARD.
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken.
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

RICHARD.
No; God forbid your Grace should be forsworn.

YORK.
I shall be, if I claim by open war.

RICHARD.
I’ll prove the contrary if you’ll hear me speak.

YORK.
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

RICHARD.
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate
That hath authority over him that swears.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
Then, seeing ’twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown,
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry’s heart.

YORK.
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
And tell him privily of our intent.
You, Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise.
In them I trust; for they are soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employed, what resteth more
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?

Enter a Messenger.

But stay. What news? Why com’st thou in such post?

MESSENGER.
The Queen, with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle.
She is hard by with twenty thousand men;
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.

YORK.
Ay, with my sword. What, think’st thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London.
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the King,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

MONTAGUE.
Brother, I go; I’ll win them, fear it not.
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.

[_Exit._]

Enter Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer.

YORK.
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
The army of the Queen mean to besiege us.

SIR JOHN.
She shall not need; we’ll meet her in the field.

YORK.
What, with five thousand men?

RICHARD.
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.
A woman’s general; what should we fear?

[_A march afar off._]

EDWARD.
I hear their drums. Let’s set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

YORK.
Five men to twenty! Though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France
Whenas the enemy hath been ten to one.
Why should I not now have the like success?

[_Alarum. Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Plains near Sandal Castle

Alarums. Enter Rutland and his Tutor.

RUTLAND.
Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.

Enter Clifford and Soldiers.

CLIFFORD.
Chaplain, away! Thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

TUTOR.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.

CLIFFORD.
Soldiers, away with him!

TUTOR.
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man.

[_Exit, dragged off by Soldiers._]

CLIFFORD.
How now? Is he dead already? Or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I’ll open them.

RUTLAND.
So looks the pent-up lion o’er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o’er his prey,
And so he comes to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threat’ning look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath;
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

CLIFFORD.
In vain thou speak’st, poor boy; my father’s blood
Hath stopped the passage where thy words should enter.

RUTLAND.
Then let my father’s blood open it again;
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.

CLIFFORD.
Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me.
No, if I digged up thy forefathers’ graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul;
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore—

[_Lifting his hand._]

RUTLAND.
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!

CLIFFORD.
Such pity as my rapier’s point affords.

RUTLAND.
I never did thee harm; why wilt thou slay me?

CLIFFORD.
Thy father hath.

RUTLAND.
But ’twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offence
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

CLIFFORD.
No cause? Thy father slew my father; therefore die.

[_Clifford stabs him._]

RUTLAND.
_Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!_

[_Dies._]

CLIFFORD.
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son’s blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon till thy blood,
Congealed with this, do make me wipe off both.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The Same

Alarum. Enter Richard, Duke of York.

YORK.
The army of the Queen hath got the field.
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly like ships before the wind,
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them;
But this I know, they have demeaned themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me,
And thrice cried “Courage, father, fight it out!”
And full as oft came Edward to my side
With purple falchion painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encountered him;
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried “Charge, and give no foot of ground!”
And cried “A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!”
With this we charged again; but, out, alas!
We budged again, as I have seen a swan
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.

[_A short alarum within._]

Ah, hark, the fatal followers do pursue,
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
The sands are numbered that makes up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.

Enter Queen Margaret, Clifford, Northumberland, the young Prince Edward
and Soldiers.

Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage.
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.

CLIFFORD.
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm
With downright payment showed unto my father.
Now Phaëthon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.

YORK.
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all;
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate’er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? What, multitudes, and fear?

CLIFFORD.
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon’s piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives ’gainst the officers.

YORK.
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought o’errun my former time;
And, if thou canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this.

CLIFFORD.
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows twice two for one.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Hold, valiant Clifford; for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitor’s life.
Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Hold, Clifford, do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war’s prize to take all vantages,
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.

[_They lay hands on York, who struggles._]

CLIFFORD.
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
So doth the cony struggle in the net.

[_York is taken prisoner._]

YORK.
So triumph thieves upon their conquered booty;
So true men yield, with robbers so o’ermatched.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
What would your Grace have done unto him now?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What, was it you that would be England’s king?
Was ’t you that revelled in our parliament
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now,
The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
And where’s that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York, I stained this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford with his rapier’s point
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas, poor York, but that I hate thee deadly
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee grieve to make me merry, York;
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parched thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland’s death?
Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou would’st be fee’d, I see, to make me sport;
York cannot speak unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! And, lords, bow low to him.
Hold you his hands whilst I do set it on.

[_Putting a paper crown on his head._]

Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king.
Ay, this is he that took King Henry’s chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crowned so soon and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.
And will you pale your head in Henry’s glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, ’tis a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the crown, and, with the crown, his head;
And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

CLIFFORD.
That is my office, for my father’s sake.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Nay, stay; let’s hear the orisons he makes.

YORK.
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder’s tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Upon their woes whom Fortune captivates!
But that thy face is vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou cam’st, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils, and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen;
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
’Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
But God he knows thy share thereof is small.
’Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wondered at.
’Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the Septentrion.
O tiger’s heart wrapped in a woman’s hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman’s face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bid’st thou me rage? Why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? Why, now thou hast thy will;
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland’s obsequies,
And every drop cries vengeance for his death
’Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false Frenchwoman.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I check my eyes from tears.

YORK.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touched, would not have stained with blood;
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father’s tears.
This cloth thou dipped’st in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this;
And if thou tell’st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
Yea, even my foes will shed fast-falling tears
And say “Alas, it was a piteous deed.”
There, take the crown, and with the crown my curse;
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world,
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him,
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.

QUEEN MARGARET.
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

CLIFFORD.
Here’s for my oath, here’s for my father’s death.

[_Stabbing him._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
And here’s to right our gentle-hearted king.

[_Stabbing him._]

YORK.
Open thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

[_Dies._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
So York may overlook the town of York.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A plain near Mortimer’s Cross in Herefordshire


A march. Enter Edward and Richard and their power.

EDWARD.
I wonder how our princely father scaped,
Or whether he be scaped away or no
From Clifford’s and Northumberland’s pursuit.
Had he been ta’en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?

RICHARD.
I cannot joy until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about,
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
Or as a bear, encompassed round with dogs,
Who having pinched a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father.
Methinks ’tis pride enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun.
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimmed like a younker prancing to his love!

EDWARD.
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

RICHARD.
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But severed in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some league inviolable.
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.

EDWARD.
’Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together,
And overshine the earth, as this the world.
Whate’er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair shining suns.

RICHARD.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.

Enter a Messenger, blowing.

But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?

MESSENGER.
Ah, one that was a woeful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord.

EDWARD.
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much!

RICHARD.
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

MESSENGER.
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have entered Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hews down and fell the hardest-timbered oak.
By many hands your father was subdued,
But only slaughtered by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the Queen,
Who crowned the gracious duke in high despite,
Laughed in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless Queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain.
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same; and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e’er I viewed.

EDWARD.
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford, thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquished him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my soul’s palace is become a prison.
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again;
Never, O, never, shall I see more joy!

RICHARD.
I cannot weep, for all my body’s moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart;
Nor can my tongue unload my heart’s great burthen,
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears, then, for babes; blows and revenge for me!
Richard, I bear thy name; I’ll venge thy death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.

EDWARD.
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

RICHARD.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle’s bird,
Show thy descent by gazing ’gainst the sun;
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say,
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.

March. Enter Warwick, Marquess Montague and their army.

WARWICK.
How now, fair lords! What fare? What news abroad?

RICHARD.
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word’s deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!

EDWARD.
O, Warwick, Warwick, that Plantagenet
Which held thee dearly as his soul’s redemption
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

WARWICK.
Ten days ago I drowned these news in tears,
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall’n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London, keeper of the King,
Mustered my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
Marched toward Saint Albans to intercept the Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in Parliament
Touching King Henry’s oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albans met,
Our battles joined, and both sides fiercely fought.
But, whether ’twas the coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robbed my soldiers of their heated spleen,
Or whether ’twas report of her success;
Or more than common fear of Clifford’s rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge; but, to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers’, like the night-owl’s lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheered them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards,
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we in them no hope to win the day;
So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you;
For in the Marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

EDWARD.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

WARWICK.
Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers;
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

RICHARD.
’Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled.
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne’er till now his scandal of retire.

WARWICK.
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry’s head
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.

RICHARD.
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not.
’Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time what’s to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.

WARWICK.
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting Queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many moe proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting King like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the Parliament;
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong.
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, _via_, to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry “Charge upon our foes!”
But never once again turn back and fly.

RICHARD.
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak.
Ne’er may he live to see a sunshine day
That cries “Retire,” if Warwick bid him stay.

EDWARD.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail’st—as God forbid the hour!—
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!

WARWICK.
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York.
The next degree is England’s royal throne;
For King of England shalt thou be proclaimed
In every borough as we pass along,
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets and about our task.

RICHARD.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

EDWARD.
Then strike up, drums! God and Saint George for us!

Enter a Messenger.

WARWICK.
How now, what news?

MESSENGER.
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant host,
And craves your company for speedy counsel.

WARWICK.
Why then it sorts; brave warriors, let’s away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Before York

Flourish. Enter King Henry, Queen Margaret, the Prince of Wales,
Clifford and Northumberland with drums and trumpets.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder’s the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompassed with your crown.
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

KING HENRY.
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wrack!
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! ’Tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

CLIFFORD.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scapes the lurking serpent’s mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York did level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows.
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue like a loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man’s face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbed unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their young’s defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent.
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father’s fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
“What my great-grandfather and grandsire got,
My careless father fondly gave away?”
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy,
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

KING HENRY.
Full well hath Clifford played the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I’ll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind,
And would my father had left me no more;
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession any jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York, would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!

QUEEN MARGARET.
My lord, cheer up your spirits; our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son.
Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.—
Edward, kneel down.

KING HENRY.
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
And learn this lesson: draw thy sword in right.

PRINCE EDWARD.
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I’ll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.

CLIFFORD.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Royal commanders, be in readiness;
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York,
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him.
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.

CLIFFORD.
I would your highness would depart the field.
The Queen hath best success when you are absent.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

KING HENRY.
Why, that’s my fortune too; therefore I’ll stay.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Be it with resolution then to fight.

PRINCE EDWARD.
My royal father, cheer these noble lords,
And hearten those that fight in your defence.
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry “Saint George!”

March. Enter Edward, George, Richard, Warwick, Norfolk, Montague and
Soldiers.

EDWARD.
Now, perjured Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace
And set thy diadem upon my head,
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

EDWARD.
I am his king, and he should bow his knee.
I was adopted heir by his consent.
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him by new act of Parliament
To blot out me and put his own son in.

CLIFFORD.
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?

RICHARD.
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!

CLIFFORD.
Ay, crook-back; here I stand, to answer thee,
Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.

RICHARD.
’Twas you that killed young Rutland, was it not?

CLIFFORD.
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

RICHARD.
For God’s sake, lords, give signal to the fight.

WARWICK.
What sayst thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick, dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Albans last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

WARWICK.
Then ’twas my turn to fly, and now ’tis thine.

CLIFFORD.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.

WARWICK.
’Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.

RICHARD.
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

CLIFFORD.
I slew thy father; call’st thou him a child?

RICHARD.
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland,
But ere sunset I’ll make thee curse the deed.

KING HENRY.
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.

KING HENRY.
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue.
I am a king, and privileged to speak.

CLIFFORD.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.

RICHARD.
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
By Him that made us all, I am resolved
That Clifford’s manhood lies upon his tongue.

EDWARD.
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts today
That ne’er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

WARWICK.
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
For York in justice puts his armour on.

PRINCE EDWARD.
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but everything is right.

RICHARD.
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
For well I wot thou hast thy mother’s tongue.

QUEEN MARGARET.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,
Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads or lizards’ dreadful stings.

RICHARD.
Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,
As if a channel should be called the sea,
Sham’st thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?

EDWARD.
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne’er was Agamemnon’s brother wronged
By that false woman as this king by thee.
His father revelled in the heart of France,
And tamed the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;
And had he matched according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day;
But when he took a beggar to his bed
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal day,
Even then that sunshine brewed a shower for him
That washed his father’s fortunes forth of France
And heaped sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broached this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipped our claim until another age.

GEORGE.
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We’ll never leave till we have hewn thee down
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

EDWARD.
And in this resolution I defy thee;
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle King to speak.
Sound trumpets! Let our bloody colours wave;
And either victory or else a grave!

QUEEN MARGARET.
Stay, Edward.

EDWARD.
No, wrangling woman, we’ll no longer stay.
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in Yorkshire

Alarums. Excursions. Enter Warwick.

WARWICK.
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe;
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robbed my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite, needs must I rest awhile.

Enter Edward, running.

EDWARD.
Smile, gentle heaven, or strike, ungentle death;
For this world frowns and Edward’s sun is clouded.

WARWICK.
How now, my lord, what hap? What hope of good?

Enter George.

GEORGE.
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke and ruin follows us.
What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?

EDWARD.
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

Enter Richard.

RICHARD.
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother’s blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broached with the steely point of Clifford’s lance;
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangor heard from far,
“Warwick, revenge! Brother, revenge my death!”
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stained their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.

WARWICK.
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood;
I’ll kill my horse because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses whiles the foe doth rage,
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were played in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above
I’ll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine,
Or Fortune given me measure of revenge.

EDWARD.
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earth’s cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to Thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where’er it be, in heaven or in earth.

RICHARD.
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.

WARWICK.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords, farewell.

GEORGE.
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games.
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer; make we hence amain.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Another Part of the Field

Excursions. Enter Richard and Clifford.

RICHARD.
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environed with a brazen wall.

CLIFFORD.
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
This is the hand that stabbed thy father York,
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
And here’s the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself;
And so have at thee!

They fight. Warwick comes; Clifford flies.

RICHARD.
Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase;
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another Part of the Field

Enter King Henry.

KING HENRY.
This battle fares like to the morning’s war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind.
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best,
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered.
So is the equal poise of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle, swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if God’s good will were so;
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! Methinks it were a happy life
To be no better than a homely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run:
How many make the hour full complete,
How many hours brings about the day,
How many days will finish up the year,
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock;
So many hours must I take my rest;
So many hours must I contemplate;
So many hours must I sport myself;
So many days my ewes have been with young;
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean;
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece.
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Passed over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! How sweet, how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep
Than doth a rich embroidered canopy
To kings that fear their subjects’ treachery?
O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherd’s homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree’s shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince’s delicates—
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

Alarum. Enter a Son that hath killed his father, bringing in the dead
body.

SON.
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns;
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who’s this? O God! It is my father’s face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have killed.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the King was I pressed forth;
My father, being the Earl of Warwick’s man,
Came on the part of York, pressed by his master;
And I, who at his hands received my life,
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did;
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks,
And no more words till they have flowed their fill.

KING HENRY.
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I’ll aid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears and break o’ercharged with grief.

Enter a Father who has killed his son, with the body in his arms.

FATHER.
Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold,
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman’s face?
Ah, no, no, no; it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! See, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart
Upon thy wounds, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous, and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!

KING HENRY.
Woe above woe, grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses;
The one his purple blood right well resembles,
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth.
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish!
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

SON.
How will my mother for a father’s death
Take on with me and ne’er be satisfied!

FATHER.
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne’er be satisfied!

KING HENRY.
How will the country for these woeful chances
Misthink the King and not be satisfied!

SON.
Was ever son so rued a father’s death?

FATHER.
Was ever father so bemoaned his son?

KING HENRY.
Was ever king so grieved for subjects’ woe?
Much is your sorrow, mine ten times so much.

SON.
I’ll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.

[_Exit with the body._]

FATHER.
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image ne’er shall go.
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I’ll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.

[_Exit with the body._]

KING HENRY.
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woeful than you are.

Alarums. Excursions. Enter Queen Margaret, Prince of Wales and Exeter.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Fly, father, fly, for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull.
Away, for death doth hold us in pursuit.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain.
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasped in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.

EXETER.
Away, for vengeance comes along with them.
Nay, stay not to expostulate; make speed,
Or else come after; I’ll away before.

KING HENRY.
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter;
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the Queen intends. Forward; away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another Part of the Field

A loud alarum. Enter Clifford, wounded.

CLIFFORD.
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which whiles it lasted gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body’s parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy tough commixtures melts,
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York.
The common people swarm like summer flies;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry’s enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaëthon should check thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorched the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou swayed as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I, and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death,
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight.
The foe is merciless and will not pity,
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick, and the rest;
I stabbed your fathers’ bosoms, split my breast.

[_He faints._]

Alarum and retreat. Enter Edward, George, Richard, Montague, Warwick
and Soldiers.

EDWARD.
Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded Queen
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, filled with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

WARWICK.
No, ’tis impossible he should escape;
For, though before his face I speak the words,
Your brother Richard marked him for the grave,
And whereso’er he is, he’s surely dead.

[_Clifford groans and dies._]

RICHARD.
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and death’s departing.

EDWARD.
See who it is; and, now the battle’s ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

RICHARD.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for ’tis Clifford,
Who, not contented that he lopped the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

WARWICK.
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father’s head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room.
Measure for measure must be answered.

EDWARD.
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours;
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

[_Soldiers bring the body forward._]

WARWICK.
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o’ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us, what we say.

RICHARD.
O, would he did, and so, perhaps, he doth!
’Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.

GEORGE.
If so thou think’st, vex him with eager words.

RICHARD.
Clifford, ask mercy, and obtain no grace.

EDWARD.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

WARWICK.
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

GEORGE.
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

RICHARD.
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

EDWARD.
Thou pitied’st Rutland, I will pity thee.

GEORGE.
Where’s Captain Margaret to fence you now?

WARWICK.
They mock thee, Clifford; swear as thou wast wont.

RICHARD.
What, not an oath? Nay then, the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he’s dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy but two hours’ life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstaunched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

WARWICK.
Ay, but he’s dead. Off with the traitor’s head,
And rear it in the place your father’s stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England’s royal king;
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen.
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together,
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scattered foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation,
And then to Brittany I’ll cross the sea
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

EDWARD.
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester;
And George, of Clarence. Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

RICHARD.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester,
For Gloucester’s dukedom is too ominous.

WARWICK.
Tut, that’s a foolish observation.
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A Forest in the North of England


Enter two Keepers with crossbows in their hands.

1 KEEPER.
Under this thick-grown brake we’ll shroud ourselves,
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.

2 KEEPER.
I’ll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

1 KEEPER.
That cannot be; the noise of thy crossbow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best;
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
I’ll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self place where now we mean to stand.

2 KEEPER.
Here comes a man; let’s stay till he be past.

Enter King Henry, disguised, with a prayer-book.

KING HENRY.
From Scotland am I stolen, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, ’tis no land of thine;
Thy place is filled, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm washed off wherewith thou wast anointed.
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them and not myself?

1 KEEPER.
Ay, here’s a deer whose skin’s a keeper’s fee.
This is the quondam king; let’s seize upon him.

KING HENRY.
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.

2 KEEPER.
Why linger we? Let us lay hands upon him.

1 KEEPER.
Forbear awhile; we’ll hear a little more.

KING HENRY.
My queen and son are gone to France for aid;
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone to crave the French King’s sister
To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost,
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account, then, Margaret may win him,
For she’s a woman to be pitied much.
Her sighs will make a batt’ry in his breast,
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn,
And Nero will be tainted with remorse
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she’s come to beg, Warwick to give;
She on his left side craving aid for Henry;
He on his right asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles and says his Edward is installed;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the King from her
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edward’s place.
O Margaret, thus ’twill be; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou went’st forlorn.

2 KEEPER.
Say, what art thou, that talk’st of kings and queens?

KING HENRY.
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

2 KEEPER.
Ay, but thou talk’st as if thou wert a king.

KING HENRY.
Why, so I am, in mind; and that’s enough.

2 KEEPER.
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?

KING HENRY.
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Not to be seen. My crown is called content;
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

2 KEEPER.
Well, if you be a king crowned with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us; for, as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects, sworn in all allegiance,
Will apprehend you as his enemy.

KING HENRY.
But did you never swear, and break an oath?

2 KEEPER.
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.

KING HENRY.
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?

2 KEEPER.
Here in this country, where we now remain.

KING HENRY.
I was anointed king at nine months old;
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me.
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?

1 KEEPER.
No, for we were subjects but while you were king.

KING HENRY.
Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear.
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust,
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the King shall be commanded;
And be you kings; command, and I’ll obey.

1 KEEPER.
We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.

KING HENRY.
So would you be again to Henry
If he were seated as King Edward is.

1 KEEPER.
We charge you, in God’s name and the King’s
To go with us unto the officers.

KING HENRY.
In God’s name, lead; your king’s name be obeyed,
And what God will, that let your king perform;
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Palace

Enter King Edward, Richard (Duke of Gloucester), George (Duke of
Clarence) and Lady Grey.

KING EDWARD.
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans field
This lady’s husband, Sir John Grey, was slain,
His land then seized on by the conqueror.
Her suit is now to repossess those lands,
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

RICHARD.
Your Highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to deny it her.

KING EDWARD.
It were no less; but yet I’ll make a pause.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] Yea, is it so?
I see the lady hath a thing to grant
Before the King will grant her humble suit.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] He knows the game; how true he keeps the wind!

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] Silence!

KING EDWARD.
Widow, we will consider of your suit,
And come some other time to know our mind.

LADY GREY.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay.
May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your pleasure is shall satisfy me.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] Ay, widow? Then I’ll warrant you all your lands,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, good faith, you’ll catch a blow.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] God forbid that, for he’ll take vantages.

KING EDWARD.
How many children hast thou, widow? Tell me.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] I think he means to beg a child of her.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] Nay, whip me then; he’ll rather give her two.

LADY GREY.
Three, my most gracious lord.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] You shall have four if you’ll be ruled by him.

KING EDWARD.
’Twere pity they should lose their father’s lands.

LADY GREY.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.

KING EDWARD.
Lords, give us leave; I’ll try this widow’s wit.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] Ay, good leave have you; for you will have leave
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.

[_Richard and George stand aside._]

KING EDWARD.
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

LADY GREY.
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

KING EDWARD.
And would you not do much to do them good?

LADY GREY.
To do them good I would sustain some harm.

KING EDWARD.
Then get your husband’s lands to do them good.

LADY GREY.
Therefore I came unto your majesty.

KING EDWARD.
I’ll tell you how these lands are to be got.

LADY GREY.
So shall you bind me to your Highness’ service.

KING EDWARD.
What service wilt thou do me if I give them?

LADY GREY.
What you command that rests in me to do.

KING EDWARD.
But you will take exceptions to my boon.

LADY GREY.
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.

KING EDWARD.
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

LADY GREY.
Why, then, I will do what your Grace commands.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] He plies her hard; and much rain wears the marble.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] As red as fire! Nay, then her wax must melt.

LADY GREY.
Why stops my lord? Shall I not hear my task?

KING EDWARD.
An easy task; ’tis but to love a king.

LADY GREY.
That’s soon performed, because I am a subject.

KING EDWARD.
Why, then, thy husband’s lands I freely give thee.

LADY GREY.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] The match is made; she seals it with a curtsy.

KING EDWARD.
But stay thee; ’tis the fruits of love I mean.

LADY GREY.
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

KING EDWARD.
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, thinkst thou, I sue so much to get?

LADY GREY.
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs, and virtue grants.

KING EDWARD.
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

LADY GREY.
Why, then, you mean not as I thought you did.

KING EDWARD.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.

LADY GREY.
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.

KING EDWARD.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

LADY GREY.
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.

KING EDWARD.
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband’s lands.

LADY GREY.
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower,
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

KING EDWARD.
Therein thou wrong’st thy children mightily.

LADY GREY.
Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit.
Please you dismiss me either with ay or no.

KING EDWARD.
Ay, if thou wilt say ay to my request;
No, if thou dost say no to my demand.

LADY GREY.
Then no, my lord. My suit is at an end.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] The widow likes him not, she knits her brows.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.

KING EDWARD.
[_Aside_.] Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;
Her words doth show her wit incomparable;
All her perfections challenge sovereignty.
One way or other, she is for a king,
And she shall be my love, or else my queen.—
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?

LADY GREY.
’Tis better said than done, my gracious lord.
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.

KING EDWARD.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee,
I speak no more than what my soul intends;
And that is to enjoy thee for my love.

LADY GREY.
And that is more than I will yield unto.
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.

KING EDWARD.
You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.

LADY GREY.
’Twill grieve your Grace my sons should call you father.

KING EDWARD.
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
And, by God’s mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some. Why, ’tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

RICHARD.
[_Aside to George_.] The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.

GEORGE.
[_Aside to Richard_.] When he was made a shriver, ’twas for shift.

KING EDWARD.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

Richard and George come forward.

RICHARD.
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.

KING EDWARD.
You’d think it strange if I should marry her.

GEORGE.
To whom, my lord?

KING EDWARD.
Why, Clarence, to myself.

RICHARD.
That would be ten days’ wonder at the least.

GEORGE.
That’s a day longer than a wonder lasts.

RICHARD.
By so much is the wonder in extremes.

KING EDWARD.
Well, jest on, brothers. I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband’s lands.

Enter a Nobleman.

NOBLEMAN.
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

KING EDWARD.
See that he be conveyed unto the Tower.
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.

[_Exeunt all but Richard._]

RICHARD.
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones, and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul’s desire and me—
The lustful Edward’s title buried—
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlooked-for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms ere I can place myself.
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why then I do but dream on sovereignty;
Like one that stands upon a promontory
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying he’ll lade it dry to have his way.
So do I wish the crown, being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
And so I say I’ll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye’s too quick, my heart o’erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard,
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I’ll make my heaven in a lady’s lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And ’witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought, and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns.
Why, Love forswore me in my mother’s womb,
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail Nature with some bribe
To shrink mine arm up like a withered shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits Deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlicked bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me
But to command, to check, to o’erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I’ll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, t’ account this world but hell
Until my misshaped trunk that bear this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home;
And I, like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rents the thorns, and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way, and straying from the way,
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,
Torment myself to catch the English crown.
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder while I smile,
And cry “Content!” to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I’ll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall,
I’ll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
I’ll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I’ll pluck it down.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. France. The King’s Palace

Flourish. Enter Lewis, the French King, his sister the Lady Bona, his
Admiral called Bourbon, Prince Edward, Queen Margaret, and the Earl of
Oxford. Lewis sits, and riseth up again.

KING LEWIS.
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us. It ill befits thy state
And birth that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.

QUEEN MARGARET.
No, mighty King of France. Now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion’s queen in former golden days;
But now mischance hath trod my title down
And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune
And to my humble seat conform myself.

KING LEWIS.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?

QUEEN MARGARET.
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.

KING LEWIS.
Whate’er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side. Yield not thy neck

[_Seats her by him._]

To Fortune’s yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased if France can yield relief.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is, of a king, become a banished man
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England’s true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry’s heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasure seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

KING LEWIS.
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm
While we bethink a means to break it off.

QUEEN MARGARET.
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

KING LEWIS.
The more I stay, the more I’ll succour thee.

QUEEN MARGARET.
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.

Enter Warwick.

KING LEWIS.
What’s he approacheth boldly to our presence?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward’s greatest friend.

KING LEWIS.
Welcome, brave Warwick. What brings thee to France?

[_He descends. Queen Margaret rises._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise,
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

WARWICK.
From worthy Edward, king of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person,
And then to crave a league of amity,
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England’s king in lawful marriage.

QUEEN MARGARET.
[_Aside_.] If that go forward, Henry’s hope is done.

WARWICK.
[_To Bona_.] And, gracious madam, in our king’s behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
To tell the passion of my sovereign’s heart,
Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beauty’s image and thy virtue.

QUEEN MARGARET.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward’s well-meant honest love,
But from deceit, bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry’s son.
Look therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

WARWICK.
Injurious Margaret!

PRINCE EDWARD.
And why not Queen?

WARWICK.
Because thy father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art prince than she is queen.

OXFORD.
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France.
From these our Henry lineally descends.

WARWICK.
Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest: you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years, a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom’s worth.

OXFORD.
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed’st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?

WARWICK.
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! Leave Henry, and call Edward king.

OXFORD.
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? And more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellowed years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.

WARWICK.
And I the house of York.

KING LEWIS.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe at our request to stand aside
While I use further conference with Warwick.

[_They stand aloof._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
Heavens grant that Warwick’s words bewitch him not!

KING LEWIS.
Now, Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? For I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

WARWICK.
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.

KING LEWIS.
But is he gracious in the people’s eye?

WARWICK.
The more that Henry was unfortunate.

KING LEWIS.
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.

WARWICK.
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fixed in virtue’s ground,
The leaves and fruit maintained with beauty’s sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

KING LEWIS.
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.

BONA.
Your grant or your denial shall be mine.
[_To Warwick_] Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your king’s desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

KING LEWIS.
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward’s.
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

PRINCE EDWARD.
To Edward, but not to the English king.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit.
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry’s friend.

KING LEWIS.
And still is friend to him and Margaret.
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward’s good success,
Then ’tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.

WARWICK.
Henry now lives in Scotland, at his ease,
Where, having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you,
And better ’twere you troubled him than France.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence till with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord’s false love;
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.

[_Post blowing a horn within._]

KING LEWIS.
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

Enter the Post.

POST.
My lord ambassador, these letters are for you.
Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague.
These from our king unto your Majesty.
And, madam, these for you, from whom I know not.

[_They all read their letters._]

OXFORD.
I like it well that our fair Queen and mistress
Smiles at her news while Warwick frowns at his.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled.
I hope all’s for the best.

KING LEWIS.
Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair Queen?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

WARWICK.
Mine, full of sorrow and heart’s discontent.

KING LEWIS.
What, has your king married the Lady Grey,
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this th’ alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

QUEEN MARGARET.
I told your majesty as much before;
This proveth Edward’s love and Warwick’s honesty.

WARWICK.
King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward’s—
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass th’ abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdoned at the last with shame?
Shame on himself, for my desert is honour;
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble Queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor.
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Warwick, these words have turned my hate to love;
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becom’st King Henry’s friend.

WARWICK.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I’ll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
’Tis not his new-made bride shall succour him;
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He’s very likely now to fall from him
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.

BONA.
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

BONA.
My quarrel and this English queen’s are one.

WARWICK.
And mine, fair Lady Bona, joins with yours.

KING LEWIS.
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret’s.
Therefore, at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.

KING LEWIS.
Then, England’s messenger, return in post
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.
Thou seest what’s past; go fear thy king withal.

BONA.
Tell him, in hope he’ll prove a widower shortly,
I’ll wear the willow garland for his sake.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.

WARWICK.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I’ll uncrown him ere ’t be long.
There’s thy reward; be gone.

[_Exit Post._]

KING LEWIS.
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas and bid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves, this noble Queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?

WARWICK.
This shall assure my constant loyalty:
That if our Queen and this young prince agree,
I’ll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick,
And with thy hand thy faith irrevocable
That only Warwick’s daughter shall be thine.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

[_He gives his hand to Warwick._]

KING LEWIS.
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral,
Shall waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war’s mischance
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

[_Exeunt all but Warwick._]

WARWICK.
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe.
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I’ll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry’s misery,
But seek revenge on Edward’s mockery.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. London. The Palace


Enter Richard (Duke of Gloucester), George (Duke of Clarence), Somerset
and Montague.

RICHARD.
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?

GEORGE.
Alas, you know ’tis far from hence to France!
How could he stay till Warwick made return?

SOMERSET.
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the King.

Flourish. Enter King Edward, attended; Lady Grey as Queen Elizabeth;
Pembroke, Stafford, Hastings and others. Four stand on one side, and
four on the other.

RICHARD.
And his well-chosen bride.

GEORGE.
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

KING EDWARD.
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive as half malcontent?

GEORGE.
As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they’ll take no offence at our abuse.

KING EDWARD.
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick; I am Edward,
Your King and Warwick’s, and must have my will.

RICHARD.
And shall have your will, because our King.
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

KING EDWARD.
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

RICHARD.
Not I.
No, God forbid that I should wish them severed
Whom God hath joined together. Ay, and ’twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.

KING EDWARD.
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England’s queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.

GEORGE.
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

RICHARD.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

KING EDWARD.
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?

MONTAGUE.
Yet to have joined with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthened this our commonwealth
’Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

HASTINGS.
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?

MONTAGUE.
But the safer when ’tis backed with France.

HASTINGS.
’Tis better using France than trusting France.
Let us be backed with God and with the seas
Which He hath giv’n for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves.
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

GEORGE.
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

KING EDWARD.
Ay, what of that? It was my will and grant;
And for this once my will shall stand for law.

RICHARD.
And yet, methinks, your Grace hath not done well
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride.
She better would have fitted me or Clarence;
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

GEORGE.
Or else you would not have bestowed the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife’s son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

KING EDWARD.
Alas, poor Clarence, is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

GEORGE.
In choosing for yourself you showed your judgment,
Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.

KING EDWARD.
Leave me or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brother’s will.

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
My lords, before it pleased his Majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent,
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

KING EDWARD.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee
So long as Edward is thy constant friend
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

RICHARD.
[_Aside_.] I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.

Enter a Post.

KING EDWARD.
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?

POST.
My sovereign liege, no letters, and few words,
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.

KING EDWARD.
Go to, we pardon thee. Therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

POST.
At my depart these were his very words:
“Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.”

KING EDWARD.
Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

POST.
These were her words, uttered with mild disdain:
“Tell him, in hope he’ll prove a widower shortly,
I’ll wear the willow garland for his sake.”

KING EDWARD.
I blame not her; she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henry’s queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.

POST.
“Tell him,” quoth she “my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.”

KING EDWARD.
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

POST.
He, more incensed against your Majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
“Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I’ll uncrown him ere ’t be long.”

KING EDWARD.
Ha! Durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarned.
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

POST.
Ay, gracious sovereign, they are so linked in friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick’s daughter.

GEORGE.
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick’s other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

[_Exit George and Somerset follows._]

RICHARD.
[_Aside_.] Not I. My thoughts aim at a further matter;
I stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.

KING EDWARD.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I armed against the worst can happen,
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men and make prepare for war;
They are already, or quickly will be, landed.
Myself in person will straight follow you.

[_Exeunt Pembroke and Stafford._]

But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me.
If it be so, then both depart to him.
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

MONTAGUE.
So God help Montague as he proves true!

HASTINGS.
And Hastings as he favours Edward’s cause!

KING EDWARD.
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

RICHARD.
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

KING EDWARD.
Why, so! Then am I sure of victory.
Now, therefore, let us hence, and lose no hour
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Plain in Warwickshire

Enter Warwick and Oxford in England, with French Soldiers.

WARWICK.
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
The common people by numbers swarm to us.

Enter George (Duke of Clarence) and Somerset.

But see where Somerset and Clarence comes.
Speak suddenly, my lords: are we all friends?

GEORGE.
Fear not that, my lord.

WARWICK.
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset. I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawned an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward’s brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings.
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, in night’s coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamped,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy;
That, as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus’ tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well covered with the night’s black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward’s guard,
And seize himself. I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.

[_They all cry “Henry!”_]

Why then, let’s on our way in silent sort,
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Edward’s Camp near Warwick

Enter three Watchmen to guard the King’s tent.

1 WATCHMAN.
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand.
The King by this is set him down to sleep.

2 WATCHMAN.
What, will he not to bed?

1 WATCHMAN.
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppressed.

2 WATCHMAN.
Tomorrow, then, belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

3 WATCHMAN.
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the King here resteth in his tent?

1 WATCHMAN.
’Tis the Lord Hastings, the King’s chiefest friend.

3 WATCHMAN.
O, is it so? But why commands the King
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

2 WATCHMAN.
’Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

3 WATCHMAN.
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
’Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

1 WATCHMAN.
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

2 WATCHMAN.
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent
But to defend his person from night-foes?

Enter Warwick, George (Duke of Clarence), Oxford, Somerset and French
Soldiers, silent all.

WARWICK.
This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters! Honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

1 WATCHMAN.
Who goes there?

2 WATCHMAN.
Stay, or thou diest.

[_Warwick and the rest cry all, “Warwick! Warwick!” and set upon the
guard, who fly, crying “Arm! Arm!” Warwick  and the rest following
them._]

The drum playing and trumpet sounding, enter Warwick, Somerset, and the
rest, bringing the King out in his gown, sitting in a chair. Richard
(Duke of Gloucester) and Hastings fly over the stage.

SOMERSET.
What are they that fly there?

WARWICK.
Richard and Hastings.
Let them go. Here is the Duke.

KING EDWARD.
The Duke? Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call’dst me king?

WARWICK.
Ay, but the case is altered.
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas, how should you govern any kingdom
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people’s welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?

KING EDWARD.
Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king.
Though Fortune’s malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

WARWICK.
Then for his mind be Edward England’s king;

[_Takes off his crown._]

But Henry now shall wear the English crown
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conveyed
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I’ll follow you and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.

[_They begin to lead him out forcibly._]

KING EDWARD.
What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

[_Exit King Edward, led out; Somerset with him._]

OXFORD.
What now remains, my lords, for us to do,
But march to London with our soldiers?

WARWICK.
Ay, that’s the first thing that we have to do,
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. The Palace

Enter Queen Elizabeth and Rivers.

RIVERS.
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
Why, brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall’n King Edward?

RIVERS.
What, loss of some pitched battle against Warwick?

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
No, but the loss of his own royal person.

RIVERS.
Then is my sovereign slain?

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayed by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares;
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick’s brother and by that our foe.

RIVERS.
These news, I must confess, are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may.
Warwick may lose that now hath won the day.

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
Till then, fair hope must hinder life’s decay;
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward’s offspring in my womb.
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune’s cross,
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward’s fruit, true heir to th’ English crown.

RIVERS.
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
I am informed that he comes towards London
To set the crown once more on Henry’s head.
Guess thou the rest: King Edward’s friends must down.
But to prevent the tyrant’s violence—
For trust not him that hath once broken faith—
I’ll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary
To save at least the heir of Edward’s right.
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly.
If Warwick take us, we are sure to die.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A park near Middleham Castle in Yorkshire

Enter Richard (Duke of Gloucester), Lord Hastings, Sir William Stanley
and others.

RICHARD.
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our King, my brother,
Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make this way,
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.

Enter King Edward and a Huntsman with him.

HUNTSMAN.
This way, my lord, for this way lies the game.

KING EDWARD.
Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop’s deer?

RICHARD.
Brother, the time and case requireth haste;
Your horse stands ready at the park corner.

KING EDWARD.
But whither shall we then?

HASTINGS.
To Lynn, my lord, and shipped from thence to Flanders.

RICHARD.
Well guessed, believe me, for that was my meaning.

KING EDWARD.
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

RICHARD.
But wherefore stay we? ’Tis no time to talk.

KING EDWARD.
Huntsman, what sayst thou? Wilt thou go along?

HUNTSMAN.
Better do so than tarry and be hanged.

RICHARD.
Come then, away! Let’s ha’ no more ado.

KING EDWARD.
Bishop, farewell; shield thee from Warwick’s frown,
And pray that I may repossess the crown.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. London. The Tower

Enter King Henry, George (Duke of Clarence), Warwick, Somerset, young
Richmond, Oxford, Montague, and Lieutenant of the Tower.

KING HENRY.
Master Lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
And turned my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?

LIEUTENANT.
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
For what, lieutenant? For well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I’ll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when, after many moody thoughts,
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God thou sett’st me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer Fortune’s spite,
By living low where Fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punished with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

WARWICK.
Your Grace hath still been famed for virtuous,
And now may seem as wise as virtuous
By spying and avoiding Fortune’s malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars;
Yet in this one thing let me blame your Grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

GEORGE.
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

WARWICK.
And I choose Clarence only for Protector.

KING HENRY.
Warwick and Clarence, give me both your hands.
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government.
I make you both Protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin’s rebuke and my Creator’s praise.

WARWICK.
What answers Clarence to his sovereign’s will?

GEORGE.
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose myself.

WARWICK.
Why, then, though loath, yet I must be content.
We’ll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry’s body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

GEORGE.
What else? And that succession be determined.

WARWICK.
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.

KING HENRY.
But with the first of all your chief affairs
Let me entreat—for I command no more—
That Margaret your Queen and my son Edward
Be sent for to return from France with speed;
For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

GEORGE.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

KING HENRY.
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

SOMERSET.
My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.

KING HENRY.
Come hither, England’s hope. If secret powers

[_Lays his hand on his head._]

Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country’s bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

Enter a Post.

WARWICK.
What news, my friend?

POST.
That Edward is escaped from your brother
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

WARWICK.
Unsavoury news! But how made he escape?

POST.
He was conveyed by Richard, Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the Bishop’s huntsmen rescued him,
For hunting was his daily exercise.

WARWICK.
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.

[_Exeunt all but Somerset, Richmond and Oxford._]

SOMERSET.
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward’s,
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before ’t be long.
As Henry’s late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we’ll send him hence to Brittany
Till storms be past of civil enmity.

OXFORD.
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
’Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.

SOMERSET.
It shall be so. He shall to Brittany.
Come therefore, let’s about it speedily.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Before York

Flourish. Enter King Edward, Richard (Duke of Gloucester), Hastings and
Soldiers.

KING EDWARD.
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far Fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry’s regal crown.
Well have we passed and now repassed the seas,
And brought desired help from Burgundy.
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter as into our dukedom?

RICHARD.
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

KING EDWARD.
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

HASTINGS.
My liege, I’ll knock once more to summon them.

Enter on the walls, the Mayor of York and his Brethren.

MAYOR.
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

KING EDWARD.
But, master Mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.

MAYOR.
True, my good lord, I know you for no less.

KING EDWARD.
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

RICHARD.
[_Aside_.] But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
He’ll soon find means to make the body follow.

HASTINGS.
Why, master Mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we are King Henry’s friends.

MAYOR.
Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be opened.

[_He descends._]

RICHARD.
A wise, stout captain, and soon persuaded.

HASTINGS.
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So ’twere not long of him; but, being entered,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

Enter the Mayor and two Aldermen below.

KING EDWARD.
So, master Mayor, these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What, fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;

[_Takes his keys._]

For Edward will defend the town and thee
And all those friends that deign to follow me.

March. Enter Montgomery with drum and Soldiers.

RICHARD.
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend unless I be deceived.

KING EDWARD.
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?

MONTGOMERY.
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

KING EDWARD.
Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
Our title to the crown, and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

MONTGOMERY.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again.
I came to serve a king, and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.

[_The drum begins to march._]

KING EDWARD.
Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we’ll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recovered.

MONTGOMERY.
What talk you of debating? In few words,
If you’ll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I’ll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succour you.
Why shall we fight if you pretend no title?

RICHARD.
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?

KING EDWARD.
When we grow stronger, then we’ll make our claim.
Till then ’tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

HASTINGS.
Away with scrupulous wit! Now arms must rule.

RICHARD.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

KING EDWARD.
Then be it as you will; for ’tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.

MONTGOMERY.
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself,
And now will I be Edward’s champion.

HASTINGS.
Sound, trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaimed.
Come, fellow soldier, make thou proclamation.

[_Gives him a paper. Flourish._]

SOLDIER.
[_Reads_.] _Edward the Fourth, by the Grace of God, King of England and
France, and Lord of Ireland, etc._

MONTGOMERY.
And whoso’er gainsays King Edward’s right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.

[_Throws down his gauntlet._]

ALL.
Long live Edward the Fourth!

KING EDWARD.
Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all.
If Fortune serve me, I’ll requite this kindness.
Now for this night let’s harbour here in York,
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon
We’ll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we’ll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. London. The Palace

Flourish. Enter King Henry, Warwick, Montague, George (Duke of
Clarence), Oxford and Exeter.

WARWICK.
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath passed in safety through the Narrow Seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London;
And many giddy people flock to him.

KING HENRY.
Let’s levy men and beat him back again.

GEORGE.
A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Which, being suffered, rivers cannot quench.

WARWICK.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war.
Those will I muster up; and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton, and in Leicestershire shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command’st.
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.

KING HENRY.
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy’s true hope.

GEORGE.
In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness’ hand.

KING HENRY.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate.

MONTAGUE.
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

OXFORD.
And thus [_kissing Henry’s hand_] I seal my truth, and bid adieu.

KING HENRY.
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

WARWICK.
Farewell, sweet lords; let’s meet at Coventry.

[_Exeunt all but King Henry and Exeter._]

KING HENRY.
Here at the palace will I rest a while.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.

EXETER.
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

KING HENRY.
That’s not my fear; my meed hath got me fame.
I have not stopped mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allayed their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears.
I have not been desirous of their wealth
Nor much oppressed them with great subsidies,
Nor forward of revenge, though they much erred.
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.

[_Shout within “A York! A York!”_]

EXETER.
Hark, hark, my lord, what shouts are these?

Enter King Edward, Richard (Duke of Gloucester) and Soldiers.

KING EDWARD.
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence,
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.
Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower. Let him not speak.

[_Exeunt some with King Henry._]

And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains.
The sun shines hot, and, if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

RICHARD.
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Coventry


Enter, Warwick, the Mayor of Coventry, two Messengers and others, upon
the walls.

WARWICK.
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?

1 MESSENGER.
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

WARWICK.
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

2 MESSENGER.
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

Enter Sir John Somerville.

WARWICK.
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

SOMERVILLE.
At Southam I did leave him with his forces
And do expect him here some two hours hence.

[_Drum heard._]

WARWICK.
Then Clarence is at hand; I hear his drum.

SOMERVILLE.
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies.
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.

WARWICK.
Who should that be? Belike, unlooked-for friends.

SOMERVILLE.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

March. Flourish. Enter King Edward, Richard (Duke of Gloucester) and
Soldiers.

KING EDWARD.
Go, trumpet, to the walls and sound a parle.

RICHARD.
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall.

WARWICK.
O, unbid spite! Is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?

KING EDWARD.
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee?
Call Edward King and at his hands beg mercy,
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

WARWICK.
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and plucked thee down,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent,
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

RICHARD.
I thought, at least, he would have said the King;
Or did he make the jest against his will?

WARWICK.
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?

RICHARD.
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give;
I’ll do thee service for so good a gift.

WARWICK.
’Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.

KING EDWARD.
Why, then, ’tis mine, if but by Warwick’s gift.

WARWICK.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight;
And, weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
And Henry is my King, Warwick his subject.

KING EDWARD.
But Warwick’s king is Edward’s prisoner;
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?

RICHARD.
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily fingered from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishop’s palace,
And ten to one you’ll meet him in the Tower.

KING EDWARD.
’Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

RICHARD.
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down.
Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.

WARWICK.
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail to strike to thee.

KING EDWARD.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
“Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.”

Enter Oxford with drum and colours.

WARWICK.
O cheerful colours! See where Oxford comes!

OXFORD.
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!

[_He and his forces enter the city._]

RICHARD.
The gates are open; let us enter too.

KING EDWARD.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle;
If not, the city being but of small defence,
We’ll quietly rouse the traitors in the same.

WARWICK.
O, welcome, Oxford, for we want thy help.

Enter Montague with drum and colours.

MONTAGUE.
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!

[_He and his forces enter the city._]

RICHARD.
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

KING EDWARD.
The harder matched, the greater victory.
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

Enter Somerset with drum and colours.

SOMERSET.
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!

[_He and his forces enter the city._]

RICHARD.
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the House of York;
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.

Enter George (Duke of Clarence) with drum and colours.

WARWICK.
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother’s love.

[_Richard and George whisper._]

Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt if Warwick call.

GEORGE.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?

[_Taking the red rose from his hat and throws the rose at Warwick._]

Look here, I throw my infamy at thee.
I will not ruinate my father’s house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful King?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah’s when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother’s hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, whereso’er I meet thee—
As I will meet thee if thou stir abroad—
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends.
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

KING EDWARD.
Now, welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

RICHARD.
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.

WARWICK.
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!

KING EDWARD.
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

WARWICK.
Alas! I am not cooped here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar’st.

KING EDWARD.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field! Saint George and victory!

[_Exeunt. March. Warwick and his company follows._]

SCENE II. A Field of Battle near Barnet

Alarum and excursions. Enter King Edward bringing forth Warwick
wounded.

KING EDWARD.
So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear,
For Warwick was a bug that feared us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
That Warwick’s bones may keep thine company.

[_Exit._]

WARWICK.
Ah, who is nigh? Come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? My mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe’s edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top branch overpeered Jove’s spreading tree,
And kept low shrubs from winter’s pow’rful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimmed with death’s black veil,
Have been as piercing as the midday sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world;
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were likened oft to kingly sepulchres,
For who lived King but I could dig his grave?
And who durst smile when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smeared in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had,
Even now forsake me; and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body’s length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And live we how we can, yet die we must.

Enter Oxford and Somerset.

SOMERSET.
Ah, Warwick, Warwick, wert thou as we are,
We might recover all our loss again.
The Queen from France hath brought a puissant power;
Even now we heard the news. Ah, couldst thou fly!

WARWICK.
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague!
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile.
Thou lov’st me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.

SOMERSET.
Ah, Warwick, Montague hath breathed his last,
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said “Commend me to my valiant brother.”
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a cannon in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished; but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
“O farewell, Warwick!”

WARWICK.
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell, to meet in heaven.

[_He dies._]

OXFORD.
Away, away, to meet the Queen’s great power!

[_Here they bear away his body. Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another Part of the Field

Flourish. Enter King Edward in triumph, with Richard, George and the
rest.

KING EDWARD.
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threat’ning cloud
That will encounter with our glorious sun
Ere he attain his easeful western bed.
I mean, my lords, those powers that the Queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

GEORGE.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came;
Thy very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.

RICHARD.
The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her.
If she have time to breathe, be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

KING EDWARD.
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewkesbury.
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum! cry “Courage!” and away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Plains near Tewkesbury

Flourish. March. Enter Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, Somerset, Oxford
and Soldiers.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Great lords, wise men ne’er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is ’t meet that he
Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles in his moan the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame, ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmast; what of him?
Our slaughtered friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allowed the skilful pilot’s charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wrack.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but a ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark?
Say you can swim: alas, ’tis but a while!
Tread on the sand: why, there you quickly sink;
Bestride the rock: the tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; that’s a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there’s no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands, and rocks.
Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
’Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here;
For did I but suspect a fearful man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of the like spirit to himself.
If any such be here, as God forbid!
Let him depart before we need his help.

OXFORD.
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! Why, ’twere perpetual shame.
O, brave young Prince, thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee. Long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!

SOMERSET.
And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mocked and wondered at.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Thanks, gentle Somerset. Sweet Oxford, thanks.

PRINCE EDWARD.
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand
Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.

OXFORD.
I thought no less. It is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

SOMERSET.
But he’s deceived; we are in readiness.

QUEEN MARGARET.
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.

OXFORD.
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

Flourish and march. Enter King Edward, Richard, George and Soldiers.

KING EDWARD.
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
Which by the heaven’s assistance and your strength
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For, well I wot, ye blaze to burn them out.
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

QUEEN MARGARET.
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; for every word I speak
Ye see I drink the water of my eye.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe, his state usurped,
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancelled, and his treasure spent;
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice. Then, in God’s name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.

[_Alarum, retreat, excursions. Exeunt both armies_]

SCENE V. Another part of the Field

Flourish. Enter King Edward, Richard, George and Soldiers; with Queen
Margaret, Oxford and Somerset as prisoners.

KING EDWARD.
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight.
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.

OXFORD.
For my part, I’ll not trouble thee with words.

SOMERSET.
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.

[_Exeunt Oxford and Somerset, guarded._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

KING EDWARD.
Is proclamation made that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

RICHARD.
It is, and lo where youthful Edward comes.

Enter soldiers with Prince Edward.

KING EDWARD.
Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.
What, can so young a man begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turned me to?

PRINCE EDWARD.
Speak like a subject, proud, ambitious York.
Suppose that I am now my father’s mouth;
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee
Which, traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ah, thy father had been so resolved!

RICHARD.
That you might still have worn the petticoat
And ne’er have stol’n the breech from Lancaster.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Let Aesop fable in a winter’s night;
His currish riddle sorts not with this place.

RICHARD.
By heaven, brat, I’ll plague you for that word.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

RICHARD.
For God’s sake, take away this captive scold.

PRINCE EDWARD.
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.

KING EDWARD.
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

GEORGE.
Untutored lad, thou art too malapert.

PRINCE EDWARD.
I know my duty; you are all undutiful.
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are,
And thou usurp’st my father’s right and mine.

KING EDWARD.
Take that, the likeness of this railer here.

[_Stabs him._]

RICHARD.
Sprawl’st thou? Take that to end thy agony.

[_Stabs him._]

GEORGE.
And there’s for twitting me with perjury.

[_Stabs him._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
O, kill me too!

RICHARD.
Marry, and shall.

[_Offers to kill her._]

KING EDWARD.
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.

RICHARD.
Why should she live to fill the world with words?

KING EDWARD.
What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.

RICHARD.
Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.
I’ll hence to London on a serious matter.
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

GEORGE.
What? What?

RICHARD.
The Tower, the Tower!

[_Exit._]

QUEEN MARGARET.
O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy.
Canst thou not speak? O traitors, murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it.
He was a man; this, in respect, a child,
And men ne’er spend their fury on a child.
What’s worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst an if I speak;
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains, bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropped!
You have no children, butchers; if you had,
The thought of them would have stirred up remorse.
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!

KING EDWARD.
Away with her; go bear her hence perforce.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here.
Here sheathe thy sword; I’ll pardon thee my death.
What, wilt thou not? Then, Clarence, do it thou.

GEORGE.
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

QUEEN MARGARET.
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

GEORGE.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

QUEEN MARGARET.
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.
’Twas sin before, but now ’tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil’s butcher, Richard,
Hard-favoured Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here. Murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne’er putt’st back.

KING EDWARD.
Away, I say! I charge ye, bear her hence.

QUEEN MARGARET.
So come to you and yours as to this prince!

[_She is taken out._]

KING EDWARD.
Where’s Richard gone?

GEORGE.
To London all in post, and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

KING EDWARD.
He’s sudden if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let’s away to London
And see our gentle Queen how well she fares.
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. London. The Tower

Enter King Henry and Richard, with the Lieutenant on the walls.

RICHARD.
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?

KING HENRY.
Ay, my good lord—my lord, I should say rather.
’Tis sin to flatter; “good” was little better:
“Good Gloucester” and “good devil” were alike,
And both preposterous; therefore, not “good lord”.

RICHARD.
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves; we must confer.

[_Exit Lieutenant._]

KING HENRY.
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece,
And next his throat unto the butcher’s knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?

RICHARD.
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

KING HENRY.
The bird that hath been limed in a bush
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught, and killed.

RICHARD.
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drowned.

KING HENRY.
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that seared the wings of my sweet boy,
Thy brother Edward; and thyself, the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger’s point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? Is ’t for my life?

RICHARD.
Think’st thou I am an executioner?

KING HENRY.
A persecutor I am sure thou art.
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.

RICHARD.
Thy son I killed for his presumption.

KING HENRY.
Hadst thou been killed when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy: that many a thousand
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man’s sigh, and many a widow’s,
And many an orphan’s water-standing eye,
Men for their sons’, wives for their husbands’,
Orphans for their parents’ timeless death,
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shrieked at thy birth, an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howled, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rooked her on the chimney’s top,
And chatt’ring pies in dismal discord sung;
Thy mother felt more than a mother’s pain,
And yet brought forth less than a mother’s hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou cam’st to bite the world;
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou cam’st—

RICHARD.
I’ll hear no more. Die, prophet, in thy speech.

[_Stabs him._]

For this, amongst the rest, was I ordained.

KING HENRY.
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
O God, forgive my sins, and pardon thee!

[_Dies._]

RICHARD.
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor King’s death.
O, may such purple tears be always shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither—

[_Stabs him again._]

I that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, ’tis true that Henry told me of,
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward.
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste
And seek their ruin that usurped our right?
The midwife wondered, and the women cried
“O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!”
And so I was, which plainly signified
That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word “love,” which greybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another,
And not in me. I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep’st me from the light,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buzz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life;
And then, to purge his fear, I’ll be thy death.
King Henry and the Prince his son are gone;
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I’ll throw thy body in another room,
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.

[_Exit with the body._]

SCENE VII. London. The Palace

Flourish. Enter King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, George, Richard,
Hastings, Nurse, carrying infant Prince Edward, and Attendants.

KING EDWARD.
Once more we sit in England’s royal throne,
Repurchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn’s corn,
Have we mowed down in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renowned
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne’er spurred their coursers at the trumpet’s sound;
With them the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fettered the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watched the winter’s night,
Went all afoot in summer’s scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace;
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.

RICHARD.
[_Aside_.] I’ll blast his harvest, if your head were laid;
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick to heave,
And heave it shall some weight or break my back.
Work thou the way, and that shall execute.

KING EDWARD.
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely Queen;
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

GEORGE.
The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

RICHARD.
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang’st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
[_Aside_.] To say the truth, so Judas kissed his master
And cried “All hail!” when as he meant all harm.

KING EDWARD.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country’s peace and brothers’ loves.

GEORGE.
What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the King of France
Hath pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

KING EDWARD.
Away with her and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! Farewell, sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.

[_Exeunt._]




KING HENRY THE EIGHTH




Contents

 ACT I
 Prologue.
 Scene I. London. An ante-chamber in the palace
 Scene II. The same. The council-chamber
 Scene III. An ante-chamber in the palace
 Scene IV. A Hall in York Place

 ACT II
 Scene I. Westminster. A street
 Scene II. An ante-chamber in the palace
 Scene III. An ante-chamber of the Queen’s apartments
 Scene IV. A hall in Blackfriars

 ACT III
 Scene I. London. The Queen’s apartments
 Scene II. Ante-chamber to the King’s apartment

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A street in Westminster
 Scene II. Kimbolton

 ACT V
 Scene I. A gallery in the palace
 Scene II. Lobby before the council-chamber
 Scene III. The palace yard
 Scene IV. The palace
 Epilogue




Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

DUKE OF NORFOLK
DUKE OF SUFFOLK

CARDINAL WOLSEY
SECRETARIES to Wolsey
CROMWELL, servant to Wolsey
CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
GARDINER, Bishop of Winchester
PAGE to Gardiner

QUEEN KATHERINE, wife to King Henry, afterwards divorced
GRIFFITH, gentleman usher to Queen Katherine
PATIENCE, woman to Queen Katherine
Queen’s GENTLEMAN USHER
CAPUTIUS, Ambassador from the Emperor Charles V

DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
LORD ABERGAVENNY, Buckingham’s son-in-law
EARL OF SURREY, Buckingham’s son-in-law
SIR NICHOLAS VAUX
SURVEYOR to the Duke of Buckingham
BRANDON
SERGEANT-at-Arms
Three Gentlemen

ANNE BULLEN, her Maid of Honour, afterwards Queen
An OLD LADY, friend to Anne Bullen
LORD CHAMBERLAIN
LORD SANDYS (called also SIR WILLIAM SANDYS)
SIR THOMAS LOVELL
SIR HENRY GUILDFORD

BISHOP OF LINCOLN
CRANMER, archbishop of Canterbury
LORD CHANCELLOR
GARTER King-of-Arms
SIR ANTHONY DENNY
DOCTOR BUTTS, physician to the King
Door-KEEPER of the Council-chamber
PORTER, and his Man
A CRIER
PROLOGUE
EPILOGUE

Spirits, Several Lords and Ladies in the Dumb Shows; Women attending
upon the Queen; Scribes, Officers, Guards, and other Attendants

SCENE: London; Westminster; Kimbolton




Enter Prologue.


THE PROLOGUE.
I come no more to make you laugh. Things now
That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,
Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
We now present. Those that can pity, here
May, if they think it well, let fall a tear;
The subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their money out of hope they may believe
May here find truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree
The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
I’ll undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a merry bawdy play,
A noise of targets, or to see a fellow
In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
Will be deceived. For, gentle hearers, know
To rank our chosen truth with such a show
As fool and fight is, beside forfeiting
Our own brains and the opinion that we bring
To make that only true we now intend,
Will leave us never an understanding friend.
Therefore, for goodness’ sake, and as you are known
The first and happiest hearers of the town,
Be sad, as we would make ye. Think ye see
The very persons of our noble story
As they were living; think you see them great,
And followed with the general throng and sweat
Of thousand friends; then, in a moment, see
How soon this mightiness meets misery;
And if you can be merry then, I’ll say
A man may weep upon his wedding day.

[_Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the palace.


Enter the Duke of Norfolk at one door; at the other, the Duke of
Buckingham and the Lord Abergavenny.

BUCKINGHAM.
Good morrow, and well met. How have ye done
Since last we saw in France?


NORFOLK.
I thank your Grace,
Healthful, and ever since a fresh admirer
Of what I saw there.

BUCKINGHAM.
An untimely ague
Stayed me a prisoner in my chamber when
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
Met in the vale of Andren.

NORFOLK.
’Twixt Guynes and Arde.
I was then present, saw them salute on horseback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their embracement, as they grew together—
Which had they, what four throned ones could have weighed
Such a compounded one?

BUCKINGHAM.
All the whole time
I was my chamber’s prisoner.

NORFOLK.
Then you lost
The view of earthly glory. Men might say,
Till this time pomp was single, but now married
To one above itself. Each following day
Became the next day’s master, till the last
Made former wonders its. Today the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the English; and tomorrow, they
Made Britain India: every man that stood
Showed like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
As cherubins, all gilt. The madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The pride upon them, that their very labour
Was to them as a painting. Now this masque
Was cried incomparable; and th’ ensuing night
Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,
As presence did present them: him in eye,
Still him in praise; and being present both,
’Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns—
For so they phrase ’em—by their heralds challenged
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
Beyond thought’s compass, that former fabulous story,
Being now seen possible enough, got credit,
That Bevis was believed.

BUCKINGHAM.
O, you go far.

NORFOLK.
As I belong to worship and affect
In honour honesty, the tract of everything
Would by a good discourser lose some life,
Which action’s self was tongue to. All was royal;
To the disposing of it nought rebelled;
Order gave each thing view; the office did
Distinctly his full function.

BUCKINGHAM.
Who did guide,
I mean, who set the body and the limbs
Of this great sport together, as you guess?

NORFOLK.
One, certes, that promises no element
In such a business.

BUCKINGHAM.
I pray you who, my lord?

NORFOLK.
All this was ordered by the good discretion
Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.

BUCKINGHAM.
The devil speed him! No man’s pie is freed
From his ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
That such a keech can with his very bulk
Take up the rays o’ th’ beneficial sun
And keep it from the earth.

NORFOLK.
Surely, sir,
There’s in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
For, being not propped by ancestry, whose grace
Chalks successors their way, nor called upon
For high feats done to th’ crown; neither allied
To eminent assistants, but spider-like,
Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note
The force of his own merit makes his way
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
A place next to the King.

ABERGAVENNY.
I cannot tell
What heaven hath given him—let some graver eye
Pierce into that—but I can see his pride
Peep through each part of him. Whence has he that?
If not from hell, the devil is a niggard,
Or has given all before, and he begins
A new hell in himself.

BUCKINGHAM.
Why the devil,
Upon this French going-out, took he upon him,
Without the privity o’ th’ King, t’ appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
Of all the gentry, for the most part such
To whom as great a charge as little honour
He meant to lay upon; and his own letter,
The honourable board of council out,
Must fetch him in he papers.

ABERGAVENNY.
I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this so sickened their estates that never
They shall abound as formerly.

BUCKINGHAM.
O, many
Have broke their backs with laying manors on ’em
For this great journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue?

NORFOLK.
Grievingly I think
The peace between the French and us not values
The cost that did conclude it.

BUCKINGHAM.
Every man,
After the hideous storm that followed, was
A thing inspired and, not consulting, broke
Into a general prophecy, that this tempest,
Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
The sudden breach on’t.

NORFOLK.
Which is budded out,
For France hath flawed the league, and hath attached
Our merchants’ goods at Bordeaux.

ABERGAVENNY.
Is it therefore
Th’ ambassador is silenced?

NORFOLK.
Marry, is’t.

ABERGAVENNY.
A proper title of a peace, and purchased
At a superfluous rate!

BUCKINGHAM.
Why, all this business
Our reverend Cardinal carried.

NORFOLK.
Like it your Grace,
The state takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you—
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
Honour and plenteous safety—that you read
The Cardinal’s malice and his potency
Together; to consider further that
What his high hatred would effect wants not
A minister in his power. You know his nature,
That he’s revengeful, and I know his sword
Hath a sharp edge; it’s long, and ’t may be said
It reaches far, and where ’twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel;
You’ll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock
That I advise your shunning.

Enter Cardinal Wolsey, the purse borne before him, certain of the Guard
and two Secretaries with papers. The Cardinal in his passage fixeth his
eye on Buckingham, and Buckingham on him, both full of disdain.

WOLSEY.
The Duke of Buckingham’s surveyor, ha?
Where’s his examination?

SECRETARY.
Here, so please you.

WOLSEY.
Is he in person ready?

SECRETARY.
Ay, please your Grace.

WOLSEY.
Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.

[_Exeunt Cardinal Wolsey and his train._]

BUCKINGHAM.
This butcher’s cur is venom-mouthed, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar’s book
Outworths a noble’s blood.

NORFOLK.
What, are you chafed?
Ask God for temp’rance. That’s the appliance only
Which your disease requires.

BUCKINGHAM.
I read in ’s looks
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object. At this instant
He bores me with some trick. He’s gone to th’ King.
I’ll follow, and outstare him.

NORFOLK.
Stay, my lord,
And let your reason with your choler question
What ’tis you go about. To climb steep hills
Requires slow pace at first. Anger is like
A full hot horse, who being allowed his way,
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
Can advise me like you; be to yourself
As you would to your friend.

BUCKINGHAM.
I’ll to the King,
And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
This Ipswich fellow’s insolence, or proclaim
There’s difference in no persons.

NORFOLK.
Be advised.
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe yourself. We may outrun
By violent swiftness that which we run at,
And lose by over-running. Know you not,
The fire that mounts the liquor till ’t run o’er,
In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advised.
I say again, there is no English soul
More stronger to direct you than yourself,
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
Or but allay the fire of passion.

BUCKINGHAM.
Sir,
I am thankful to you, and I’ll go along
By your prescription; but this top-proud fellow—
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions—by intelligence,
And proofs as clear as founts in July when
We see each grain of gravel, I do know
To be corrupt and treasonous.

NORFOLK.
Say not “treasonous.”

BUCKINGHAM.
To th’ King I’ll say’t, and make my vouch as strong
As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox,
Or wolf, or both—for he is equal ravenous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
As able to perform’t, his mind and place
Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally—
Only to show his pomp as well in France
As here at home, suggests the King our master
To this last costly treaty, th’ interview,
That swallowed so much treasure, and like a glass
Did break i’ th’ rinsing.

NORFOLK.
Faith, and so it did.

BUCKINGHAM.
Pray give me favour, sir. This cunning Cardinal
The articles o’ th’ combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried “Thus let be,” to as much end
As give a crutch to the dead. But our Count-Cardinal
Has done this, and ’tis well, for worthy Wolsey,
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows—
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
To the old dam treason—Charles the Emperor,
Under pretence to see the Queen his aunt—
For ’twas indeed his colour, but he came
To whisper Wolsey—here makes visitation.
His fears were that the interview betwixt
England and France might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice, for from this league
Peeped harms that menaced him. He privily
Deals with our Cardinal, and, as I trow—
Which I do well, for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold, the Emperor thus desired
That he would please to alter the King’s course
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know,
As soon he shall by me, that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases
And for his own advantage.

NORFOLK.
I am sorry
To hear this of him, and could wish he were
Something mistaken in’t.

BUCKINGHAM.
No, not a syllable.
I do pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.

Enter Brandon, a Sergeant-at-arms before him, and two or three of the
Guard.

BRANDON.
Your office, sergeant: execute it.

SERGEANT.
Sir,
My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
Of our most sovereign King.

BUCKINGHAM.
Lo you, my lord,
The net has fall’n upon me. I shall perish
Under device and practice.

BRANDON.
I am sorry
To see you ta’en from liberty, to look on
The business present. ’Tis his Highness’ pleasure
You shall to th’ Tower.

BUCKINGHAM.
It will help nothing
To plead mine innocence, for that dye is on me
Which makes my whit’st part black. The will of heaven
Be done in this and all things. I obey.
O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well.

BRANDON.
Nay, he must bear you company.
[_To Abergavenny_.] The King
Is pleased you shall to th’ Tower, till you know
How he determines further.

ABERGAVENNY.
As the Duke said,
The will of heaven be done, and the King’s pleasure
By me obeyed.

BRANDON.
Here is warrant from
The King t’ attach Lord Montague, and the bodies
Of the Duke’s confessor, John de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor—

BUCKINGHAM.
So, so;
These are the limbs o’ th’ plot. No more, I hope?

BRANDON.
A monk o’ th’ Chartreux.

BUCKINGHAM.
O, Nicholas Hopkins?

BRANDON.
He.

BUCKINGHAM.
My surveyor is false. The o’er-great Cardinal
Hath showed him gold. My life is spanned already.
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on
By dark’ning my clear sun. My lord, farewell.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The council-chamber.

Cornets. Enter King Henry, leaning on the Cardinal’s shoulder, the
Nobles, and Sir Thomas Lovell; the Cardinal places himself under the
King’s feet on his right side.

KING.
My life itself, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care. I stood i’ th’ level
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks
To you that choked it. Let be called before us
That gentleman of Buckingham’s; in person
I’ll hear his confessions justify,
And point by point the treasons of his master
He shall again relate.

A noise within crying “Room for the Queen!” Enter  Queen Katherine,
ushered by the Duke of Norfolk and the Duke of Suffolk. She kneels. The
King riseth from his state, takes her up and kisses her.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a suitor.

KING.
Arise, and take place by us.

[_He placeth her by him._]

Half your suit
Never name to us; you have half our power;
The other moiety ere you ask is given.
Repeat your will and take it.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Thank your Majesty.
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Not unconsidered leave your honour nor
The dignity of your office, is the point
Of my petition.

KING.
Lady mine, proceed.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
I am solicited, not by a few,
And those of true condition, that your subjects
Are in great grievance. There have been commissions
Sent down among ’em which hath flawed the heart
Of all their loyalties; wherein, although,
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you as putter-on
Of these exactions, yet the King our master,
Whose honour heaven shield from soil, even he escapes not
Language unmannerly, yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
In loud rebellion.

NORFOLK.
Not “almost appears,”
It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who,
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring the event to th’ teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.

KING.
Taxation?
Wherein? And what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with us,
Know you of this taxation?

WOLSEY.
Please you, sir,
I know but of a single part in aught
Pertains to th’ state, and front but in that file
Where others tell steps with me.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
No, my lord?
You know no more than others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
Most pestilent to the hearing, and to bear ’em,
The back is sacrifice to the load. They say
They are devised by you, or else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.

KING.
Still exaction!
The nature of it? In what kind, let’s know,
Is this exaction?

QUEEN KATHERINE.
I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience, but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The subjects’ grief
Comes through commissions, which compels from each
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied
Without delay; and the pretence for this
Is named your wars in France. This makes bold mouths.
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them. Their curses now
Live where their prayers did; and it’s come to pass
This tractable obedience is a slave
To each incensed will. I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration, for
There is no primer business.

KING.
By my life,
This is against our pleasure.

WOLSEY.
And for me,
I have no further gone in this than by
A single voice, and that not passed me but
By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing, let me say
’Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
That virtue must go through. We must not stint
Our necessary actions in the fear
To cope malicious censurers, which ever,
As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow
That is new-trimmed, but benefit no further
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,
By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is
Not ours or not allowed; what worst, as oft,
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best act. If we shall stand still
In fear our motion will be mocked or carped at,
We should take root here where we sit,
Or sit state-statues only.

KING.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear;
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a precedent
Of this commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our subjects from our laws
And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
A trembling contribution! Why, we take
From every tree lop, bark, and part o’ t’ timber,
And though we leave it with a root, thus hacked,
The air will drink the sap. To every county
Where this is questioned send our letters with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this commission. Pray, look to’t;
I put it to your care.

WOLSEY.
[_Aside to his Secretary_.] A word with you.
Let there be letters writ to every shire
Of the King’s grace and pardon. The grieved commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised
That through our intercession this revokement
And pardon comes. I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.

[_Exit Secretary._]

Enter Surveyor.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.

KING.
It grieves many.
The gentleman is learned and a most rare speaker;
To nature none more bound; his training such
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers
And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
When these so noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enrolled ’mongst wonders, and when we,
Almost with ravished list’ning, could not find
His hour of speech a minute—he, my lady,
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
That once were his, and is become as black
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by us. You shall hear—
This was his gentleman in trust—of him
Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount
The fore-recited practices, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

WOLSEY.
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,
Most like a careful subject, have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.

KING.
Speak freely.

SURVEYOR.
First, it was usual with him—every day
It would infect his speech—that if the King
Should without issue die, he’ll carry it so
To make the sceptre his. These very words
I’ve heard him utter to his son-in-law,
Lord Abergavenny; to whom by oath he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.

WOLSEY.
Please your Highness, note
This dangerous conception in this point,
Not friended by his wish to your high person
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
My learned Lord Cardinal,
Deliver all with charity.

KING.
Speak on.
How grounded he his title to the crown?
Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him
At any time speak aught?

SURVEYOR.
He was brought to this
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.

KING.
What was that Henton?

SURVEYOR.
Sir, a Chartreux friar,
His confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of sovereignty.

KING.
How know’st thou this?

SURVEYOR.
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners
Concerning the French journey. I replied,
Men fear the French would prove perfidious,
To the King’s danger. Presently the Duke
Said ’twas the fear indeed, and that he doubted
’Twould prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy monk, “that oft,” says he,
“Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment;
Whom after under the confession’s seal
He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke
My chaplain to no creature living but
To me should utter, with demure confidence
This pausingly ensued: ‘Neither the King nor’s heirs,
Tell you the Duke—shall prosper. Bid him strive
To gain the love o’ th’ commonalty. The Duke
Shall govern England.’”

QUEEN KATHERINE.
If I know you well,
You were the Duke’s surveyor, and lost your office
On the complaint o’ th’ tenants. Take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a noble person
And spoil your nobler soul. I say, take heed—
Yes, heartily beseech you.

KING.
Let him on.
Go forward.

SURVEYOR.
On my soul, I’ll speak but truth.
I told my lord the Duke, by th’ devil’s illusions
The monk might be deceived, and that ’twas dangerous
For him to ruminate on this so far until
It forged him some design, which, being believed,
It was much like to do. He answered, “Tush,
It can do me no damage,” adding further
That had the King in his last sickness failed,
The Cardinal’s and Sir Thomas Lovell’s heads
Should have gone off.

KING.
Ha! What, so rank? Ah ha!
There’s mischief in this man. Canst thou say further?

SURVEYOR.
I can, my liege.

KING.
Proceed.

SURVEYOR.
Being at Greenwich,
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Bulmer—

KING.
I remember
Of such a time, being my sworn servant,
The Duke retained him his. But on. What hence?

SURVEYOR.
“If,” quoth he, “I for this had been committed,”
As to the Tower, I thought, “I would have played
The part my father meant to act upon
Th’ usurper Richard who, being at Salisbury,
Made suit to come in ’s presence; which if granted,
As he made semblance of his duty, would
Have put his knife into him.”

KING.
A giant traitor!

WOLSEY.
Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
And this man out of prison?

QUEEN KATHERINE.
God mend all.

KING.
There’s something more would out of thee. What sayst?

SURVEYOR.
After “the Duke his father,” with “the knife,”
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on ’s breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible oath, whose tenour
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His father by as much as a performance
Does an irresolute purpose.

KING.
There’s his period,
To sheathe his knife in us. He is attached.
Call him to present trial. If he may
Find mercy in the law, ’tis his; if none,
Let him not seek ’t of us. By day and night,
He’s traitor to th’ height!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. An ante-chamber in the palace.

Enter Lord Chamberlain  and Lord Sandys.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Is’t possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?

SANDYS.
New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous—
Nay, let ’em be unmanly—yet are followed.

CHAMBERLAIN.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late voyage is but merely
A fit or two o’ th’ face; but they are shrewd ones,
For when they hold ’em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been counsellors
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.

SANDYS.
They have all new legs, and lame ones. One would take it,
That never saw ’em pace before, the spavin
Or springhalt reigned among ’em.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Death! My lord,
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to’t,
That, sure, they’ve worn out Christendom.

Enter Sir Thomas Lovell.

How now?
What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?

LOVELL.
Faith, my lord,
I hear of none but the new proclamation
That’s clapped upon the court gate.

CHAMBERLAIN.
What is’t for?

LOVELL.
The reformation of our travelled gallants
That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.

CHAMBERLAIN.
I’m glad ’tis there. Now I would pray our monsieurs
To think an English courtier may be wise
And never see the Louvre.

LOVELL.
They must either,
For so run the conditions, leave those remnants
Of fool and feather that they got in France,
With all their honourable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks,
Abusing better men than they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in tennis and tall stockings,
Short blistered breeches, and those types of travel,
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old playfellows. There, I take it,
They may, _cum privilegio, oui_ away
The lag end of their lewdness and be laughed at.

SANDYS.
’Tis time to give ’em physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.

CHAMBERLAIN.
What a loss our ladies
Will have of these trim vanities!

LOVELL.
Ay, marry,
There will be woe indeed, lords. The sly whoresons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies.
A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.

SANDYS.
The devil fiddle ’em! I am glad they are going,
For sure, there’s no converting of ’em. Now
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong
And have an hour of hearing, and, by ’r Lady,
Held current music too.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Well said, Lord Sandys.
Your colt’s tooth is not cast yet.

SANDYS.
No, my lord,
Nor shall not while I have a stump.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a-going?

LOVELL.
To the Cardinal’s.
Your lordship is a guest too.

CHAMBERLAIN.
O, ’tis true.
This night he makes a supper, and a great one,
To many lords and ladies. There will be
The beauty of this kingdom, I’ll assure you.

LOVELL.
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us.
His dews fall everywhere.

CHAMBERLAIN.
No doubt he’s noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.

SANDYS.
He may, my lord; has wherewithal. In him
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine.
Men of his way should be most liberal;
They are set here for examples.

CHAMBERLAIN.
True, they are so,
But few now give so great ones. My barge stays.
Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford,
This night to be comptrollers.

SANDYS.
I am your lordship’s.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Hall in York Place.

Hautboys. A small table under a state for the Cardinal, a longer table
for the guests. Then enter Anne Bullen and divers other Ladies and
Gentlemen as guests, at one door. At another door enter Sir Henry
Guildford.

GUILDFORD.
Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace
Salutes ye all. This night he dedicates
To fair content and you. None here, he hopes,
In all this noble bevy has brought with her
One care abroad. He would have all as merry
As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome
Can make good people.

Enter Lord Chamberlain, Lord Sandys and Sir Thomas Lovell.

O, my lord, you’re tardy.
The very thought of this fair company
Clapped wings to me.

CHAMBERLAIN.
You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.

SANDYS.
Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running banquet ere they rested,
I think would better please ’em. By my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.

LOVELL.
O, that your lordship were but now confessor
To one or two of these!

SANDYS.
I would I were.
They should find easy penance.

LOVELL.
Faith, how easy?

SANDYS.
As easy as a down bed would afford it.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,
Place you that side; I’ll take the charge of this.
His Grace is ent’ring. Nay, you must not freeze;
Two women placed together makes cold weather.
My Lord Sandys, you are one will keep ’em waking.
Pray, sit between these ladies.

SANDYS.
By my faith,
And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies.
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
I had it from my father.

ANNE.
Was he mad, sir?

SANDYS.
O, very mad, exceeding mad in love too;
But he would bite none. Just as I do now,
He would kiss you twenty with a breath.

[_Kisses her._]

CHAMBERLAIN.
Well said, my lord.
So, now you’re fairly seated. gentlemen,
The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
Pass away frowning.

SANDYS.
For my little cure,
Let me alone.

Hautboys. Enter Cardinal Wolsey and takes his state.

WOLSEY.
You’re welcome, my fair guests. That noble lady
Or gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my friend. This, to confirm my welcome;
And to you all, good health.

[_Drinks._]

SANDYS.
Your Grace is noble.
Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
And save me so much talking.

WOLSEY.
My Lord Sandys,
I am beholding to you. Cheer your neighbours.
Ladies, you are not merry. Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?

SANDYS.
The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have ’em
Talk us to silence.

ANNE.
You are a merry gamester,
My Lord Sandys.

SANDYS.
Yes, if I make my play.
Here’s to your ladyship; and pledge it, madam,
For ’tis to such a thing—

ANNE.
You cannot show me.

SANDYS.
I told your Grace they would talk anon.

[_Drum and trumpet. Chambers discharged._]

WOLSEY.
What’s that?

CHAMBERLAIN.
Look out there, some of ye.

[_Exit Servant._]

WOLSEY.
What warlike voice,
And to what end, is this? Nay, ladies, fear not.
By all the laws of war you’re privileged.

Enter Servant.

CHAMBERLAIN.
How now, what is’t?

SERVANT.
A noble troop of strangers,
For so they seem. They’ve left their barge and landed,
And hither make, as great ambassadors
From foreign princes.

WOLSEY.
Good Lord Chamberlain,
Go, give ’em welcome—you can speak the French tongue—
And pray receive ’em nobly, and conduct ’em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.

[_Exit Chamberlain, attended. All rise, and tables removed._]

You have now a broken banquet, but we’ll mend it.
A good digestion to you all; and once more
I shower a welcome on ye. Welcome all!

Hautboys. Enter King and others as masquers, habited like shepherds,
ushered by the Lord Chamberlain. They pass directly before the Cardinal
and gracefully salute him.

A noble company! What are their pleasures?

CHAMBERLAIN.
Because they speak no English, thus they prayed
To tell your Grace: that having heard by fame
Of this so noble and so fair assembly
This night to meet here, they could do no less,
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
An hour of revels with ’em.

WOLSEY.
Say, Lord Chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay ’em
A thousand thanks and pray ’em take their pleasures.

[_The masquers choose ladies. The King chooses Anne Bullen._]

KING.
The fairest hand I ever touched! O beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.

[_Music. Dance._]

WOLSEY.
My lord!

CHAMBERLAIN.
Your Grace?

WOLSEY.
Pray tell ’em thus much from me:
There should be one amongst ’em, by his person
More worthy this place than myself, to whom,
If I but knew him, with my love and duty
I would surrender it.

CHAMBERLAIN.
I will, my lord.

[_Whispers with the Masquers._]

WOLSEY.
What say they?

CHAMBERLAIN.
Such a one they all confess
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.

WOLSEY.
Let me see, then.
By all your good leaves, gentlemen; here I’ll make
My royal choice.

KING.
[_Unmasking_.] Ye have found him, Cardinal.
You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.
You are a churchman, or I’ll tell you, Cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.

WOLSEY.
I am glad
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.

KING.
My Lord Chamberlain,
Prithee come hither. What fair lady’s that?

CHAMBERLAIN.
An’t please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen’s daughter,
The Viscount Rochford, one of her Highness’ women.

KING.
By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweetheart,
I were unmannerly to take you out
And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen!
Let it go round.

WOLSEY.
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
I’ th’ privy chamber?

LOVELL.
Yes, my lord.

WOLSEY.
Your Grace,
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.

KING.
I fear, too much.

WOLSEY.
There’s fresher air, my lord,
In the next chamber.

KING.
Lead in your ladies, every one. Sweet partner,
I must not yet forsake you. Let’s be merry,
Good my Lord Cardinal, I have half a dozen healths
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
To lead ’em once again, and then let’s dream
Who’s best in favour. Let the music knock it.

[_Exeunt with trumpets._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Westminster. A street.


Enter two Gentlemen at several doors.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Whither away so fast?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
O, God save ye.
Even to the Hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I’ll save you
That labour, sir. All’s now done but the ceremony
Of bringing back the prisoner.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Were you there?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Yes, indeed, was I.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Pray speak what has happened.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
You may guess quickly what.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Is he found guilty?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Yes, truly is he, and condemned upon’t.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I am sorry for’t.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
So are a number more.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
But pray, how passed it?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I’ll tell you in a little. The great Duke
Came to the bar, where to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
The King’s attorney on the contrary
Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired
To have brought _viva voce_ to his face;
At which appeared against him his surveyor,
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
Confessor to him, with that devil monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
That was he
That fed him with his prophecies?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
The same.
All these accused him strongly, which he fain
Would have flung from him, but, indeed he could not.
And so his peers, upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly, for life, but all
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
After all this, how did he bear himself?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
When he was brought again to th’ bar to hear
His knell rung out, his judgement, he was stirred
With such an agony, he sweat extremely
And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty.
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
In all the rest showed a most noble patience.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I do not think he fears death.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Sure he does not;
He never was so womanish. The cause
He may a little grieve at.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Certainly
The Cardinal is the end of this.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis likely,
By all conjectures: first, Kildare’s attainder,
Then deputy of Ireland, who removed,
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his father.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
That trick of state
Was a deep envious one.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
At his return
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
And generally, whoever the King favours,
The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from court too.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
All the commons
Hate him perniciously and, o’ my conscience,
Wish him ten fathom deep. This duke as much
They love and dote on, call him bounteous Buckingham,
The mirror of all courtesy.

Enter Buckingham from his arraignment. Tipstaves before him, the axe
with the edge towards him, Halberds on each side, accompanied with Sir
Thomas Lovell, Sir Nicholas Vaux, Sir William Sandys and common people.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Stay there, sir,
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Let’s stand close and behold him.

BUCKINGHAM.
All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me,
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a traitor’s judgement,
And by that name must die; yet heaven bear witness,
And if I have a conscience, let it sink me,
Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!
The law I bear no malice for my death;
’T has done, upon the premises, but justice.
But those that sought it I could wish more Christians.
Be what they will, I heartily forgive ’em.
Yet let ’em look they glory not in mischief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
For then my guiltless blood must cry against ’em.
For further life in this world I ne’er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying,
Go with me like good angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, i’ God’s name.

LOVELL.
I do beseech your Grace, for charity,
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.

BUCKINGHAM.
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven. I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offences
’Gainst me that I cannot take peace with. No black envy
Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his Grace,
And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him
You met him half in heaven. My vows and prayers
Yet are the King’s and, till my soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer than I have time to tell his years;
Ever beloved and loving may his rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill up one monument!

LOVELL.
To th’ waterside I must conduct your Grace,
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.

VAUX.
Prepare there!
The Duke is coming. See the barge be ready,
And fit it with such furniture as suits
The greatness of his person.

BUCKINGHAM.
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone. My state now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable
And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.
Yet I am richer than my base accusers,
That never knew what truth meant. I now seal it,
And with that blood will make ’em one day groan for’t.
My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against usurping Richard,
Flying for succour to his servant Banister,
Being distressed, was by that wretch betrayed,
And, without trial, fell. God’s peace be with him.
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My father’s loss, like a most royal prince,
Restored me to my honours and out of ruins
Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all
That made me happy at one stroke has taken
For ever from the world. I had my trial,
And must needs say a noble one, which makes me
A little happier than my wretched father.
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most—
A most unnatural and faithless service.
Heaven has an end in all; yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends
And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,
Pray for me. I must now forsake ye. The last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me.
Farewell. And when you would say something that is sad,
Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me.

[_Exeunt Duke and train._]

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
O, this is full of pity. Sir, it calls,
I fear, too many curses on their heads
That were the authors.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
If the Duke be guiltless,
’Tis full of woe. Yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Good angels keep it from us!
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
This secret is so weighty, ’twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Let me have it.
I do not talk much.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I am confident;
You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a separation
Between the King and Katherine?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumour and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
But that slander, sir,
Is found a truth now, for it grows again
Fresher than e’er it was, and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have, out of malice
To the good Queen, possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her. To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think, for this business.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
For not bestowing on him at his asking,
The archbishopric of Toledo this is purposed.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I think you have hit the mark. But is’t not cruel
That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis woeful.
We are too open here to argue this.
Let’s think in private more.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. An ante-chamber in the palace.

Enter Lord Chamberlain, reading this letter.

CHAMBERLAIN.
_My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with all the care had I
saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome,
and of the best breed in the north. When they were ready to set out for
London, a man of my Lord Cardinal’s, by commission and main power, took
’em from me, with this reason: his master would be served before a
subject, if not before the King; which stopped our mouths, sir._
I fear he will indeed. Well, let him have them.
He will have all, I think.

Enter to the Lord Chamberlain, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk.

NORFOLK.
Well met, my Lord Chamberlain.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Good day to both your Graces.

SUFFOLK.
How is the King employed?

CHAMBERLAIN.
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

NORFOLK.
What’s the cause?

CHAMBERLAIN.
It seems the marriage with his brother’s wife
Has crept too near his conscience.

SUFFOLK.
No, his conscience
Has crept too near another lady.

NORFOLK.
’Tis so.
This is the Cardinal’s doing, the king-cardinal.
That blind priest, like the eldest son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.

SUFFOLK.
Pray God he do! He’ll never know himself else.

NORFOLK.
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal! For, now he has cracked the league
Between us and the Emperor, the Queen’s great nephew,
He dives into the King’s soul and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
Fears and despairs—and all these for his marriage.
And out of all these to restore the King,
He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
That like a jewel has hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
Of her that loves him with that excellence
That angels love good men with; even of her
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
Will bless the King. And is not this course pious?

CHAMBERLAIN.
Heaven keep me from such counsel! ’Tis most true:
These news are everywhere, every tongue speaks ’em,
And every true heart weeps for’t. All that dare
Look into these affairs see this main end,
The French king’s sister. Heaven will one day open
The King’s eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.

SUFFOLK.
And free us from his slavery.

NORFOLK.
We had need pray,
And heartily, for our deliverance,
Or this imperious man will work us all
From princes into pages. All men’s honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.

SUFFOLK.
For me, my lords,
I love him not, nor fear him; there’s my creed.
As I am made without him, so I’ll stand,
If the King please. His curses and his blessings
Touch me alike, they’re breath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him
To him that made him proud, the Pope.

NORFOLK.
Let’s in,
And with some other business put the King
From these sad thoughts that work too much upon him.
My lord, you’ll bear us company?

CHAMBERLAIN.
Excuse me;
The King has sent me otherwhere. Besides,
You’ll find a most unfit time to disturb him.
Health to your lordships.

NORFOLK.
Thanks, my good Lord Chamberlain.

[_Exit Lord Chamberlain, and the King draws the curtain and sits
reading pensively._]

SUFFOLK.
How sad he looks! Sure, he is much afflicted.

KING.
Who’s there? Ha?

NORFOLK.
Pray God he be not angry.

KING.
Who’s there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
Into my private meditations?
Who am I? Ha?

NORFOLK.
A gracious king that pardons all offences
Malice ne’er meant. Our breach of duty this way
Is business of estate, in which we come
To know your royal pleasure.

KING.
Ye are too bold.
Go to; I’ll make ye know your times of business.
Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?

Enter Wolsey and Campeius with a commission.

Who’s there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded conscience,
Thou art a cure fit for a king. [_To Campeius_.] You’re welcome,
Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom;
Use us and it. [_To Wolsey_.] My good lord, have great care
I be not found a talker.

WOLSEY.
Sir, you cannot.
I would your Grace would give us but an hour
Of private conference.

KING.
[_To Norfolk and Suffolk_.] We are busy. Go.

NORFOLK.
[A_side to Suffolk_.] This priest has no pride in him?

SUFFOLK.
[_Aside to Norfolk_.] Not to speak of.
I would not be so sick, though, for his place.
But this cannot continue.

NORFOLK.
[_Aside to Suffolk_.] If it do,
I’ll venture one have-at-him.

SUFFOLK.
[_Aside to Norfolk_.] I another.

[_Exeunt Norfolk and Suffolk._]

WOLSEY.
Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom
Above all princes in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
Who can be angry now? What envy reach you?
The Spaniard, tied by blood and favour to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The trial just and noble. All the clerks—
I mean the learned ones in Christian kingdoms—
Have their free voices. Rome, the nurse of judgement,
Invited by your noble self, hath sent
One general tongue unto us, this good man,
This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more I present unto your Highness.

KING.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves.
They have sent me such a man I would have wished for.

CAMPEIUS.
Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers’ loves,
You are so noble. To your Highness’ hand
I tender my commission, by whose virtue,
The court of Rome commanding, you, my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their servant
In the unpartial judging of this business.

KING.
Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted
Forthwith for what you come. Where’s Gardiner?

WOLSEY.
I know your Majesty has always loved her
So dear in heart not to deny her that
A woman of less place might ask by law:
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.

KING.
Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favour
To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary.
I find him a fit fellow.

Enter Gardiner.

WOLSEY.
[_Aside to Gardiner_.]
Give me your hand. Much joy and favour to you;
You are the King’s now.

GARDINER.
[_Aside to Wolsey_.] But to be commanded
For ever by your Grace, whose hand has raised me.

KING.
Come hither, Gardiner.

[_The King and Gardiner walk and whisper._]

CAMPEIUS.
My lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
In this man’s place before him?

WOLSEY.
Yes, he was.

CAMPEIUS.
Was he not held a learned man?

WOLSEY.
Yes, surely.

CAMPEIUS.
Believe me, there’s an ill opinion spread, then
Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.

WOLSEY.
How? Of me?

CAMPEIUS.
They will not stick to say you envied him
And fearing he would rise—he was so virtuous—
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him
That he ran mad and died.

WOLSEY.
Heav’n’s peace be with him!
That’s Christian care enough. For living murmurers
There’s places of rebuke. He was a fool,
For he would needs be virtuous. That good fellow,
If I command him, follows my appointment.
I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother:
We live not to be griped by meaner persons.

KING.
Deliver this with modesty to th’ Queen.

[_Exit Gardiner._]

The most convenient place that I can think of
For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars.
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished. O, my lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
O, ’tis a tender place, and I must leave her.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. An ante-chamber of the Queen’s apartments.

Enter Anne Bullen and an Old Lady.

ANNE.
Not for that neither. Here’s the pang that pinches:
His Highness having lived so long with her, and she
So good a lady that no tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonour of her—by my life,
She never knew harm-doing—O, now, after
So many courses of the sun enthroned,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
To leave a thousandfold more bitter than
’Tis sweet at first t’ acquire—after this process,
To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
Would move a monster.

OLD LADY.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.

ANNE.
O, God’s will! Much better
She ne’er had known pomp; though’t be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel, Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, ’tis a sufferance panging
As soul and body’s severing.

OLD LADY.
Alas, poor lady,
She’s a stranger now again.

ANNE.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
I swear, ’tis better to be lowly born
And range with humble livers in content
Than to be perked up in a glist’ring grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.

OLD LADY.
Our content
Is our best having.

ANNE.
By my troth and maidenhead,
I would not be a queen.

OLD LADY.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture maidenhead for’t; and so would you,
For all this spice of your hypocrisy.
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,
Have too a woman’s heart, which ever yet
Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
Saving your mincing, the capacity
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive,
If you might please to stretch it.

ANNE.
Nay, good troth.

OLD LADY.
Yes, troth and troth. You would not be a queen?

ANNE.
No, not for all the riches under heaven.

OLD LADY.
’Tis strange. A threepence bowed would hire me,
Old as I am, to queen it. But I pray you,
What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of title?

ANNE.
No, in truth.

OLD LADY.
Then you are weakly made. Pluck off a little.
I would not be a young count in your way
For more than blushing comes to. If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, ’tis too weak
Ever to get a boy.

ANNE.
How you do talk!
I swear again I would not be a queen
For all the world.

OLD LADY.
In faith, for little England
You’d venture an emballing. I myself
Would for Caernarfonshire, although there longed
No more to th’ crown but that. Lo, who comes here?

Enter Lord Chamberlain.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Good morrow, ladies. What were’t worth to know
The secret of your conference?

ANNE.
My good lord,
Not your demand; it values not your asking.
Our mistress’ sorrows we were pitying.

CHAMBERLAIN.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women. There is hope
All will be well.

ANNE.
Now, I pray God, amen!

CHAMBERLAIN.
You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings
Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note’s
Ta’en of your many virtues, the King’s Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you, and
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing
Than Marchioness of Pembroke, to which title
A thousand pound a year annual support
Out of his grace he adds.

ANNE.
I do not know
What kind of my obedience I should tender.
More than my all is nothing; nor my prayers
Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes
More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes
Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness,
Whose health and royalty I pray for.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Lady,
I shall not fail t’ approve the fair conceit
The King hath of you. [_Aside_.] I have perused her well.
Beauty and honour in her are so mingled
That they have caught the King; and who knows yet
But from this lady may proceed a gem
To lighten all this isle? I’ll to the King,
And say I spoke with you.

ANNE.
My honoured lord.

[_Exit Lord Chamberlain._]

OLD LADY.
Why, this it is: see, see!
I have been begging sixteen years in court,
Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could
Come pat betwixt too early and too late
For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate!
A very fresh fish here—fie, fie, fie upon
This compelled fortune!—have your mouth filled up
Before you open it.

ANNE.
This is strange to me.

OLD LADY.
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no.
There was a lady once—’tis an old story—
That would not be a queen, that would she not,
For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?

ANNE.
Come, you are pleasant.

OLD LADY.
With your theme, I could
O’ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke?
A thousand pounds a year for pure respect?
No other obligation? By my life,
That promises more thousands; honour’s train
Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time
I know your back will bear a duchess. Say,
Are you not stronger than you were?

ANNE.
Good lady,
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on’t. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a jot. It faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless, and we forgetful
In our long absence. Pray do not deliver
What here you’ve heard to her.

OLD LADY.
What do you think me?

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A hall in Blackfriars.

Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two Vergers, with short silver
wands; next them, two Scribes, in the habit of doctors; after them, the
Archbishop of Canterbury alone; after him, the Bishops of Lincoln, Ely,
Rochester, and Saint Asaph; next them, with some small distance,
follows a Gentleman bearing the purse with the great seal, and a
cardinal’s hat; then two Priests, bearing each a silver cross; then a
Gentleman Usher bare-headed, accompanied with a Sergeant-at-arms
bearing a silver mace; then two Gentlemen, bearing two great silver
pillars; after them, side by side, the two Cardinals; two Noblemen with
the sword and mace. The King takes place under the cloth of state. The
two Cardinals sit under him as judges. The Queen takes place some
distance from the King. The Bishops place themselves on each side the
court, in manner of consistory; below them the Scribes. The Lords sit
next the Bishops. The rest of the Attendants stand in convenient order
about the stage.

WOLSEY.
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
Let silence be commanded.

KING.
What’s the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides th’ authority allowed;
You may then spare that time.

WOLSEY.
Be’t so. Proceed.

SCRIBE.
Say, “Henry King of England, come into the court.”

CRIER.
Henry King of England, come into the court.

KING.
Here.

SCRIBE.
Say, “Katherine Queen of England, come into the court.”

CRIER.
Katherine Queen of England, come into the court.

[_The Queen makes no answer, rises out of her chair, goes about the
court, comes to the King, and kneels at his feet; then speaks._]

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
I am a most poor woman and a stranger,
Born out of your dominions, having here
No judge indifferent nor no more assurance
Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure
That thus you should proceed to put me off
And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness
I have been to you a true and humble wife,
At all times to your will conformable,
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry
As I saw it inclined. When was the hour
I ever contradicted your desire,
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine enemy? What friend of mine
That had to him derived your anger did I
Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind
That I have been your wife in this obedience
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many children by you. If, in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine honour aught,
My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty
Against your sacred person, in God’s name,
Turn me away and let the foul’st contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharp’st kind of justice. Please you, sir,
The King your father was reputed for
A prince most prudent, of an excellent
And unmatched wit and judgement. Ferdinand,
My father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest prince that there had reigned by many
A year before. It is not to be questioned
That they had gathered a wise council to them
Of every realm, that did debate this business,
Who deemed our marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you, sir, to spare me till I may
Be by my friends in Spain advised, whose counsel
I will implore. If not, i’ th’ name of God,
Your pleasure be fulfilled.

WOLSEY.
You have here, lady,
And of your choice, these reverend fathers, men
Of singular integrity and learning,
Yea, the elect o’ th’ land, who are assembled
To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless
That longer you desire the court, as well
For your own quiet as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.

CAMPEIUS.
His Grace
Hath spoken well and justly. Therefore, madam,
It’s fit this royal session do proceed,
And that without delay their arguments
Be now produced and heard.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Lord Cardinal,
To you I speak.

WOLSEY.
Your pleasure, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Sir,
I am about to weep; but, thinking that
We are a queen, or long have dreamed so, certain
The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
I’ll turn to sparks of fire.

WOLSEY.
Be patient yet.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
I will, when you are humble; nay, before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe,
Induced by potent circumstances, that
You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
You shall not be my judge; for it is you
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me,
Which God’s dew quench! Therefore I say again,
I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul
Refuse you for my judge, whom, yet once more,
I hold my most malicious foe and think not
At all a friend to truth.

WOLSEY.
I do profess
You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
Have stood to charity and displayed th’ effects
Of disposition gentle and of wisdom
O’ertopping woman’s power. Madam, you do me wrong.
I have no spleen against you, nor injustice
For you or any. How far I have proceeded,
Or how far further shall, is warranted
By a commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me
That I have “blown this coal”. I do deny it.
The King is present. If it be known to him
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
And worthily, my falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my truth. If he know
That I am free of your report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
Remove these thoughts from you, the which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
And to say so no more.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
My lord, my lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
T’ oppose your cunning. You’re meek and humble-mouthed;
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
With meekness and humility; but your heart
Is crammed with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.
You have, by fortune and his Highness’ favours,
Gone slightly o’er low steps, and now are mounted
Where powers are your retainers, and your words,
Domestics to you, serve your will as ’t please
Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you,
You tender more your person’s honour than
Your high profession spiritual; that again
I do refuse you for my judge; and here,
Before you all, appeal unto the Pope,
To bring my whole cause ’fore his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.

[_She curtsies to the King and offers to depart._]

CAMPEIUS.
The Queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by’t. ’Tis not well.
She’s going away.

KING.
Call her again.

CRIER.
Katherine, Queen of England, come into the court.

GENTLEMAN USHER.
Madam, you are called back.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
What need you note it? Pray you keep your way.
When you are called, return. Now, the Lord help!
They vex me past my patience. Pray you, pass on.
I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make
In any of their courts.

[_Exeunt Queen and her Attendants._]

KING.
Go thy ways, Kate.
That man i’ th’ world who shall report he has
A better wife, let him in naught be trusted,
For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone—
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out—
The queen of earthly queens. She’s noble born,
And like her true nobility she has
Carried herself towards me.

WOLSEY.
Most gracious sir,
In humblest manner I require your Highness
That it shall please you to declare, in hearing
Of all these ears—for where I am robbed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once and fully satisfied—whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on’t? or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present state,
Or touch of her good person?

KING.
My Lord Cardinal,
I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour,
I free you from’t. You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies that know not
Why they are so, but, like to village curs,
Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger. You’re excused.
But will you be more justified? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never desired
It to be stirred, but oft have hindered, oft,
The passages made toward it. On my honour,
I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point
And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to’t,
I will be bold with time and your attention.
Then mark th’ inducement. Thus it came; give heed to’t:
My conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick on certain speeches uttered
By th’ Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
A marriage ’twixt the Duke of Orleans and
Our daughter Mary. I’ th’ progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, he,
I mean the Bishop, did require a respite,
Wherein he might the King his lord advertise
Whether our daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
Sometimes our brother’s wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my conscience, entered me,
Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my breast; which forced such way
That many mazed considerings did throng
And pressed in with this caution. First, methought
I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
Commanded nature that my lady’s womb,
If it conceived a male child by me, should
Do no more offices of life to’t than
The grave does to th’ dead; for her male issue
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought
This was a judgement on me, that my kingdom,
Well worthy the best heir o’ th’ world, should not
Be gladded in’t by me. Then follows that
I weighed the danger which my realms stood in
By this my issue’s fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy whereupon we are
Now present here together. That’s to say,
I meant to rectify my conscience, which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
By all the reverend fathers of the land
And doctors learned. First I began in private
With you, my Lord of Lincoln. You remember
How under my oppression I did reek
When I first moved you.

LINCOLN.
Very well, my liege.

KING.
I have spoke long. Be pleased yourself to say
How far you satisfied me.

LINCOLN.
So please your Highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a state of mighty moment in’t
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daring’st counsel which I had to doubt
And did entreat your Highness to this course
Which you are running here.

KING.
I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present summons. Unsolicited
I left no reverend person in this court,
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and seals. Therefore go on,
For no dislike i’ th’ world against the person
Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points
Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward.
Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
And kingly dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal state to come with her,
Katherine, our Queen, before the primest creature
That’s paragoned o’ th’ world.

CAMPEIUS.
So please your Highness,
The Queen being absent, ’tis a needful fitness
That we adjourn this court till further day.
Meanwhile must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.

KING.
[_Aside_.] I may perceive
These cardinals trifle with me. I abhor
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,
Prithee return. With thy approach, I know,
My comfort comes along.—Break up the court!
I say, set on.

[_Exeunt in manner as they entered._]




ACT III

SCENE I. London. The Queen’s apartments.


Enter Queen and her Women, as at work.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Take thy lute, wench. My soul grows sad with troubles.
Sing, and disperse ’em, if thou canst. Leave working.

WOMAN
[_sings song._]

Orpheus with his lute made trees
And the mountain tops that freeze
    Bow themselves when he did sing.
To his music plants and flowers
Ever sprung, as sun and showers
    There had made a lasting spring.


Everything that heard him play,
Even the billows of the sea,
    Hung their heads and then lay by.
In sweet music is such art,
Killing care and grief of heart
    Fall asleep or, hearing, die.

Enter a Gentleman.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
How now?

GENTLEMAN.
An’t please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
Wait in the presence.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Would they speak with me?

GENTLEMAN.
They willed me say so, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Pray their Graces
To come near.

[_Exit Gentleman._]

What can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fallen from favour?
I do not like their coming. Now I think on’t,
They should be good men, their affairs as righteous.
But all hoods make not monks.

Enter the two Cardinals, Wolsey and Campeius.

WOLSEY.
Peace to your Highness.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Your Graces find me here part of housewife;
I would be all, against the worst may happen.
What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?

WOLSEY.
May it please you, noble madam, to withdraw
Into your private chamber, we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Speak it here.
There’s nothing I have done yet, o’ my conscience,
Deserves a corner. Would all other women
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do!
My lords, I care not, so much I am happy
Above a number, if my actions
Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw ’em,
Envy and base opinion set against ’em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
Out with it boldly. Truth loves open dealing.

WOLSEY.
_Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina serenissima_—

QUEEN KATHERINE.
O, good my lord, no Latin.
I am not such a truant since my coming
As not to know the language I have lived in.
A strange tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious.
Pray speak in English. Here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor mistress’ sake.
Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willing’st sin I ever yet committed
May be absolved in English.

WOLSEY.
Noble lady,
I am sorry my integrity should breed—
And service to his Majesty and you—
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.
We come not by the way of accusation,
To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow—
You have too much, good lady—but to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver,
Like free and honest men, our just opinions
And comforts to your cause.

CAMPEIUS.
Most honoured madam,
My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
Zeal, and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure
Both of his truth and him—which was too far—
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
His service and his counsel.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
[_Aside_.] To betray me.
My lords, I thank you both for your good wills.
Ye speak like honest men; pray God ye prove so.
But how to make ye suddenly an answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine honour—
More near my life, I fear—with my weak wit,
And to such men of gravity and learning,
In truth I know not. I was set at work
Among my maids, full little, God knows, looking
Either for such men or such business.
For her sake that I have been—for I feel
The last fit of my greatness—good your Graces,
Let me have time and counsel for my cause.
Alas, I am a woman friendless, hopeless.

WOLSEY.
Madam, you wrong the King’s love with these fears;
Your hopes and friends are infinite.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
In England
But little for my profit. Can you think, lords,
That any Englishman dare give me counsel?
Or be a known friend, ’gainst his Highness’ pleasure,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,
And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,
They that much weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here.
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence
In mine own country, lords.

CAMPEIUS.
I would your Grace
Would leave your griefs and take my counsel.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
How, sir?

CAMPEIUS.
Put your main cause into the King’s protection.
He’s loving and most gracious. ’Twill be much
Both for your honour better and your cause,
For if the trial of the law o’ertake ye,
You’ll part away disgraced.

WOLSEY.
He tells you rightly.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both: my ruin.
Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon ye!
Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge
That no king can corrupt.

CAMPEIUS.
Your rage mistakes us.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
The more shame for ye! Holy men I thought ye,
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye.
Mend ’em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort,
The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady,
A woman lost among ye, laughed at, scorned?
I will not wish ye half my miseries;
I have more charity. But say I warned ye.
Take heed, for heaven’s sake, take heed, lest at once
The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye.

WOLSEY.
Madam, this is a mere distraction.
You turn the good we offer into envy.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye
And all such false professors! Would you have me—
If you have any justice, any pity,
If ye be anything but churchmen’s habits—
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
Alas, ’has banished me his bed already,
His love, too, long ago. I am old, my lords,
And all the fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my obedience. What can happen
To me above this wretchedness? All your studies
Make me a curse like this.

CAMPEIUS.
Your fears are worse.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Have I lived thus long—let me speak myself,
Since virtue finds no friends—a wife, a true one—
A woman, I dare say without vainglory,
Never yet branded with suspicion—
Have I with all my full affections
Still met the King, loved him next heav’n, obeyed him,
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,
Almost forgot my prayers to content him,
And am I thus rewarded? ’Tis not well, lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
One that ne’er dreamed a joy beyond his pleasure,
And to that woman, when she has done most,
Yet will I add an honour: a great patience.

WOLSEY.
Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty
To give up willingly that noble title
Your master wed me to. Nothing but death
Shall e’er divorce my dignities.

WOLSEY.
Pray hear me.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Would I had never trod this English earth
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
Ye have angels’ faces, but heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched lady?
I am the most unhappy woman living.
[_To her Women_.] Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes?
Shipwrecked upon a kingdom where no pity,
No friends, no hope, no kindred weep for me,
Almost no grave allowed me, like the lily
That once was mistress of the field and flourished,
I’ll hang my head and perish.

WOLSEY.
If your Grace
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
You’d feel more comfort. Why should we, good lady,
Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,
The way of our profession, is against it.
We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow ’em.
For goodness’ sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
Grow from the King’s acquaintance, by this carriage.
The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
So much they love it, but to stubborn spirits
They swell and grow as terrible as storms.
I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
A soul as even as a calm. Pray think us
Those we profess: peacemakers, friends, and servants.

CAMPEIUS.
Madam, you’ll find it so. You wrong your virtues
With these weak women’s fears. A noble spirit,
As yours was put into you, ever casts
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The King loves you;
Beware you lose it not. For us, if you please
To trust us in your business, we are ready
To use our utmost studies in your service.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Do what ye will, my lords, and pray forgive me
If I have used myself unmannerly.
You know I am a woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty.
He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers
While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
Bestow your counsels on me. She now begs
That little thought, when she set footing here,
She should have bought her dignities so dear.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Ante-chamber to the King’s apartment.

Enter the Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Suffolk, Lord Surrey and Lord
Chamberlain.

NORFOLK.
If you will now unite in your complaints
And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces
With these you bear already.

SURREY.
I am joyful
To meet the least occasion that may give me
Remembrance of my father-in-law the Duke,
To be revenged on him.

SUFFOLK.
Which of the peers
Have uncontemned gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of nobleness in any person
Out of himself?

CHAMBERLAIN.
My lords, you speak your pleasures.
What he deserves of you and me I know;
What we can do to him—though now the time
Gives way to us—I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to th’ King, never attempt
Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft
Over the King in ’s tongue.

NORFOLK.
O, fear him not.
His spell in that is out. The King hath found
Matter against him that for ever mars
The honey of his language. No, he’s settled,
Not to come off, in his displeasure.

SURREY.
Sir,
I should be glad to hear such news as this
Once every hour.

NORFOLK.
Believe it, this is true.
In the divorce his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded, wherein he appears
As I would wish mine enemy.

SURREY.
How came
His practices to light?

SUFFOLK.
Most strangely.

SURREY.
O, how, how?

SUFFOLK.
The Cardinal’s letters to the Pope miscarried,
And came to th’ eye o’ the King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the judgement o’ th’ divorce; for if
It did take place, “I do” quoth he “perceive
My king is tangled in affection to
A creature of the Queen’s, Lady Anne Bullen.”

SURREY.
Has the King this?

SUFFOLK.
Believe it.

SURREY.
Will this work?

CHAMBERLAIN.
The King in this perceives him how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point
All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic
After his patient’s death. The King already
Hath married the fair lady.

SURREY.
Would he had!

SUFFOLK.
May you be happy in your wish, my lord,
For I profess you have it.

SURREY.
Now, all my joy
Trace the conjunction!

SUFFOLK.
My amen to’t!

NORFOLK.
All men’s.

SUFFOLK.
There’s order given for her coronation.
Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
She is a gallant creature, and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this land which shall
In it be memorized.

SURREY.
But will the King
Digest this letter of the Cardinal’s?
The Lord forbid!

NORFOLK.
Marry, amen!

SUFFOLK.
No, no.
There be more wasps that buzz about his nose
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
Is stolen away to Rome; hath ta’en no leave;
Has left the cause o’ th’ King unhandled, and
Is posted, as the agent of our Cardinal,
To second all his plot. I do assure you
The King cried “Ha!” at this.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Now, God incense him,
And let him cry “Ha!” louder.

NORFOLK.
But, my lord,
When returns Cranmer?

SUFFOLK.
He is returned in his opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
Together with all famous colleges
Almost in Christendom. Shortly, I believe,
His second marriage shall be published, and
Her coronation. Katherine no more
Shall be called Queen, but Princess Dowager
And widow to Prince Arthur.

NORFOLK.
This same Cranmer’s
A worthy fellow, and hath ta’en much pain
In the King’s business.

SUFFOLK.
He has, and we shall see him
For it an archbishop.

NORFOLK.
So I hear.

SUFFOLK.
’Tis so.

Enter Wolsey and Cromwell.

The Cardinal!

NORFOLK.
Observe, observe; he’s moody.

WOLSEY.
The packet, Cromwell,
Gave’t you the King?

CROMWELL.
To his own hand, in ’s bedchamber.

WOLSEY.
Looked he o’ th’ inside of the paper?

CROMWELL.
Presently
He did unseal them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a serious mind; a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bade
Attend him here this morning.

WOLSEY.
Is he ready
To come abroad?

CROMWELL.
I think by this he is.

WOLSEY.
Leave me a while.

[_Exit Cromwell._]

[_Aside_.] It shall be to the Duchess of Alençon,
The French king’s sister; he shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No; I’ll no Anne Bullens for him.
There’s more in’t than fair visage. Bullen?
No, we’ll no Bullens. Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!

NORFOLK.
He’s discontented.

SUFFOLK.
Maybe he hears the King
Does whet his anger to him.

SURREY.
Sharp enough,
Lord, for thy justice!

WOLSEY.
[_Aside_.] The late queen’s gentlewoman, a knight’s daughter,
To be her mistress’ mistress? The Queen’s Queen?
This candle burns not clear. ’Tis I must snuff it;
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well deserving? Yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
Our cause, that she should lie i’ th’ bosom of
Our hard-ruled King. Again, there is sprung up
An heretic, an arch-one, Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favour of the King
And is his oracle.

NORFOLK.
He is vexed at something.

Enter King, reading a schedule, and Lovell.

SURREY.
I would ’twere something that would fret the string,
The master-cord on ’s heart.

SUFFOLK.
The King, the King!

KING.
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion! And what expense by th’ hour
Seems to flow from him! How, i’ th’ name of thrift
Does he rake this together? Now, my lords,
Saw you the Cardinal?

NORFOLK.
My lord, we have
Stood here observing him. Some strange commotion
Is in his brain. He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his temple; straight
Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts
His eye against the moon. In most strange postures
We have seen him set himself.

KING.
It may well be
There is a mutiny in ’s mind. This morning
Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
As I required; and wot you what I found
There—on my conscience, put unwittingly?
Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing
The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
Rich stuffs and ornaments of household, which
I find at such proud rate that it outspeaks
Possession of a subject.

NORFOLK.
It’s heaven’s will!
Some spirit put this paper in the packet
To bless your eye withal.

KING.
If we did think
His contemplation were above the earth
And fixed on spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his musings, but I am afraid
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
His serious considering.

[_King takes his seat; whispers Lovell, who goes to the Cardinal._]

WOLSEY.
Heaven forgive me!
Ever God bless your Highness.

KING.
Good my lord,
You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory
Of your best graces in your mind, the which
You were now running o’er. You have scarce time
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
To keep your earthly audit. Sure, in that
I deem you an ill husband, and am glad
To have you therein my companion.

WOLSEY.
Sir,
For holy offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business which
I bear i’ th’ state; and Nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,
Must give my tendance to.

KING.
You have said well.

WOLSEY.
And ever may your Highness yoke together,
As I will lend you cause, my doing well
With my well saying.

KING.
’Tis well said again,
And ’tis a kind of good deed to say well.
And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you;
He said he did, and with his deed did crown
His word upon you. Since I had my office,
I have kept you next my heart, have not alone
Employed you where high profits might come home,
But pared my present havings to bestow
My bounties upon you.

WOLSEY.
[_Aside_.] What should this mean?

SURREY.
[_Aside_.] The Lord increase this business!

KING.
Have I not made you
The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me,
If what I now pronounce you have found true,
And, if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to us or no. What say you?

WOLSEY.
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
Showered on me daily, have been more than could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all man’s endeavours. My endeavours
Have ever come too short of my desires,
Yet filed with my abilities. Mine own ends
Have been mine so that evermore they pointed
To th’ good of your most sacred person and
The profit of the state. For your great graces
Heaped upon me, poor undeserver, I
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,
My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing,
Till death, that winter, kill it.

KING.
Fairly answered.
A loyal and obedient subject is
Therein illustrated. The honour of it
Does pay the act of it, as i’ th’ contrary,
The foulness is the punishment. I presume
That, as my hand has opened bounty to you,
My heart dropped love, my power rained honour, more
On you than any, so your hand and heart,
Your brain, and every function of your power,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
As ’twere in love’s particular, be more
To me, your friend, than any.

WOLSEY.
I do profess
That for your Highness’ good I ever laboured
More than mine own, that am, have, and will be.
Though all the world should crack their duty to you
And throw it from their soul, though perils did
Abound as thick as thought could make ’em, and
Appear in forms more horrid—yet my duty,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
Should the approach of this wild river break,
And stand unshaken yours.

KING.
’Tis nobly spoken.
Take notice, lords: he has a loyal breast,
For you have seen him open’t.

[_Giving him papers._]

Read o’er this,
And after, this; and then to breakfast with
What appetite you have.

[_Exit King, frowning upon the Cardinal; the nobles throng after him,
smiling and whispering._]

WOLSEY.
What should this mean?
What sudden anger’s this? How have I reaped it?
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
Leaped from his eyes. So looks the chafed lion
Upon the daring huntsman that has galled him,
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper—
I fear, the story of his anger. ’Tis so.
This paper has undone me. ’Tis th’ account
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends—indeed, to gain the popedom
And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence,
Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil
Made me put this main secret in the packet
I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his brains?
I know ’twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune,
Will bring me off again. What’s this? “To th’ Pope”?
The letter, as I live, with all the business
I writ to ’s Holiness. Nay then, farewell!
I have touched the highest point of all my greatness,
And from that full meridian of my glory
I haste now to my setting. I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
And no man see me more.

Enter to Wolsey, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, the Earl of Surrey,
and the Lord Chamberlain.

NORFOLK.
Hear the King’s pleasure, Cardinal, who commands you
To render up the great seal presently
Into our hands, and to confine yourself
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester’s,
Till you hear further from his Highness.

WOLSEY.
Stay.
Where’s your commission, lords? Words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.

SUFFOLK.
Who dares cross ’em,
Bearing the King’s will from his mouth expressly?

WOLSEY.
Till I find more than will or words to do it—
I mean your malice—know, officious lords,
I dare and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what coarse metal ye are moulded, envy!
How eagerly ye follow my disgraces,
As if it fed ye, and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in everything may bring my ruin!
Follow your envious courses, men of malice;
You have Christian warrant for ’em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit rewards. That seal
You ask with such a violence, the King,
Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me;
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,
During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,
Tied it by letters-patents. Now, who’ll take it?

SURREY.
The King that gave it.

WOLSEY.
It must be himself, then.

SURREY.
Thou art a proud traitor, priest.

WOLSEY.
Proud lord, thou liest.
Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
Have burnt that tongue than said so.

SURREY.
Thy ambition,
Thou scarlet sin, robbed this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.
The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
Far from his succour, from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault thou gav’st him,
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an axe.

WOLSEY.
This, and all else
This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer is most false. The Duke by law
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His noble jury and foul cause can witness.
If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you
You have as little honesty as honour,
That in the way of loyalty and truth
Toward the King, my ever royal master,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,
And all that love his follies.

SURREY.
By my soul,
Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel
My sword i’ th’ lifeblood of thee else. My lords,
Can ye endure to hear this arrogance?
And from this fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
Farewell, nobility. Let his Grace go forward
And dare us with his cap, like larks.

WOLSEY.
All goodness
Is poison to thy stomach.

SURREY.
Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the land’s wealth into one,
Into your own hands, Cardinal, by extortion;
The goodness of your intercepted packets
You writ to the Pope against the King. Your goodness,
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,
As you respect the common good, the state
Of our despised nobility, our issues,
Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
Collected from his life. I’ll startle you
Worse than the sacring bell when the brown wench
Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.

WOLSEY.
How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in charity against it!

NORFOLK.
Those articles, my lord, are in the King’s hand;
But thus much, they are foul ones.

WOLSEY.
So much fairer
And spotless shall mine innocence arise
When the King knows my truth.

SURREY.
This cannot save you.
I thank my memory I yet remember
Some of these articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush and cry “Guilty,” Cardinal,
You’ll show a little honesty.

WOLSEY.
Speak on, sir;
I dare your worst objections. If I blush,
It is to see a nobleman want manners.

SURREY.
I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!
First, that without the King’s assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate, by which power
You maimed the jurisdiction of all bishops.

NORFOLK.
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
To foreign princes, “_ego et rex meus_”
Was still inscribed, in which you brought the King
To be your servant.

SUFFOLK.
Then, that without the knowledge
Either of King or Council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders the great seal.

SURREY.
Item, you sent a large commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
Without the King’s will or the state’s allowance,
A league between his Highness and Ferrara.

SUFFOLK.
That out of mere ambition you have caused
Your holy hat to be stamped on the King’s coin.

SURREY.
Then, that you have sent innumerable substance—
By what means got, I leave to your own conscience—
To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
Of all the kingdom. Many more there are,
Which, since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.

CHAMBERLAIN.
O my lord,
Press not a falling man too far! ’Tis virtue.
His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little of his great self.

SURREY.
I forgive him.

SUFFOLK.
Lord Cardinal, the King’s further pleasure is,
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power legative within this kingdom
Fall into th’ compass of a _praemunire_,
That therefore such a writ be sued against you
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the King’s protection. This is my charge.

NORFOLK.
And so we’ll leave you to your meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the great seal to us,
The King shall know it and, no doubt, shall thank you.
So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.

[_Exeunt all but Wolsey._]

WOLSEY.
So farewell to the little good you bear me.
Farewell? A long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes; tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory,
But far beyond my depth. My high-blown pride
At length broke under me and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye!
I feel my heart new opened. O, how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on princes’ favours!
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.

Enter Cromwell, standing amazed.

Why, how now, Cromwell?

CROMWELL.
I have no power to speak, sir.

WOLSEY.
What, amazed
At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder
A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,
I am fallen indeed.

CROMWELL.
How does your Grace?

WOLSEY.
Why, well.
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
I know myself now, and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience. The King has cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace, and from these shoulders,
These ruined pillars, out of pity, taken
A load would sink a navy: too much honour.
O, ’tis a burden, Cromwell, ’tis a burden
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven.

CROMWELL.
I am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.

WOLSEY.
I hope I have. I am able now, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
To endure more miseries and greater far
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?

CROMWELL.
The heaviest and the worst
Is your displeasure with the King.

WOLSEY.
God bless him.

CROMWELL.
The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen
Lord Chancellor in your place.

WOLSEY.
That’s somewhat sudden.
But he’s a learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness’ favour, and do justice
For truth’s sake and his conscience, that his bones,
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans’ tears wept on him.
What more?

CROMWELL.
That Cranmer is returned with welcome,
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

WOLSEY.
That’s news indeed.

CROMWELL.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open as his Queen,
Going to chapel, and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.

WOLSEY.
There was the weight that pulled me down.
O Cromwell,
The King has gone beyond me. All my glories
In that one woman I have lost for ever.
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell.
I am a poor fallen man, unworthy now
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;
That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;
Some little memory of me will stir him—
I know his noble nature—not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.

CROMWELL.
O my lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so noble, and so true a master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
The King shall have my service, but my prayers
For ever and for ever shall be yours.

WOLSEY.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries, but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let’s dry our eyes, and thus far hear me, Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in,
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my fall and that that ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition!
By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
The image of his maker, hope to win by it?
Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee.
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not.
Let all the ends thou aim’st at be thy country’s,
Thy God’s, and truth’s. Then if thou fall’st, O Cromwell,
Thou fall’st a blessed martyr!
Serve the King. And, prithee, lead me in.
There take an inventory of all I have.
To the last penny; ’tis the King’s. My robe
And my integrity to heaven is all
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, He would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies.

CROMWELL.
Good sir, have patience.

WOLSEY.
So I have. Farewell,
The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. A street in Westminster.


Enter two Gentlemen, meeting one another.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
You’re well met once again.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
So are you.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
You come to take your stand here and behold
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis very true. But that time offered sorrow,
This, general joy.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis well. The citizens,
I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds,
As, let ’em have their rights, they are ever forward
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants, and sights of honour.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Never greater,
Nor, I’ll assure you, better taken, sir.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That paper in your hand?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Yes, ’tis the list
Of those that claim their offices this day
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I thank you, sir. Had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your paper.
But I beseech you, what’s become of Katherine,
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off
From Ampthill where the Princess lay; to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not;
And, to be short, for not appearance and
The King’s late scruple, by the main assent
Of all these learned men she was divorced,
And the late marriage made of none effect;
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
Where she remains now sick.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Alas, good lady!

[_Trumpets._]

The trumpets sound. Stand close. The Queen is coming.

_The order of the coronation_.


_1. A lively flourish of trumpets.
2. Then, two Judges.
3. Lord Chancellor, with purse and mace before him.
4. Choristers, singing. Music.
5. Mayor of London, bearing the mace. Then Garter, in his coat of arms,
and on his head he wore a gilt copper crown.
6. Marquess Dorset, bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a
demi-coronal of gold. With him, the Earl of Surrey, bearing the rod of
silver with the dove, crowned with an earl’s coronet. Collars of S’s.
7. Duke of Suffolk, in his robe of estate, his coronet on his head,
bearing a long white wand, as High Steward. With him, the Duke of
Norfolk, with the rod of marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of
S’s.
8. A canopy, borne by four of the Cinque Ports; under it, the Queen in
her robe, in her hair, richly adorned with pearl, crowned. On each side
her, the Bishops of London and Winchester.
9. The old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of gold wrought with
flowers, bearing the Queen’s train.
10. Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain circlets of gold without
flowers._

[_Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and state, and then a
great flourish of trumpets._]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A royal train, believe me. These I know.
Who’s that that bears the sceptre?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Marquess Dorset,
And that the Earl of Surrey with the rod.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A bold brave gentleman. That should be
The Duke of Suffolk.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
’Tis the same: High Steward.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Yes.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
[_Sees the Queen_.] Heaven bless thee!
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel.
Our King has all the Indies in his arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that lady.
I cannot blame his conscience.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
They that bear
The cloth of honour over her are four barons
Of the Cinque Ports.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Those men are happy, and so are all are near her.
I take it she that carries up the train
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
It is, and all the rest are countesses.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
And sometimes falling ones.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No more of that.

[_Exit the last of the procession._]

Enter a third Gentleman.

God save you, sir. Where have you been broiling?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Among the crowds i’ th’ Abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedged in more. I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
You saw
The ceremony?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
That I did.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
How was it?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Well worth the seeing.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Good sir, speak it to us.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off
A distance from her, while her Grace sat down
To rest a while, some half an hour or so,
In a rich chair of state, opposing freely
The beauty of her person to the people.
Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
That ever lay by man, which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
As loud and to as many tunes. Hats, cloaks,
Doublets, I think, flew up, and had their faces
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great-bellied women
That had not half a week to go, like rams
In the old time of war, would shake the press
And make ’em reel before ’em. No man living
Could say “This is my wife” there, all were woven
So strangely in one piece.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
But what followed?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
At length her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the altar, where she kneeled and saintlike
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and prayed devoutly;
Then rose again and bowed her to the people,
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
She had all the royal makings of a queen,
As holy oil, Edward Confessor’s crown,
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems
Laid nobly on her; which performed, the choir,
With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
Together sung _Te Deum_. So she parted,
And with the same full state paced back again
To York Place, where the feast is held.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Sir,
You must no more call it “York Place”, that’s past;
For since the Cardinal fell, that title’s lost.
’Tis now the King’s, and called “Whitehall”.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
I know it,
But ’tis so lately altered that the old name
Is fresh about me.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
What two reverend bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Stokesley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the King’s secretary;
The other, London.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop’s,
The virtuous Cranmer.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
All the land knows that.
However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Who may that be, I pray you?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Thomas Cromwell,
A man in much esteem with th’ King, and truly
A worthy friend. The King has made him
Master o’ th’ Jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
He will deserve more.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Yes, without all doubt.
Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way,
Which is to th’ court, and there ye shall be my guests,
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
I’ll tell ye more.

BOTH.
You may command us, sir.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Kimbolton.

Enter Katherine Dowager, sick, led between Griffith, her gentleman
usher, and Patience, her woman.

GRIFFITH.
How does your Grace?

QUEEN KATHERINE.
O Griffith, sick to death.
My legs like loaden branches bow to th’ earth,
Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.

[_She sits._]

So. Now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou ledst me,
That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey,
Was dead?

GRIFFITH.
Yes, madam, but I think your Grace,
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear to’t.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.

GRIFFITH.
Well, the voice goes, madam.
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Alas, poor man!

GRIFFITH.
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey, where the reverend abbot,
With all his covent, honourably received him;
To whom he gave these words: “O father abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye.
Give him a little earth for charity.”
So went to bed, where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still; and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of repentance,
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
He gave his honours to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
So may he rest. His faults lie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with princes; one that by suggestion
Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair-play.
His own opinion was his law. I’ th’ presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning. He was never,
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he is now, nothing.
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The clergy ill example.

GRIFFITH.
Noble madam,
Men’s evil manners live in brass; their virtues
We write in water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Yes, good Griffith;
I were malicious else.

GRIFFITH.
This Cardinal,
Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much honour. From his cradle
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one,
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not,
But to those men that sought him, sweet as summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam,
He was most princely. Ever witness for him
Those twins of learning that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford, one of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinished, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
His overthrow heaped happiness upon him,
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little.
And, to add greater honours to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
After my death I wish no other herald,
No other speaker of my living actions,
To keep mine honour from corruption
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
With thy religious truth and modesty,
Now in his ashes honour. Peace be with him!
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower:
I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
Cause the musicians play me that sad note
I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating
On that celestial harmony I go to.

[_Sad and solemn music._]

GRIFFITH.
She is asleep. Good wench, let’s sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.

_The vision._


Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six Personages, clad in
white robes, wearing on their heads garlands of bays, and golden
vizards on their faces, branches of bays or palm in their hands. They
first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain changes, the first
two hold a spare garland over her head, at which the other four make
reverent curtsies. Then the two that held the garland deliver the same
to the other next two, who observe the same order in their changes and
holding the garland over her head; which done, they deliver the same
garland to the last two, who likewise observe the same order. At which,
as it were by inspiration, she makes in her sleep signs of rejoicing
and holdeth up her hands to heaven. And so in their dancing, vanish,
carrying the garland with them. The music continues.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?

GRIFFITH.
Madam, we are here.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
It is not you I call for.
Saw ye none enter since I slept?

GRIFFITH.
None, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
Invite me to a banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
They promised me eternal happiness
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear. I shall, assuredly.

GRIFFITH.
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
Possess your fancy.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Bid the music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.

[_Music ceases._]

PATIENCE.
Do you note
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthly cold? Mark her eyes.

GRIFFITH.
She is going, wench. Pray, pray.

PATIENCE.
Heaven comfort her!

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
An’t like your Grace—

QUEEN KATHERINE.
You are a saucy fellow.
Deserve we no more reverence?

GRIFFITH.
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behaviour. Go to, kneel.

MESSENGER.
I humbly do entreat your Highness’ pardon.
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
A gentleman sent from the King to see you.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Admit him entrance, Griffith. But this fellow
Let me ne’er see again.

[_Exit Messenger._]

Enter Lord Caputius.

If my sight fail not,
You should be lord ambassador from the Emperor,
My royal nephew, and your name Caputius.

CAPUTIUS.
Madam, the same. Your servant.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
O my lord,
The times and titles now are altered strangely
With me since first you knew me. But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?

CAPUTIUS.
Noble lady,
First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
The King’s request that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his princely commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
O my good lord, that comfort comes too late;
’Tis like a pardon after execution.
That gentle physic given in time had cured me,
But now I am past all comforts here but prayers.
How does his Highness?

CAPUTIUS.
Madam, in good health.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor name
Banished the kingdom. Patience, is that letter
I caused you write yet sent away?

PATIENCE.
No, madam.

[_Giving it to Katherine._]

QUEEN KATHERINE.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my lord the King.

CAPUTIUS.
Most willing, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter—
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!—
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding—
She is young and of a noble modest nature;
I hope she will deserve well—and a little
To love her for her mother’s sake that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition
Is that his noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my fortunes faithfully;
Of which there is not one, I dare avow—
And now I should not lie—but will deserve,
For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
For honesty and decent carriage,
A right good husband. Let him be a noble;
And sure those men are happy that shall have ’em.
The last is for my men—they are the poorest,
But poverty could never draw ’em from me—
That they may have their wages duly paid ’em,
And something over to remember me by.
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole contents, and, good my lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people’s friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.

CAPUTIUS.
By heaven, I will,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man!

QUEEN KATHERINE.
I thank you, honest lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his Highness.
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him,
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet. I must to bed;
Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
Let me be used with honour. Strew me over
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste wife to my grave. Embalm me,
Then lay me forth. Although unqueened, yet like
A queen and daughter to a king inter me.
I can no more.

[_Exeunt leading Katherine._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A gallery in the palace.


Enter Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, a Page with a torch before him,
met by Sir Thomas Lovell.

GARDINER.
It’s one o’clock, boy, is’t not?

PAGE.
It hath struck.

GARDINER.
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights; times to repair our nature
With comforting repose, and not for us
To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
Whither so late?

LOVELL.
Came you from the King, my lord?

GARDINER.
I did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.

LOVELL.
I must to him too,
Before he go to bed. I’ll take my leave.

GARDINER.
Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What’s the matter?
It seems you are in haste. An if there be
No great offence belongs to’t, give your friend
Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk,
As they say spirits do, at midnight have
In them a wilder nature than the business
That seeks despatch by day.

LOVELL.
My lord, I love you,
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier than this work. The Queen’s in labour—
They say in great extremity, and feared
She’ll with the labour end.

GARDINER.
The fruit she goes with
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Good time, and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbed up now.

LOVELL.
Methinks I could
Cry the amen, and yet my conscience says
She’s a good creature and, sweet lady, does
Deserve our better wishes.

GARDINER.
But, sir, sir,
Hear me, Sir Thomas. You’re a gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you wise, religious;
And let me tell you, it will ne’er be well,
’Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take’t of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she
Sleep in their graves.

LOVELL.
Now, sir, you speak of two
The most remarked i’ th’ kingdom. As for Cromwell,
Beside that of the Jewel House, is made Master
O’ th’ Rolls, and the King’s secretary; further, sir,
Stands in the gap and trade of more preferments,
With which the time will load him. Th’ Archbishop
Is the King’s hand and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?

GARDINER.
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that dare, and I myself have ventured
To speak my mind of him. And indeed this day,
Sir—I may tell it you, I think—I have
Incensed the lords o’ th’ Council, that he is—
For so I know he is, they know he is—
A most arch heretic, a pestilence
That does infect the land; with which they, moved,
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace
And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs
Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded
Tomorrow morning to the Council board
He be convented. He’s a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your affairs
I hinder you too long. Good night, Sir Thomas.

LOVELL.
Many good nights, my lord. I rest your servant.

[_Exeunt Gardiner and Page._]

Enter King and Suffolk.

KING.
Charles, I will play no more tonight.
My mind’s not on’t; you are too hard for me.

SUFFOLK.
Sir, I did never win of you before.

KING.
But little, Charles,
Nor shall not, when my fancy’s on my play.
Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?

LOVELL.
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman
I sent your message, who returned her thanks
In the great’st humbleness, and desired your Highness
Most heartily to pray for her.

KING.
What sayst thou, ha?
To pray for her? What, is she crying out?

LOVELL.
So said her woman, and that her suff’rance made
Almost each pang a death.

KING.
Alas, good lady!

SUFFOLK.
God safely quit her of her burden, and
With gentle travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an heir!

KING.
’Tis midnight, Charles.
Prithee, to bed, and in thy prayers remember
Th’ estate of my poor Queen. Leave me alone,
For I must think of that which company
Will not be friendly to.

SUFFOLK.
I wish your Highness
A quiet night, and my good mistress will
Remember in my prayers.

KING.
Charles, good night.

[_Exit Suffolk._]

Enter Sir Anthony Denny.

Well, sir, what follows?

DENNY.
Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
As you commanded me.

KING.
Ha! Canterbury?

DENNY.
Ay, my good lord.

KING.
’Tis true. Where is he, Denny?

DENNY.
He attends your Highness’ pleasure.

KING.
Bring him to us.

[_Exit Denny._]

LOVELL.
[_Aside_.] This is about that which the Bishop spake.
I am happily come hither.

Enter Cranmer and Denny.

KING.
Avoid the gallery. [_Lovell seems to stay_.]
Ha! I have said. Be gone.
What!

[_Exeunt Lovell and Denny._]

CRANMER.
[_Aside_.] I am fearful. Wherefore frowns he thus?
’Tis his aspect of terror. All’s not well.

KING.
How now, my lord? You do desire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.

CRANMER.
[_Kneeling_.] It is my duty
T’ attend your Highness’ pleasure.

KING.
Pray you, arise,
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walk a turn together.
I have news to tell you. Come, come, give me your hand.
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
I have, and most unwillingly, of late
Heard many grievous—I do say, my lord,
Grievous—complaints of you, which, being considered,
Have moved us and our Council that you shall
This morning come before us, where I know,
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself
But that, till further trial in those charges
Which will require your answer, you must take
Your patience to you and be well contented
To make your house our Tower. You a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.

CRANMER.
[_Kneeling_.] I humbly thank your Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most throughly to be winnowed, where my chaff
And corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There’s none stands under more calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.

KING.
Stand up, good Canterbury!
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand. Stand up.
Prithee, let’s walk. Now, by my halidom,
What manner of man are you? My lord, I looked
You would have given me your petition that
I should have ta’en some pains to bring together
Yourself and your accusers and to have heard you
Without endurance, further.

CRANMER.
Most dread liege,
The good I stand on is my truth and honesty.
If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
Will triumph o’er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.

KING.
Know you not
How your state stands i’ th’ world, with the whole world?
Your enemies are many, and not small; their practices
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The justice and the truth o’ th’ question carries
The due o’ th’ verdict with it. At what ease
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? Such things have been done.
You are potently opposed, and with a malice
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
I mean in perjured witness, than your master,
Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to.
You take a precipice for no leap of danger,
And woo your own destruction.

CRANMER.
God and your Majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.

KING.
Be of good cheer.
They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance,
In charging you with matters, to commit you,
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
Th’ occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this ring
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!
He’s honest, on mine honour. God’s blest mother,
I swear he is true-hearted, and a soul
None better in my kingdom.—Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.

[_Exit Cranmer._]

He has strangled
His language in his tears.

LOVELL.
[_Within_.] Come back! What mean you?

Enter Old Lady; Lovell follows.

OLD LADY.
I’ll not come back. The tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels
Fly o’er thy royal head and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings!

KING.
Now by thy looks
I guess thy message. Is the Queen delivered?
Say “Ay, and of a boy”.

OLD LADY.
Ay, ay, my liege,
And of a lovely boy. The God of heaven
Both now and ever bless her! ’Tis a girl
Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your Queen
Desires your visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger. ’Tis as like you
As cherry is to cherry.

KING.
Lovell.

LOVELL.
Sir?

KING.
Give her an hundred marks. I’ll to the Queen.

[_Exit King._]

OLD LADY.
An hundred marks? By this light, I’ll ha’ more.
An ordinary groom is for such payment.
I will have more or scold it out of him.
Said I for this the girl was like to him?
I’ll have more, or else unsay’t. And now,
While ’tis hot, I’ll put it to the issue.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Lobby before the council-chamber.

Enter Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.

CRANMER.
I hope I am not too late, and yet the gentleman
That was sent to me from the Council prayed me
To make great haste. All fast? What means this? Ho!
Who waits there?

Enter Keeper.

Sure you know me?

KEEPER.
Yes, my lord,
But yet I cannot help you.

CRANMER.
Why?

KEEPER.
Your Grace must wait till you be called for.

Enter  Doctor Butts.

CRANMER.
So.

BUTTS.
[_Aside_.] This is a piece of malice. I am glad
I came this way so happily. The King
Shall understand it presently.

[_Exit._]

CRANMER.
[_Aside_.] ’Tis Butts,
The King’s physician. As he passed along,
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace. For certain,
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me—
God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice—
To quench mine honour. They would shame to make me
Wait else at door, a fellow councillor,
’Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.

Enter the King and Butts at a window above.

BUTTS.
I’ll show your Grace the strangest sight.

KING.
What’s that, Butts?

BUTTS.
I think your Highness saw this many a day.

KING.
Body o’ me, where is it?

BUTTS.
There, my lord:
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his state at door, ’mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.

KING.
Ha! ’Tis he, indeed.
Is this the honour they do one another?
’Tis well there’s one above ’em yet. I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among ’em—
At least good manners—as not thus to suffer
A man of his place, and so near our favour,
To dance attendance on their lordships’ pleasures,
And at the door too, like a post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts, there’s knavery!
Let ’em alone, and draw the curtain close.
We shall hear more anon.

[_Exeunt._]

A council table brought in with chairs and stools and placed under the
state. Enter Lord Chancellor, places himself at the upper end of the
table on the left hand, a seat being left void above him, as for
Canterbury’s seat. Duke of Suffolk, Duke of Norfolk, Surrey, Lord
Chamberlain, Gardiner seat themselves in order on each side; Cromwell
at lower end, as secretary.

CHANCELLOR.
Speak to the business, master secretary.
Why are we met in council?

CROMWELL.
Please your honours,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.

GARDINER.
Has he had knowledge of it?

CROMWELL.
Yes.

NORFOLK.
Who waits there?

KEEPER.
Without, my noble lords?

GARDINER.
Yes.

KEEPER.
My lord Archbishop,
And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.

CHANCELLOR.
Let him come in.

KEEPER.
Your Grace may enter now.

Cranmer approaches the council table.

CHANCELLOR.
My good lord Archbishop, I’m very sorry
To sit here at this present and behold
That chair stand empty. But we all are men,
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh—few are angels—out of which frailty
And want of wisdom, you that best should teach us,
Have misdemeaned yourself, and not a little,
Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling
The whole realm, by your teaching and your chaplains’—
For so we are informed—with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous, which are heresies
And, not reformed, may prove pernicious.

GARDINER.
Which reformation must be sudden too,
My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses
Pace ’em not in their hands to make ’em gentle,
But stop their mouth with stubborn bits and spur ’em
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one man’s honour, this contagious sickness,
Farewell, all physic. And what follows then?
Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
Of the whole state, as of late days our neighbours,
The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.

CRANMER.
My good lords, hitherto in all the progress
Both of my life and office, I have laboured,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my authority
Might go one way, and safely; and the end
Was ever to do well. Nor is there living—
I speak it with a single heart, my lords—
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private conscience and his place,
Defacers of a public peace than I do.
Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
With less allegiance in it! Men that make
Envy and crooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships
That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
And freely urge against me.

SUFFOLK.
Nay, my lord,
That cannot be. You are a councillor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.

GARDINER.
My lord, because we have business of more moment,
We will be short with you. ’Tis his Highness’ pleasure
And our consent, for better trial of you,
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where, being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly—
More than, I fear, you are provided for.

CRANMER.
Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you.
You are always my good friend. If your will pass,
I shall both find your lordship judge and juror,
You are so merciful. I see your end:
’Tis my undoing. Love and meekness, lord,
Become a churchman better than ambition.
Win straying souls with modesty again;
Cast none away. That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt as you do conscience
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling makes me modest.

GARDINER.
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary,
That’s the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,
To men that understand you, words and weakness.

CROMWELL.
My Lord of Winchester, you are a little,
By your good favour, too sharp. Men so noble,
However faulty, yet should find respect
For what they have been. ’Tis a cruelty
To load a falling man.

GARDINER.
Good master secretary,
I cry your honour mercy: you may worst
Of all this table say so.

CROMWELL.
Why, my lord?

GARDINER.
Do not I know you for a favourer
Of this new sect? Ye are not sound.

CROMWELL.
Not sound?

GARDINER.
Not sound, I say.

CROMWELL.
Would you were half so honest!
Men’s prayers then would seek you, not their fears.

GARDINER.
I shall remember this bold language.

CROMWELL.
Do.
Remember your bold life too.

CHANCELLOR.
This is too much.
Forbear, for shame, my lords.

GARDINER.
I have done.

CROMWELL.
And I.

CHANCELLOR.
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
You be conveyed to th’ Tower a prisoner,
There to remain till the King’s further pleasure
Be known unto us. Are you all agreed, lords?

ALL.
We are.

CRANMER.
Is there no other way of mercy
But I must needs to th’ Tower, my lords?

GARDINER.
What other
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.
Let some o’ th’ guard be ready there.

Enter the guard.

CRANMER.
For me?
Must I go like a traitor thither?

GARDINER.
Receive him,
And see him safe i’ th’ Tower.

CRANMER.
Stay, good my lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords.
By virtue of that ring, I take my cause
Out of the gripes of cruel men and give it
To a most noble judge, the King my master.

CHAMBERLAIN.
This is the King’s ring.

SURREY.
’Tis no counterfeit.

SUFFOLK.
’Tis the right ring, by heaven! I told ye all,
When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,
’Twould fall upon ourselves.

NORFOLK.
Do you think, my lords,
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?

CHAMBERLAIN.
’Tis now too certain.
How much more is his life in value with him?
Would I were fairly out on’t!

CROMWELL.
My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and informations
Against this man, whose honesty the devil
And his disciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye. Now have at ye!

Enter King, frowning on them; takes his seat.

GARDINER.
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince,
Not only good and wise, but most religious;
One that, in all obedience, makes the Church
The chief aim of his honour and, to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His royal self in judgement comes to hear
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.

KING.
You were ever good at sudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin and bare to hide offences.
To me you cannot reach, you play the spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
But whatsoe’er thou tak’st me for, I’m sure
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.
[_To Cranmer_.] Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that’s holy, he had better starve
Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

SURREY.
May it please your Grace—

KING.
No, sir, it does not please me.
I had thought I had had men of some understanding
And wisdom of my Council, but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
This good man—few of you deserve that title—
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
At chamber door? And one as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye
Power as he was a councillor to try him,
Not as a groom. There’s some of ye, I see,
More out of malice than integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean,
Which ye shall never have while I live.

CHANCELLOR.
Thus far,
My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his imprisonment was rather,
If there be faith in men, meant for his trial
And fair purgation to the world than malice,
I’m sure, in me.

KING.
Well, well, my lords, respect him.
Take him, and use him well; he’s worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him: if a prince
May be beholding to a subject, I
Am, for his love and service, so to him.
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him.
Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of Canterbury,
I have a suit which you must not deny me:
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism.
You must be godfather and answer for her.

CRANMER.
The greatest monarch now alive may glory
In such an honour. How may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble subject to you?

KING.
Come, come, my lord, you’d spare your spoons. You shall have two noble
partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk and Lady Marquess Dorset.
Will these please you?
Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.

GARDINER.
With a true heart
And brother-love I do it.

CRANMER.
And let heaven
Witness how dear I hold this confirmation.

KING.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.
The common voice, I see, is verified
Of thee, which says thus: “Do my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and he is your friend for ever.”
Come, lords, we trifle time away. I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made ye one, lords, one remain.
So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The palace yard.

Noise and tumult within. Enter Porter and his Man.

PORTER.
You’ll leave your noise anon, ye rascals. Do you take the court for
Parish Garden? Ye rude slaves, leave your gaping.

ONE.
[_Within_.] Good master porter, I belong to th’ larder.

PORTER.
Belong to th’ gallows, and be hanged, ye rogue! Is this a place to roar
in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves, and strong ones. These are but
switches to ’em. I’ll scratch your heads. You must be seeing
christenings? Do you look for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?

PORTER’S MAN.
Pray, sir, be patient. ’Tis as much impossible—
Unless we sweep ’em from the door with cannons—
To scatter ’em as ’tis to make ’em sleep
On May-day morning, which will never be.
We may as well push against Paul’s as stir ’em.

PORTER.
How got they in, and be hanged?

PORTER’S MAN.
Alas, I know not. How gets the tide in?
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot—
You see the poor remainder—could distribute,
I made no spare, sir.

PORTER.
You did nothing, sir.

PORTER’S MAN.
I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
To mow ’em down before me; but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
Let me ne’er hope to see a chine again—
And that I would not for a cow, God save her!

ONE.
[_Within_.] Do you hear, master porter?

PORTER.
I shall be with you presently, good master puppy.—
Keep the door close, sirrah.

PORTER’S MAN.
What would you have me do?

PORTER.
What should you do, but knock ’em down by th’ dozens? Is this
Moorfields to muster in? Or have we some strange Indian with the great
tool come to court, the women so besiege us? Bless me, what a fry of
fornication is at door! On my Christian conscience, this one
christening will beget a thousand; here will be father, godfather, and
all together.

PORTER’S MAN.
The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a fellow somewhat near the
door—he should be a brazier by his face, for, o’ my conscience, twenty
of the dog-days now reign in’s nose. All that stand about him are under
the line; they need no other penance. That fire-drake did I hit three
times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged against me.
He stands there, like a mortar-piece, to blow us. There was a
haberdasher’s wife of small wit near him that railed upon me till her
pinked porringer fell off her head for kindling such a combustion in
the state. I missed the meteor once and hit that woman, who cried out
“Clubs!” when I might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to her
succour, which were the hope o’ th’ Strand, where she was quartered.
They fell on; I made good my place; at length they came to th’
broomstaff to me; I defied ’em still, when suddenly a file of boys
behind ’em, loose shot, delivered such a shower of pebbles that I was
fain to draw mine honour in and let ’em win the work. The devil was
amongst ’em, I think, surely.

PORTER.
These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse and fight for bitten
apples, that no audience but the tribulation of Tower Hill or the limbs
of Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure. I have some of
’em in _Limbo Patrum_, and there they are like to dance these three
days, besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.

Enter Lord Chamberlain.

CHAMBERLAIN.
Mercy o’ me, what a multitude are here!
They grow still too. From all parts they are coming,
As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
These lazy knaves? You’ve made a fine hand, fellows!
There’s a trim rabble let in. Are all these
Your faithful friends o’ th’ suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
When they pass back from the christening.

PORTER.
An’t please your honour,
We are but men; and what so many may do,
Not being torn a-pieces, we have done.
An army cannot rule ’em.

CHAMBERLAIN.
As I live,
If the King blame me for’t, I’ll lay ye all
By th’ heels, and suddenly, and on your heads
Clap round fines for neglect. You’re lazy knaves,
And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when
Ye should do service. Hark, the trumpets sound!
They’re come already from the christening.
Go break among the press, and find a way out
To let the troops pass fairly, or I’ll find
A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.

PORTER.
Make way there for the Princess!

PORTER’S MAN.
You great fellow,
Stand close up, or I’ll make your head ache.

PORTER.
You i’ th’ camlet, get up o’ th’ rail!
I’ll peck you o’er the pales else.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The palace.

Enter Trumpets, sounding; then two Aldermen, Lord Mayor, Garter,
Cranmer, Duke of Norfolk with his marshal’s staff, Duke of Suffolk, two
Noblemen bearing great standing bowls for the christening gifts; then
four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the Duchess of Norfolk,
godmother, bearing the child richly habited in a mantle, etc., train
borne by a Lady; then follows the Marchioness Dorset, the other
godmother, and Ladies. The troop pass once about the stage, and Garter
speaks.

GARTER.
Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous life, long and ever
happy, to the high and mighty Princess of England, Elizabeth.

Flourish. Enter King and Guard.

CRANMER.
[_Kneeling_.] And to your royal Grace and the good Queen,
My noble partners and myself thus pray
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy
May hourly fall upon ye!

KING.
Thank you, good lord Archbishop.
What is her name?

CRANMER.
Elizabeth.

KING.
Stand up, lord.

[_The King kisses the child._]

With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee,
Into whose hand I give thy life.

CRANMER.
Amen.

KING.
My noble gossips, you’ve have been too prodigal.
I thank ye heartily; so shall this lady,
When she has so much English.

CRANMER.
Let me speak, sir,
For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
Let none think flattery, for they’ll find ’em truth.
This royal infant—heaven still move about her!—
Though in her cradle, yet now promises
Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings,
Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be—
But few now living can behold that goodness—
A pattern to all princes living with her
And all that shall succeed. Saba was never
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
Than this pure soul shall be. All princely graces
That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall nurse her;
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her.
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn,
And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with her.
In her days every man shall eat in safety
Under his own vine what he plants, and sing
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours.
God shall be truly known, and those about her
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour
And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but as when
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new create another heir
As great in admiration as herself,
So shall she leave her blessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness,
Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
Shall star-like rise as great in fame as she was
And so stand fixed. Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
That were the servants to this chosen infant,
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him.
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
His honour and the greatness of his name
Shall be, and make new nations. He shall flourish,
And, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches
To all the plains about him. Our children’s children
Shall see this and bless heaven.

KING.
Thou speakest wonders.

CRANMER.
She shall be to the happiness of England
An aged princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it.
Would I had known no more! But she must die,
She must, the saints must have her; yet a virgin,
A most unspotted lily, shall she pass to the ground,
And all the world shall mourn her.

KING.
O lord Archbishop,
Thou hast made me now a man. Never before
This happy child did I get anything.
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me
That when I am in heaven I shall desire
To see what this child does and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all. To you, my good Lord Mayor,
And you, good brethren, I am much beholding.
I have received much honour by your presence,
And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords.
Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye;
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
’Has business at his house, for all shall stay.
This little one shall make it holiday.

[_Exeunt._]

Epilogue

Enter Epilogue.

EPILOGUE.
’Tis ten to one this play can never please
All that are here. Some come to take their ease,
And sleep an act or two—but those, we fear,
We’ve frighted with our trumpets; so, ’tis clear,
They’ll say ’tis naught—others, to hear the city
Abused extremely and to cry “That’s witty!”—
Which we have not done neither—that I fear
All the expected good we’re like to hear
For this play at this time is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed ’em. If they smile
And say ’twill do, I know within a while
All the best men are ours; for ’tis ill hap
If they hold when their ladies bid ’em clap.

[_Exit._]




THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING JOHN




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Northampton. A Room of State in the Palace.

 ACT II
 Scene I. France. Before the walls of Angiers.

 ACT III
 Scene I. France. The French King’s tent.
 Scene II. The same. Plains near Angiers
 Scene III. The same.
 Scene IV. The same. The French King’s tent.

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Northampton. A Room in the Castle.
 Scene II. The same. A Room of State in the Palace.
 Scene III. The same. Before the castle.

 ACT V
 Scene I. Northampton. A Room in the Palace.
 Scene II. Near Saint Edmundsbury. The French Camp.
 Scene III. The same. The Field of Battle.
 Scene IV. The same. Another part of the same.
 Scene V. The same. The French camp.
 Scene VI. An open place in the neighborhood of Swinstead Abbey.
 Scene VII. The orchard of Swinstead Abbey.




Dramatis Personæ

KING JOHN.
PRINCE HENRY, son to King John; afterwards KING HENRY III.
ARTHUR, Duke of Brittany, nephew to King John.
EARL OF PEMBROKE.
EARL OF ESSEX.
EARL OF SALISBURY.
ROBERT BIGOT, Earl of Norfolk.
HUBERT DE BURGH, Chamberlain to the King.
ROBERT FAULCONBRIDGE, son to Sir Robert Faulconbridge.
The BASTARD, PHILIP FAULCONBRIDGE, his half-brother, bastard son to
King Richard I.
JAMES GURNEY, servant to Lady Faulconbridge.
PETER OF POMFRET, a prophet

KING PHILIP II., King of France.
LOUIS, the Dauphin; son to King Philip II.
DUKE OF AUSTRIA, also called Limoges.
MELUN, a French lord.
CHATILLION, Ambassador from France to King John.
CARDINAL PANDULPH, the Pope’s legate.

QUEEN ELEANOR, Mother to King John and Widow of King Henry II.
CONSTANCE, Mother to Arthur.
BLANCHE OF SPAIN, Daughter to Alphonso, King of Castile, and Niece to
King John.
LADY FAULCONBRIDGE, Mother to the Bastard and Robert Faulconbridge.

Lords, Citizens of Angiers, Sheriff, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers,
Executioners, Messengers and other Attendants.

SCENE: Sometimes in England, and sometimes in France.




ACT I


SCENE I. Northampton. A Room of State in the Palace.

Enter King John, Queen Eleanor, Pembroke, Essex, Salisbury and others
with Chatillion.

KING JOHN.
Now, say, Chatillion, what would France with us?

CHATILLION.
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
In my behaviour to the majesty,
The borrow’d majesty, of England here.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
A strange beginning: “borrow’d majesty”!

KING JOHN.
Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.

CHATILLION.
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother Geoffrey’s son,
Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim
To this fair island and the territories,
To Ireland, Poitiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
And put the same into young Arthur’s hand,
Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.

KING JOHN.
What follows if we disallow of this?

CHATILLION.
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.

KING JOHN.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
Controlment for controlment: so answer France.

CHATILLION.
Then take my king’s defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my embassy.

KING JOHN.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace.
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France,
For ere thou canst report, I will be there,
The thunder of my cannon shall be heard.
So, hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
And sullen presage of your own decay.—
An honourable conduct let him have.
Pembroke, look to ’t. Farewell, Chatillion.

[_Exeunt Chatillion and Pembroke._]

QUEEN ELEANOR.
What now, my son! Have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not cease
Till she had kindled France and all the world
Upon the right and party of her son?
This might have been prevented and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.

KING JOHN.
Our strong possession and our right for us.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Your strong possession much more than your right,
Or else it must go wrong with you and me:
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.

Enter a Sheriff, who whispers to Essex.

ESSEX.
My liege, here is the strangest controversy,
Come from the country to be judg’d by you,
That e’er I heard. Shall I produce the men?

KING JOHN.
Let them approach.

[_Exit Sheriff._]

Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
This expedition’s charge.

Enter Robert Faulconbridge and Philip, his Bastard brother.

What men are you?

BASTARD.
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman
Born in Northamptonshire, and eldest son,
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
A soldier by the honour-giving hand
Of Cœur-de-lion knighted in the field.

KING JOHN.
What art thou?

ROBERT.
The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.

KING JOHN.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then, it seems.

BASTARD.
Most certain of one mother, mighty king;
That is well known; and, as I think, one father.
But for the certain knowledge of that truth
I put you o’er to heaven and to my mother.
Of that I doubt, as all men’s children may.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Out on thee, rude man! Thou dost shame thy mother
And wound her honour with this diffidence.

BASTARD.
I, madam? No, I have no reason for it;
That is my brother’s plea, and none of mine;
The which if he can prove, he pops me out
At least from fair five hundred pound a year.
Heaven guard my mother’s honour and my land!

KING JOHN.
A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?

BASTARD.
I know not why, except to get the land.
But once he slander’d me with bastardy.
But whe’er I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mother’s head;
But that I am as well begot, my liege—
Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!—
Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
If old Sir Robert did beget us both
And were our father, and this son like him,
O old Sir Robert, father, on my knee
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!

KING JOHN.
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!

QUEEN ELEANOR.
He hath a trick of Cœur-de-lion’s face;
The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
Do you not read some tokens of my son
In the large composition of this man?

KING JOHN.
Mine eye hath well examined his parts
And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
What doth move you to claim your brother’s land?

BASTARD.
Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
With half that face would he have all my land:
A half-fac’d groat five hundred pound a year!

ROBERT.
My gracious liege, when that my father liv’d,
Your brother did employ my father much—

BASTARD.
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land.
Your tale must be how he employ’d my mother.

ROBERT.
And once dispatch’d him in an embassy
To Germany, there with the emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time.
Th’ advantage of his absence took the King
And in the meantime sojourn’d at my father’s;
Where how he did prevail I shame to speak;
But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself,
When this same lusty gentleman was got.
Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath’d
His lands to me, and took it, on his death
That this my mother’s son was none of his;
And if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
My father’s land, as was my father’s will.

KING JOHN.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate;
Your father’s wife did after wedlock bear him,
And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claim’d this son for his?
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world;
In sooth, he might; then, if he were my brother’s,
My brother might not claim him; nor your father,
Being none of his, refuse him. This concludes;
My mother’s son did get your father’s heir;
Your father’s heir must have your father’s land.

ROBERT.
Shall then my father’s will be of no force
To dispossess that child which is not his?

BASTARD.
Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
Than was his will to get me, as I think.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Whether hadst thou rather be: a Faulconbridge
And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
Or the reputed son of Cœur-de-lion,
Lord of thy presence and no land besides?

BASTARD.
Madam, and if my brother had my shape
And I had his, Sir Robert’s his, like him;
And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
My arms such eel-skins stuff’d, my face so thin
That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
Lest men should say “Look where three-farthings goes!”
And, to his shape, were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
I would give it every foot to have this face.
I would not be Sir Nob in any case.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
I like thee well. Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me?
I am a soldier and now bound to France.

BASTARD.
Brother, take you my land, I’ll take my chance.
Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
Yet sell your face for five pence and ’tis dear.
Madam, I’ll follow you unto the death.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.

BASTARD.
Our country manners give our betters way.

KING JOHN.
What is thy name?

BASTARD.
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun;
Philip, good old Sir Robert’s wife’s eldest son.

KING JOHN.
From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bearest.
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Arise Sir Richard and Plantagenet.

BASTARD.
Brother by th’ mother’s side, give me your hand.
My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
Now blessed be the hour, by night or day,
When I was got, Sir Robert was away!

QUEEN ELEANOR.
The very spirit of Plantagenet!
I am thy grandam, Richard; call me so.

BASTARD.
Madam, by chance but not by truth; what though?
Something about, a little from the right,
In at the window, or else o’er the hatch.
Who dares not stir by day must walk by night,
And have is have, however men do catch.
Near or far off, well won is still well shot,
And I am I, howe’er I was begot.

KING JOHN.
Go, Faulconbridge; now hast thou thy desire.
A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
For France, for France, for it is more than need.

BASTARD.
Brother, adieu, good fortune come to thee!
For thou wast got i’ th’ way of honesty.

[_Exeunt all but the Bastard._]

A foot of honour better than I was,
But many a many foot of land the worse.
Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
“Good den, Sir Richard!” “God-a-mercy, fellow!”
And if his name be George, I’ll call him Peter;
For new-made honour doth forget men’s names:
’Tis too respective and too sociable
For your conversion. Now your traveller,
He and his toothpick at my worship’s mess,
And when my knightly stomach is suffic’d,
Why then I suck my teeth and catechize
My picked man of countries: “My dear sir,”
Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin,
“I shall beseech you”—that is Question now;
And then comes Answer like an absey book:
“O sir,” says Answer “at your best command;
At your employment; at your service, sir.”
“No, sir,” says Question, “I, sweet sir, at yours.”
And so, ere Answer knows what Question would,
Saving in dialogue of compliment,
And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
The Pyrenean and the river Po,
It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society,
And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
For he is but a bastard to the time
That doth not smack of observation,
And so am I, whether I smack or no;
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age’s tooth,
Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
What woman-post is this? Hath she no husband
That will take pains to blow a horn before her?

Enter Lady Faulconbridge and James Gurney.

O me, ’tis my mother!—How now, good lady?
What brings you here to court so hastily?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
Where is that slave, thy brother? Where is he
That holds in chase mine honour up and down?

BASTARD.
My brother Robert, old Sir Robert’s son?
Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
Is it Sir Robert’s son that you seek so?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
Sir Robert’s son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
Sir Robert’s son. Why scorn’st thou at Sir Robert?
He is Sir Robert’s son, and so art thou.

BASTARD.
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?

GURNEY.
Good leave, good Philip.

BASTARD.
Philip?—sparrow!—James,
There’s toys abroad. Anon I’ll tell thee more.

[_Exit Gurney._]

Madam, I was not old Sir Robert’s son.
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Upon Good Friday, and ne’er broke his fast.
Sir Robert could do well—marry, to confess—
Could … get me. Sir Robert could not do it.
We know his handiwork. Therefore, good mother,
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?

BASTARD.
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
What! I am dubb’d! I have it on my shoulder.
But, mother, I am not Sir Robert’s son.
I have disclaim’d Sir Robert and my land;
Legitimation, name, and all is gone.
Then, good my mother, let me know my father—
Some proper man, I hope. Who was it, mother?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?

BASTARD.
As faithfully as I deny the devil.

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
King Richard Cœur-de-lion was thy father.
By long and vehement suit I was seduc’d
To make room for him in my husband’s bed.
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
Which was so strongly urg’d, past my defence.

BASTARD.
Now, by this light, were I to get again,
Madam, I would not wish a better father.
Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
And so doth yours. Your fault was not your folly.
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force
The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his princely heart from Richard’s hand.
He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
May easily win a woman’s. Ay, my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
When I was got, I’ll send his soul to hell.
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin;
And they shall say when Richard me begot,
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin.
Who says it was, he lies. I say ’twas not.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II


SCENE I. France. Before the walls of Angiers.

Enter, on one side, the  Archduke of Austria and Forces; on the other,
Philip King of France, Louis, Constance, Arthur and Forces.

LOUIS.
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
Richard, that robb’d the lion of his heart
And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
By this brave duke came early to his grave.
And, for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come
To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural uncle, English John.
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.

ARTHUR.
God shall forgive you Cœur-de-lion’s death
The rather that you give his offspring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war.
I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
But with a heart full of unstained love.
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.

LOUIS.
A noble boy. Who would not do thee right?

AUSTRIA.
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
As seal to this indenture of my love:
That to my home I will no more return,
Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
Together with that pale, that white-fac’d shore,
Whose foot spurns back the ocean’s roaring tides
And coops from other lands her islanders,
Even till that England, hedg’d in with the main,
That water-walled bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the west
Salute thee for her king; till then, fair boy,
Will I not think of home, but follow arms.

CONSTANCE.
O, take his mother’s thanks, a widow’s thanks,
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
To make a more requital to your love!

AUSTRIA.
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
In such a just and charitable war.

KING PHILIP.
Well then, to work; our cannon shall be bent
Against the brows of this resisting town.
Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
To cull the plots of best advantages.
We’ll lay before this town our royal bones,
Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen’s blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.

CONSTANCE.
Stay for an answer to your embassy,
Lest unadvis’d you stain your swords with blood.
My Lord Chatillion may from England bring
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.

Enter Chatillion.

KING PHILIP.
A wonder, lady! Lo, upon thy wish,
Our messenger Chatillion is arriv’d.
What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;
We coldly pause for thee; Chatillion, speak.

CHATILLION.
Then turn your forces from this paltry siege
And stir them up against a mightier task.
England, impatient of your just demands,
Hath put himself in arms. The adverse winds,
Whose leisure I have stay’d, have given him time
To land his legions all as soon as I;
His marches are expedient to this town,
His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
With him along is come the mother-queen,
An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife;
With her her niece, the Lady Blanche of Spain;
With them a bastard of the King’s deceas’d.
And all th’ unsettled humours of the land;
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With ladies’ faces and fierce dragons’ spleens,
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
To make a hazard of new fortunes here.
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
Than now the English bottoms have waft o’er
Did never float upon the swelling tide
To do offence and scathe in Christendom.

[_Drums beat within._]

The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance. They are at hand,
To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.

KING PHILIP.
How much unlook’d-for is this expedition!

AUSTRIA.
By how much unexpected, by so much
We must awake endeavour for defence,
For courage mounteth with occasion.
Let them be welcome, then; we are prepar’d.

Enter King John, Eleanor, Blanche, the Bastard, Pembroke, Lords and
Forces.

KING JOHN.
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
Our just and lineal entrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
Whiles we, God’s wrathful agent, do correct
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heaven.

KING PHILIP.
Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace.
England we love; and for that England’s sake
With burden of our armour here we sweat.
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far
That thou hast underwrought his lawful king,
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Outfaced infant state, and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
Look here upon thy brother Geoffrey’s face;
These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his:
This little abstract doth contain that large
Which died in Geoffrey, and the hand of time
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
That Geoffrey was thy elder brother born,
And this his son; England was Geoffrey’s right,
And this is Geoffrey’s. In the name of God,
How comes it then that thou art call’d a king,
When living blood doth in these temples beat,
Which owe the crown that thou o’ermasterest?

KING JOHN.
From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
To draw my answer from thy articles?

KING PHILIP.
From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
In any breast of strong authority,
To look into the blots and stains of right.
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy,
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.

KING JOHN.
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.

KING PHILIP.
Excuse it is to beat usurping down.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?

CONSTANCE.
Let me make answer: thy usurping son.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Out, insolent! Thy bastard shall be king,
That thou mayst be a queen, and check the world!

CONSTANCE.
My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband; and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geoffrey
Than thou and John in manners; being as like
As rain to water, or devil to his dam.
My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think
His father never was so true begot:
It cannot be, and if thou wert his mother.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
There’s a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.

CONSTANCE.
There’s a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.

AUSTRIA.
Peace!

BASTARD.
Hear the crier!

AUSTRIA.
What the devil art thou?

BASTARD.
One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
An he may catch your hide and you alone.
You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard.
I’ll smoke your skin-coat an I catch you right;
Sirrah, look to ’t; i’ faith I will, i’ faith.

BLANCHE.
O, well did he become that lion’s robe
That did disrobe the lion of that robe!

BASTARD.
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides’ shows upon an ass.
But, ass, I’ll take that burden from your back,
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.

AUSTRIA.
What cracker is this same that deafs our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?

KING PHILIP.
Louis, determine what we shall do straight.

LOUIS.
Women and fools, break off your conference.

KING PHILIP.
King John, this is the very sum of all:
England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee.
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?

KING JOHN.
My life as soon: I do defy thee, France.
Arthur of Brittany, yield thee to my hand;
And out of my dear love I’ll give thee more
Than e’er the coward hand of France can win.
Submit thee, boy.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Come to thy grandam, child.

CONSTANCE.
Do, child, go to it grandam, child.
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig.
There’s a good grandam.

ARTHUR.
Good my mother, peace!
I would that I were low laid in my grave.
I am not worth this coil that’s made for me.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.

CONSTANCE.
Now, shame upon you, whe’er she does or no!
His grandam’s wrongs, and not his mother’s shames,
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee.
Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be brib’d
To do him justice, and revenge on you.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!

CONSTANCE.
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth!
Call not me slanderer. Thou and thine usurp
The dominations, royalties, and rights
Of this oppressed boy. This is thy eldest son’s son,
Infortunate in nothing but in thee.
Thy sins are visited in this poor child;
The canon of the law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.

KING JOHN.
Bedlam, have done.

CONSTANCE.
I have but this to say,
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sin and her the plague
On this removed issue, plagued for her
And with her plague; her sin his injury
Her injury the beadle to her sin,
All punish’d in the person of this child,
And all for her. A plague upon her!

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
A will that bars the title of thy son.

CONSTANCE.
Ay, who doubts that? A will, a wicked will;
A woman’s will; a cankered grandam’s will!

KING PHILIP.
Peace, lady! Pause, or be more temperate.
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
To these ill-tuned repetitions.—
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
These men of Angiers. Let us hear them speak
Whose title they admit, Arthur’s or John’s.

Trumpet sounds. Enter Citizens upon the walls.

CITIZEN.
Who is it that hath warn’d us to the walls?

KING PHILIP.
’Tis France, for England.

KING JOHN.
England for itself.
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects—

KING PHILIP.
You loving men of Angiers, Arthur’s subjects,
Our trumpet call’d you to this gentle parle—

KING JOHN.
For our advantage; therefore hear us first.
These flags of France, that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your town,
Have hither march’d to your endamagement.
The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their iron indignation ’gainst your walls.
All preparation for a bloody siege
And merciless proceeding by these French
Confronts your city’s eyes, your winking gates;
And, but for our approach, those sleeping stones,
That as a waist doth girdle you about,
By the compulsion of their ordinance
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
But on the sight of us your lawful king,
Who painfully with much expedient march
Have brought a countercheck before your gates,
To save unscratch’d your city’s threatened cheeks,
Behold, the French, amaz’d, vouchsafe a parle;
And now, instead of bullets wrapp’d in fire,
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
To make a faithless error in your ears,
Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
And let us in, your king, whose labour’d spirits
Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
Craves harbourage within your city walls.

KING PHILIP.
When I have said, make answer to us both.
Lo, in this right hand, whose protection
Is most divinely vow’d upon the right
Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,
Son to the elder brother of this man,
And king o’er him and all that he enjoys.
For this down-trodden equity we tread
In warlike march these greens before your town,
Being no further enemy to you
Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
In the relief of this oppressed child
Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
To pay that duty which you truly owe
To him that owes it, namely, this young prince,
And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
Save in aspect, hath all offence seal’d up;
Our cannons’ malice vainly shall be spent
Against th’ invulnerable clouds of heaven;
And with a blessed and unvex’d retire,
With unhack’d swords and helmets all unbruis’d,
We will bear home that lusty blood again
Which here we came to spout against your town,
And leave your children, wives, and you, in peace.
But if you fondly pass our proffer’d offer,
’Tis not the roundure of your old-fac’d walls
Can hide you from our messengers of war,
Though all these English, and their discipline
Were harbour’d in their rude circumference.
Then, tell us, shall your city call us lord
In that behalf which we have challeng’d it?
Or shall we give the signal to our rage
And stalk in blood to our possession?

FIRST CITIZEN.
In brief, we are the King of England’s subjects.
For him, and in his right, we hold this town.

KING JOHN.
Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.

CITIZEN.
That can we not; but he that proves the King,
To him will we prove loyal. Till that time
Have we ramm’d up our gates against the world.

KING JOHN.
Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
And if not that, I bring you witnesses,
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England’s breed—

BASTARD.
Bastards and else.

KING JOHN.
To verify our title with their lives.

KING PHILIP.
As many and as well-born bloods as those—

BASTARD.
Some bastards too.

KING PHILIP.
Stand in his face to contradict his claim.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

KING JOHN.
Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
That to their everlasting residence,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet,
In dreadful trial of our kingdom’s king!

KING PHILIP.
Amen, Amen!—Mount, chevaliers! To arms!

BASTARD.
Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e’er since
Sits on ’s horseback at mine hostess’ door,
Teach us some fence! [_To Austria_.] Sirrah, were I at home,
At your den, sirrah, with your lioness,
I would set an ox-head to your lion’s hide,
And make a monster of you.

AUSTRIA.
Peace! No more.

BASTARD.
O, tremble, for you hear the lion roar.

KING JOHN.
Up higher to the plain; where we’ll set forth
In best appointment all our regiments.

BASTARD.
Speed, then, to take advantage of the field.

KING PHILIP.
It shall be so; and at the other hill
Command the rest to stand. God and our right!

[_Exeunt severally._]

Here, after excursions, enter a Herald of France with Trumpets, to the
gates.

FRENCH HERALD.
You men of Angiers, open wide your gates,
And let young Arthur, Duke of Brittany, in,
Who by the hand of France this day hath made
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Whose sons lie scatter’d on the bleeding ground.
Many a widow’s husband grovelling lies,
Coldly embracing the discolour’d earth;
And victory, with little loss, doth play
Upon the dancing banners of the French,
Who are at hand, triumphantly display’d,
To enter conquerors, and to proclaim
Arthur of Brittany England’s king and yours.

Enter English Herald with Trumpet.

ENGLISH HERALD.
Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells:
King John, your king and England’s, doth approach,
Commander of this hot malicious day.
Their armours, that march’d hence so silver-bright,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen’s blood;
There stuck no plume in any English crest
That is removed by a staff of France,
Our colours do return in those same hands
That did display them when we first march’d forth;
And, like a jolly troop of huntsmen, come
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes:
Open your gates and give the victors way.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Heralds, from off our towers, we might behold,
From first to last, the onset and retire
Of both your armies; whose equality
By our best eyes cannot be censured:
Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answer’d blows;
Strength match’d with strength, and power confronted power:
Both are alike, and both alike we like.
One must prove greatest: while they weigh so even,
We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

Enter on one side King John, Eleanor, Blanche, the Bastard and Forces;
on the other, King Philip, Louis, Austria and Forces.

KING JOHN.
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
Say, shall the current of our right run on,
Whose passage, vex’d with thy impediment,
Shall leave his native channel, and o’erswell
With course disturb’d even thy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silver water keep
A peaceful progress to the ocean?

KING PHILIP.
England, thou hast not sav’d one drop of blood
In this hot trial, more than we of France;
Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear,
That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
We’ll put thee down, ’gainst whom these arms we bear,
Or add a royal number to the dead,
Gracing the scroll that tells of this war’s loss
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.

BASTARD.
Ha, majesty! How high thy glory towers
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel;
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs;
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
In undetermin’d differences of kings.
Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
Cry havoc, kings! Back to the stained field,
You equal potents, fiery-kindled spirits!
Then let confusion of one part confirm
The other’s peace. Till then, blows, blood, and death!

KING JOHN.
Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?

KING PHILIP.
Speak, citizens, for England; who’s your king?

FIRST CITIZEN.
The King of England, when we know the king.

KING PHILIP.
Know him in us, that here hold up his right.

KING JOHN.
In us, that are our own great deputy,
And bear possession of our person here,
Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.

FIRST CITIZEN.
A greater power than we denies all this;
And till it be undoubted, we do lock
Our former scruple in our strong-barr’d gates:
Kings of our fear, until our fears, resolv’d,
Be by some certain king purg’d and depos’d.

BASTARD.
By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
And stand securely on their battlements
As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
Your royal presences be rul’d by me:
Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town:
By east and west let France and England mount
Their battering cannon charged to the mouths,
Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl’d down
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city:
I’d play incessantly upon these jades,
Even till unfenced desolation
Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
That done, dissever your united strengths,
And part your mingled colours once again;
Turn face to face, and bloody point to point;
Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth
Out of one side her happy minion,
To whom in favour she shall give the day,
And kiss him with a glorious victory.
How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
Smacks it not something of the policy?

KING JOHN.
Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers
And lay this Angiers even with the ground;
Then after fight who shall be king of it?

BASTARD.
An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
Being wrong’d as we are by this peevish town,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
As we will ours, against these saucy walls;
And when that we have dash’d them to the ground,
Why then defy each other, and pell-mell,
Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.

KING PHILIP.
Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?

KING JOHN.
We from the west will send destruction
Into this city’s bosom.

AUSTRIA.
I from the north.

KING PHILIP.
Our thunder from the south
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.

BASTARD.
O prudent discipline! From north to south,
Austria and France shoot in each other’s mouth:
I’ll stir them to it.—Come, away, away!

FIRST CITIZEN.
Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,
And I shall show you peace and fair-fac’d league;
Win you this city without stroke or wound;
Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds
That here come sacrifices for the field:
Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.

KING JOHN.
Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.

FIRST CITIZEN.
That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanche,
Is niece to England. Look upon the years
Of Louis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
Where should he find it fairer than in Blanche?
If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
Where should he find it purer than in Blanche?
If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanche?
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Is the young Dauphin every way complete.
If not complete of, say he is not she;
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
If want it be not that she is not he:
He is the half part of a blessed man,
Left to be finished by such a she;
And she a fair divided excellence,
Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.
O, two such silver currents, when they join
Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
And two such shores to two such streams made one,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
To these two princes, if you marry them.
This union shall do more than battery can
To our fast-closed gates; for at this match,
With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope,
And give you entrance. But without this match,
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
More free from motion; no, not Death himself
In mortal fury half so peremptory
As we to keep this city.

BASTARD.
Here’s a stay
That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
Out of his rags! Here’s a large mouth indeed,
That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas;
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
He speaks plain cannon, fire, and smoke, and bounce;
He gives the bastinado with his tongue;
Our ears are cudgell’d; not a word of his
But buffets better than a fist of France.
Zounds! I was never so bethump’d with words
Since I first call’d my brother’s father dad.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Son, list to this conjunction, make this match.
Give with our niece a dowry large enough,
For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
Thy now unsur’d assurance to the crown,
That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
I see a yielding in the looks of France;
Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their souls
Are capable of this ambition,
Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
Cool and congeal again to what it was.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Why answer not the double majesties
This friendly treaty of our threaten’d town?

KING PHILIP.
Speak England first, that hath been forward first
To speak unto this city. What say you?

KING JOHN.
If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
Can in this book of beauty read “I love,”
Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen.
For Anjou, and fair Touraine, Maine, Poitiers,
And all that we upon this side the sea—
Except this city now by us besieg’d—
Find liable to our crown and dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bed, and make her rich
In titles, honours, and promotions,
As she in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any princess of the world.

KING PHILIP.
What say’st thou, boy? Look in the lady’s face.

LOUIS.
I do, my lord, and in her eye I find
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
The shadow of myself form’d in her eye;
Which, being but the shadow of your son,
Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow.
I do protest I never lov’d myself
Till now infixed I beheld myself
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.

[_Whispers with Blanche._]

BASTARD.
[_Aside_.] Drawn in the flattering table of her eye!
Hang’d in the frowning wrinkle of her brow,
And quarter’d in her heart! He doth espy
Himself love’s traitor. This is pity now,
That, hang’d and drawn and quarter’d, there should be
In such a love so vile a lout as he.

BLANCHE.
My uncle’s will in this respect is mine.
If he see aught in you that makes him like,
That anything he sees, which moves his liking
I can with ease translate it to my will;
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
I will enforce it eas’ly to my love.
Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Than this: that nothing do I see in you,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge,
That I can find should merit any hate.

KING JOHN.
What say these young ones? What say you, my niece?

BLANCHE.
That she is bound in honour still to do
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.

KING JOHN.
Speak then, Prince Dauphin. Can you love this lady?

LOUIS.
Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;
For I do love her most unfeignedly.

KING JOHN.
Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
Poitiers, and Anjou, these five provinces,
With her to thee; and this addition more,
Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.—
Philip of France, if thou be pleas’d withal,
Command thy son and daughter to join hands.

KING PHILIP.
It likes us well.—Young princes, close your hands.

AUSTRIA.
And your lips too; for I am well assur’d
That I did so when I was first assur’d.

KING PHILIP.
Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,
Let in that amity which you have made;
For at Saint Mary’s chapel presently
The rites of marriage shall be solemniz’d.
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
I know she is not, for this match made up
Her presence would have interrupted much.
Where is she and her son? Tell me, who knows.

LOUIS.
She is sad and passionate at your highness’ tent.

KING PHILIP.
And, by my faith, this league that we have made
Will give her sadness very little cure.—
Brother of England, how may we content
This widow lady? In her right we came;
Which we, God knows, have turn’d another way,
To our own vantage.

KING JOHN.
We will heal up all;
For we’ll create young Arthur Duke of Brittany,
And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town
We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance.
Some speedy messenger bid her repair
To our solemnity. I trust we shall,
If not fill up the measure of her will,
Yet in some measure satisfy her so
That we shall stop her exclamation.
Go we, as well as haste will suffer us,
To this unlook’d-for, unprepared pomp.

[_Exeunt all but the Bastard. The Citizens retire from the walls._]

BASTARD.
Mad world! mad kings! mad composition!
John, to stop Arthur’s title in the whole,
Hath willingly departed with a part;
And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
As God’s own soldier, rounded in the ear
With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,
That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
Who having no external thing to lose
But the word “maid,” cheats the poor maid of that,
That smooth-fac’d gentleman, tickling commodity,
Commodity, the bias of the world,
The world, who of itself is peised well,
Made to run even upon even ground,
Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
This sway of motion, this commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent.
And this same bias, this commodity,
This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
Clapp’d on the outward eye of fickle France,
Hath drawn him from his own determin’d aid,
From a resolv’d and honourable war,
To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
And why rail I on this commodity?
But for because he hath not woo’d me yet.
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
When his fair angels would salute my palm;
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail
And say there is no sin but to be rich;
And being rich, my virtue then shall be
To say there is no vice but beggary.
Since kings break faith upon commodity,
Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee!

[_Exit._]




ACT III


SCENE I. France. The French King’s tent.

Enter Constance, Arthur and Salisbury.

CONSTANCE.
Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?
False blood to false blood join’d? Gone to be friends?
Shall Louis have Blanche, and Blanche those provinces?
It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard;
Be well advis’d, tell o’er thy tale again.
It cannot be; thou dost but say ’tis so.
I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
Is but the vain breath of a common man.
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man.
I have a king’s oath to the contrary.
Thou shalt be punish’d for thus frighting me,
For I am sick and capable of fears,
Oppress’d with wrongs, and therefore full of fears,
A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,
A woman, naturally born to fears,
And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,
With my vex’d spirits I cannot take a truce,
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
Like a proud river peering o’er his bounds?
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
Then speak again—not all thy former tale,
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.

SALISBURY.
As true as I believe you think them false
That give you cause to prove my saying true.

CONSTANCE.
O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,
And let belief and life encounter so
As doth the fury of two desperate men
Which in the very meeting fall and die.
Louis marry Blanche? O boy, then where art thou?
France friend with England? What becomes of me?
Fellow, be gone. I cannot brook thy sight.
This news hath made thee a most ugly man.

SALISBURY.
What other harm have I, good lady, done,
But spoke the harm that is by others done?

CONSTANCE.
Which harm within itself so heinous is,
As it makes harmful all that speak of it.

ARTHUR.
I do beseech you, madam, be content.

CONSTANCE.
If thou, that bid’st me be content, wert grim,
Ugly, and sland’rous to thy mother’s womb,
Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
Patch’d with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
I would not care, I then would be content,
For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
Become thy great birth, nor deserve a crown.
But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,
Nature and Fortune join’d to make thee great.
Of Nature’s gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,
And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,
She is corrupted, chang’d, and won from thee;
She adulterates hourly with thine uncle John,
And with her golden hand hath pluck’d on France
To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,
And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!
Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
Envenom him with words, or get thee gone,
And leave those woes alone which I alone
Am bound to underbear.

SALISBURY.
Pardon me, madam,
I may not go without you to the Kings.

CONSTANCE.
Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee.
I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.
To me and to the state of my great grief
Let kings assemble; for my grief’s so great
That no supporter but the huge firm earth
Can hold it up. Here I and sorrows sit;
Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.

[_Seats herself on the ground._]

Enter King John, King Philip, Louis, Blanche, Eleanor, Bastard, Austria
and attendants.

KING PHILIP.
’Tis true, fair daughter; and this blessed day
Ever in France shall be kept festival.
To solemnize this day the glorious sun
Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,
Turning with splendour of his precious eye
The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold.
The yearly course that brings this day about
Shall never see it but a holy day.

CONSTANCE.
[_Rising_.] A wicked day, and not a holy day!
What hath this day deserv’d? What hath it done
That it in golden letters should be set
Among the high tides in the calendar?
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child
Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross’d.
But on this day let seamen fear no wrack;
No bargains break that are not this day made;
This day, all things begun come to ill end,
Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!

KING PHILIP.
By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause
To curse the fair proceedings of this day.
Have I not pawn’d to you my majesty?

CONSTANCE.
You have beguil’d me with a counterfeit
Resembling majesty, which, being touch’d and tried,
Proves valueless. You are forsworn, forsworn.
You came in arms to spill mine enemies’ blood,
But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.
The grappling vigour and rough frown of war
Is cold in amity and painted peace,
And our oppression hath made up this league.
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjur’d kings!
A widow cries; be husband to me, heavens!
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,
Set armed discord ’twixt these perjur’d kings!
Hear me, O, hear me!

AUSTRIA.
Lady Constance, peace!

CONSTANCE.
War! war! no peace! Peace is to me a war.
O Limoges, O Austria, thou dost shame
That bloody spoil. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward!
Thou little valiant, great in villainy!
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
Thou Fortune’s champion that dost never fight
But when her humorous ladyship is by
To teach thee safety! Thou art perjur’d too,
And sooth’st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
A ramping fool, to brag, and stamp, and swear
Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,
Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side?
Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength?
And dost thou now fall over to my foes?
Thou wear a lion’s hide! Doff it for shame,
And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA.
O that a man should speak those words to me!

BASTARD.
And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA.
Thou dar’st not say so, villain, for thy life.

BASTARD.
And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.

KING JOHN.
We like not this. Thou dost forget thyself.

KING PHILIP.
Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.

Enter Pandulph.

PANDULPH.
Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
Do in his name religiously demand
Why thou against the church, our holy mother,
So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce
Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop
Of Canterbury, from that holy see.
This, in our foresaid holy father’s name,
Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.

KING JOHN.
What earthy name to interrogatories
Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name
So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous,
To charge me to an answer, as the pope.
Tell him this tale; and from the mouth of England
Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
But as we under God are supreme head,
So, under Him, that great supremacy,
Where we do reign, we will alone uphold
Without th’ assistance of a mortal hand.
So tell the pope, all reverence set apart
To him and his usurp’d authority.

KING PHILIP.
Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.

KING JOHN.
Though you and all the kings of Christendom
Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
Dreading the curse that money may buy out;
And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself;
Though you and all the rest, so grossly led,
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
Against the pope, and count his friends my foes.

PANDULPH.
Then, by the lawful power that I have,
Thou shalt stand curs’d and excommunicate;
And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
From his allegiance to an heretic;
And meritorious shall that hand be call’d,
Canonized and worshipp’d as a saint,
That takes away by any secret course
Thy hateful life.

CONSTANCE.
O, lawful let it be
That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
Good father Cardinal, cry thou amen
To my keen curses; for without my wrong
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.

PANDULPH.
There’s law and warrant, lady, for my curse.

CONSTANCE.
And for mine too. When law can do no right,
Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong.
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,
For he that holds his kingdom holds the law;
Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,
How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?

PANDULPH.
Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
And raise the power of France upon his head,
Unless he do submit himself to Rome.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Look’st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand.

CONSTANCE
Look to that, devil, lest that France repent
And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.

AUSTRIA.
King Philip, listen to the cardinal.

BASTARD.
And hang a calf’s-skin on his recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA.
Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
Because—

BASTARD.
Your breeches best may carry them.

KING JOHN.
Philip, what say’st thou to the cardinal?

CONSTANCE.
What should he say, but as the cardinal?

LOUIS.
Bethink you, father; for the difference
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
Or the light loss of England for a friend.
Forgo the easier.

BLANCHE.
That’s the curse of Rome.

CONSTANCE.
O Louis, stand fast! The devil tempts thee here
In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.

BLANCHE.
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
But from her need.

CONSTANCE.
O, if thou grant my need,
Which only lives but by the death of faith,
That need must needs infer this principle:
That faith would live again by death of need.
O then tread down my need, and faith mounts up;
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!

KING JOHN.
The King is mov’d, and answers not to this.

CONSTANCE.
O, be remov’d from him, and answer well!

AUSTRIA.
Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.

BASTARD.
Hang nothing but a calf’s-skin, most sweet lout.

KING PHILIP.
I am perplex’d, and know not what to say.

PANDULPH.
What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,
If thou stand excommunicate and curs’d?

KING PHILIP.
Good reverend father, make my person yours,
And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Married in league, coupled and link’d together
With all religious strength of sacred vows;
The latest breath that gave the sound of words
Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves;
And even before this truce, but new before,
No longer than we well could wash our hands
To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
Heaven knows, they were besmear’d and overstain’d
With slaughter’s pencil, where revenge did paint
The fearful difference of incensed kings.
And shall these hands, so lately purg’d of blood,
So newly join’d in love, so strong in both,
Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
Play fast and loose with faith? So jest with heaven,
Make such unconstant children of ourselves,
As now again to snatch our palm from palm,
Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
And make a riot on the gentle brow
Of true sincerity? O, holy sir,
My reverend father, let it not be so!
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blest
To do your pleasure and continue friends.

PANDULPH.
All form is formless, order orderless,
Save what is opposite to England’s love.
Therefore to arms! Be champion of our church,
Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse,
A mother’s curse, on her revolting son.
France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.

KING PHILIP.
I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.

PANDULPH.
So mak’st thou faith an enemy to faith,
And like a civil war sett’st oath to oath,
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow
First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform’d,
That is, to be the champion of our church.
What since thou swor’st is sworn against thyself
And may not be performed by thyself,
For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
Is not amiss when it is truly done;
And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
The truth is then most done not doing it.
The better act of purposes mistook
Is to mistake again; though indirect,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
Within the scorched veins of one new-burn’d.
It is religion that doth make vows kept,
But thou hast sworn against religion
By what thou swear’st against the thing thou swear’st,
And mak’st an oath the surety for thy truth
Against an oath. The truth thou art unsure
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn,
Else what a mockery should it be to swear?
But thou dost swear only to be forsworn,
And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear.
Therefore thy latter vows against thy first
Is in thyself rebellion to thyself;
And better conquest never canst thou make
Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
Against these giddy loose suggestions,
Upon which better part our prayers come in,
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
The peril of our curses light on thee,
So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
But in despair die under the black weight.

AUSTRIA.
Rebellion, flat rebellion!

BASTARD.
Will’t not be?
Will not a calf’s-skin stop that mouth of thine?

LOUIS.
Father, to arms!

BLANCHE.
Upon thy wedding-day?
Against the blood that thou hast married?
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughter’d men?
Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
O husband, hear me! Ay, alack, how new
Is “husband” in my mouth! Even for that name,
Which till this time my tongue did ne’er pronounce,
Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
Against mine uncle.

CONSTANCE.
O, upon my knee,
Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
Forethought by heaven!

BLANCHE.
Now shall I see thy love. What motive may
Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?

CONSTANCE.
That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
His honour. O, thine honour, Louis, thine honour!

LOUIS.
I muse your majesty doth seem so cold,
When such profound respects do pull you on.

PANDULPH.
I will denounce a curse upon his head.

KING PHILIP.
Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.

CONSTANCE.
O fair return of banish’d majesty!

QUEEN ELEANOR.
O foul revolt of French inconstancy!

KING JOHN.
France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.

BASTARD.
Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,
Is it as he will? Well, then, France shall rue.

BLANCHE.
The sun’s o’ercast with blood. Fair day, adieu!
Which is the side that I must go withal?
I am with both, each army hath a hand;
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whirl asunder and dismember me.
Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive.
Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose;
Assured loss before the match be play’d.

LOUIS.
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.

BLANCHE.
There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.

KING JOHN.
Cousin, go draw our puissance together.

[_Exit Bastard._]

France, I am burn’d up with inflaming wrath;
A rage whose heat hath this condition,
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
The blood, and dearest-valu’d blood, of France.

KING PHILIP.
Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire.
Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.

KING JOHN.
No more than he that threats. To arms let’s hie!

[_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE II. The same. Plains near Angiers

Alarums. Excursions. Enter the Bastard with Austria’s head.

BASTARD.
Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;
Some airy devil hovers in the sky
And pours down mischief. Austria’s head lie there,
While Philip breathes.

Enter King John, Arthur and Hubert.

KING JOHN.
Hubert, keep this boy.—Philip, make up.
My mother is assailed in our tent,
And ta’en, I fear.

BASTARD.
My lord, I rescu’d her;
Her highness is in safety, fear you not.
But on, my liege; for very little pains
Will bring this labour to an happy end.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same.

Alarums, Excursions, Retreat. Enter King John, Eleanor, Arthur, the
Bastard, Hubert and Lords.

KING JOHN.
[_To Eleanor_] So shall it be; your grace shall stay behind
So strongly guarded.
[_To Arthur_] Cousin, look not sad.
Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will
As dear be to thee as thy father was.

ARTHUR.
O, this will make my mother die with grief!

KING JOHN.
[_To the Bastard_] Cousin, away for England! Haste before,
And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
Of hoarding abbots; imprison’d angels
Set at liberty. The fat ribs of peace
Must by the hungry now be fed upon.
Use our commission in his utmost force.

BASTARD.
Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back
When gold and silver becks me to come on.
I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray,
If ever I remember to be holy,
For your fair safety; so, I kiss your hand.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Farewell, gentle cousin.

KING JOHN.
Coz, farewell.

[_Exit Bastard._]

QUEEN ELEANOR.
Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.

[_She takes Arthur aside._]

KING JOHN.
Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
We owe thee much! Within this wall of flesh
There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love.
And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,
But I will fit it with some better tune.
By heaven, Hubert, I am almost asham’d
To say what good respect I have of thee.

HUBERT.
I am much bounden to your majesty.

KING JOHN.
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
But thou shalt have; and creep time ne’er so slow,
Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.
I had a thing to say, but let it go.
The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton and too full of gauds
To give me audience. If the midnight bell
Did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth,
Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
If this same were a churchyard where we stand,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs;
Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
Had bak’d thy blood and made it heavy, thick,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that idiot, laughter, keep men’s eyes
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
A passion hateful to my purposes;
Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words;
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts.
But, ah, I will not! Yet I love thee well;
And, by my troth, I think thou lov’st me well.

HUBERT.
So well that what you bid me undertake,
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
By heaven, I would do it.

KING JOHN.
Do not I know thou wouldst?
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
On yon young boy. I’ll tell thee what, my friend,
He is a very serpent in my way;
And wheresoe’er this foot of mine doth tread,
He lies before me. Dost thou understand me?
Thou art his keeper.

HUBERT.
And I’ll keep him so
That he shall not offend your majesty.

KING JOHN.
Death.

HUBERT.
My lord?

KING JOHN.
A grave.

HUBERT.
He shall not live.

KING JOHN.
Enough.
I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee.
Well, I’ll not say what I intend for thee.
Remember. Madam, fare you well.
I’ll send those powers o’er to your majesty.

QUEEN ELEANOR.
My blessing go with thee!

KING JOHN.
For England, cousin, go.
Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. The French King’s tent.

Enter King Philip, Louis, Pandulph and Attendants.

KING PHILIP.
So, by a roaring tempest on the flood
A whole armado of convicted sail
Is scattered and disjoin’d from fellowship.

PANDULPH.
Courage and comfort! All shall yet go well.

KING PHILIP.
What can go well, when we have run so ill.
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Arthur ta’en prisoner? Divers dear friends slain?
And bloody England into England gone,
O’erbearing interruption, spite of France?

LOUIS.
What he hath won, that hath he fortified.
So hot a speed with such advice dispos’d,
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
Doth want example. Who hath read or heard
Of any kindred action like to this?

KING PHILIP.
Well could I bear that England had this praise,
So we could find some pattern of our shame.

Enter Constance.

Look who comes here! A grave unto a soul;
Holding th’ eternal spirit, against her will,
In the vile prison of afflicted breath.
I prithee, lady, go away with me.

CONSTANCE.
Lo, now, now see the issue of your peace!

KING PHILIP.
Patience, good lady! Comfort, gentle Constance!

CONSTANCE.
No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
But that which ends all counsel, true redress,
Death, death, O amiable, lovely death!
Thou odoriferous stench, sound rottenness!
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
And I will kiss thy detestable bones
And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,
And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
And be a carrion monster like thyself.
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil’st,
And buss thee as thy wife. Misery’s love,
O, come to me!

KING PHILIP.
O fair affliction, peace!

CONSTANCE.
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry.
O, that my tongue were in the thunder’s mouth!
Then with a passion would I shake the world;
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
Which cannot hear a lady’s feeble voice,
Which scorns a modern invocation.

PANDULPH.
Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.

CONSTANCE.
Thou art not holy to belie me so.
I am not mad. This hair I tear is mine;
My name is Constance; I was Geoffrey’s wife;
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.
I am not mad; I would to heaven I were!
For then ’tis like I should forget myself.
O, if I could, what grief should I forget!
Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
And thou shalt be canoniz’d, cardinal;
For, being not mad but sensible of grief,
My reasonable part produces reason
How I may be deliver’d of these woes,
And teaches me to kill or hang myself.
If I were mad, I should forget my son,
Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.
I am not mad; too well, too well I feel
The different plague of each calamity.

KING PHILIP.
Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note
In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
Where but by a chance a silver drop hath fall’n,
Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends
Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
Sticking together in calamity.

CONSTANCE.
To England, if you will.

KING PHILIP.
Bind up your hairs.

CONSTANCE.
Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it?
I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud,
“O that these hands could so redeem my son,
As they have given these hairs their liberty!”
But now I envy at their liberty,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
And, father cardinal, I have heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven.
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature born.
But now will canker sorrow eat my bud
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
As dim and meagre as an ague’s fit,
And so he’ll die; and, rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
I shall not know him. Therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.

PANDULPH.
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.

CONSTANCE.
He talks to me that never had a son.

KING PHILIP.
You are as fond of grief as of your child.

CONSTANCE.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
Then have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fare you well. Had you such a loss as I,
I could give better comfort than you do.
I will not keep this form upon my head,

[_She unbinds her hair._]

When there is such disorder in my wit.
O Lord! My boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!
My widow-comfort, and my sorrows’ cure!

[_Exit._]

KING PHILIP.
I fear some outrage, and I’ll follow her.

[_Exit._]

LOUIS.
There’s nothing in this world can make me joy.
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
And bitter shame hath spoil’d the sweet world’s taste,
That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.

PANDULPH.
Before the curing of a strong disease,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
The fit is strongest; evils that take leave
On their departure most of all show evil.
What have you lost by losing of this day?

LOUIS.
All days of glory, joy, and happiness.

PANDULPH.
If you had won it, certainly you had.
No, no; when Fortune means to men most good,
She looks upon them with a threat’ning eye.
’Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost
In this which he accounts so clearly won.
Are not you griev’d that Arthur is his prisoner?

LOUIS.
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.

PANDULPH.
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;
For even the breath of what I mean to speak
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Thy foot to England’s throne; and therefore mark.
John hath seiz’d Arthur; and it cannot be
That, whiles warm life plays in that infant’s veins,
The misplac’d John should entertain an hour,
One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
A sceptre snatch’d with an unruly hand
Must be boisterously maintain’d as gain’d.
And he that stands upon a slipp’ry place
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.
That John may stand, then, Arthur needs must fall.
So be it, for it cannot be but so.

LOUIS.
But what shall I gain by young Arthur’s fall?

PANDULPH.
You, in the right of Lady Blanche your wife,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

LOUIS.
And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.

PANDULPH.
How green you are and fresh in this old world!
John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;
For he that steeps his safety in true blood
Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.
This act so evilly borne shall cool the hearts
Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal,
That none so small advantage shall step forth
To check his reign, but they will cherish it;
No natural exhalation in the sky,
No scope of nature, no distemper’d day,
No common wind, no customed event,
But they will pluck away his natural cause
And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,
Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.

LOUIS.
Maybe he will not touch young Arthur’s life,
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.

PANDULPH.
O, sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
Of all his people shall revolt from him,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
Out of the bloody fingers’ ends of John.
Methinks I see this hurly all on foot;
And, O, what better matter breeds for you
Than I have nam’d! The bastard Faulconbridge
Is now in England ransacking the church,
Offending charity. If but a dozen French
Were there in arms, they would be as a call
To train ten thousand English to their side,
Or as a little snow, tumbled about,
Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin,
Go with me to the King. ’Tis wonderful
What may be wrought out of their discontent,
Now that their souls are topful of offence.
For England go. I will whet on the King.

LOUIS.
Strong reasons makes strong actions. Let us go.
If you say ay, the King will not say no.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV


SCENE I. Northampton. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Hubert and two Executioners.

HUBERT.
Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
Within the arras. When I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair. Be heedful. Hence, and watch.

FIRST EXECUTIONER.
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.

HUBERT.
Uncleanly scruples! Fear not you; look to’t.

[_Exeunt Executioners._]

Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.

Enter Arthur.

ARTHUR.
Good morrow, Hubert.

HUBERT.
Good morrow, little prince.

ARTHUR.
As little prince, having so great a title
To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.

HUBERT.
Indeed, I have been merrier.

ARTHUR.
Mercy on me!
Methinks nobody should be sad but I.
Yet, I remember, when I was in France,
Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
So I were out of prison, and kept sheep,
I should be as merry as the day is long;
And so I would be here, but that I doubt
My uncle practises more harm to me.
He is afraid of me, and I of him.
Is it my fault that I was Geoffrey’s son?
No, indeed, is’t not; and I would to heaven
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.

HUBERT.
[_Aside_.] If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead.
Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.

ARTHUR.
Are you sick, Hubert? You look pale today.
In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
That I might sit all night and watch with you.
I warrant I love you more than you do me.

HUBERT.
[_Aside_.] His words do take possession of my bosom.
Read here, young Arthur.

[_Showing a paper._]

[_Aside_.] How now, foolish rheum!
Turning dispiteous torture out of door!
I must be brief, lest resolution drop
Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.—
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?

ARTHUR.
Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect.
Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?

HUBERT.
Young boy, I must.

ARTHUR.
And will you?

HUBERT.
And I will.

ARTHUR.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
I knit my handkercher about your brows,
The best I had, a princess wrought it me,
And I did never ask it you again;
And with my hand at midnight held your head,
And, like the watchful minutes to the hour,
Still and anon cheer’d up the heavy time,
Saying ’What lack you?” and “Where lies your grief?”
Or “What good love may I perform for you?”
Many a poor man’s son would have lien still
And ne’er have spoke a loving word to you;
But you at your sick service had a prince.
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Do, an if you will.
If heaven be pleas’d that you must use me ill,
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes?
These eyes that never did nor never shall
So much as frown on you?

HUBERT.
I have sworn to do it.
And with hot irons must I burn them out.

ARTHUR.
Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
Approaching near these eyes would drink my tears
And quench his fiery indignation
Even in the matter of mine innocence;
Nay, after that, consume away in rust,
But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer’d iron?
An if an angel should have come to me
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
I would not have believ’d him. No tongue but Hubert’s.

HUBERT.
[_Stamps_.] Come forth.

Enter Executioners with cords, irons, &c.

Do as I bid you do.

ARTHUR.
O, save me, Hubert, save me! My eyes are out
Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.

HUBERT.
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.

ARTHUR.
Alas, what need you be so boist’rous-rough?
I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still.
For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound!
Nay, hear me, Hubert! Drive these men away,
And I will sit as quiet as a lamb;
I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word,
Nor look upon the iron angerly.
Thrust but these men away, and I’ll forgive you,
Whatever torment you do put me to.

HUBERT.
Go, stand within; let me alone with him.

FIRST EXECUTIONER.
I am best pleas’d to be from such a deed.

[_Exeunt Executioners._]

ARTHUR.
Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
He hath a stern look but a gentle heart.
Let him come back, that his compassion may
Give life to yours.

HUBERT.
Come, boy, prepare yourself.

ARTHUR.
Is there no remedy?

HUBERT.
None, but to lose your eyes.

ARTHUR.
O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours,
A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
Any annoyance in that precious sense!
Then, feeling what small things are boisterous there,
Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.

HUBERT.
Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.

ARTHUR.
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes.
Let me not hold my tongue. Let me not, Hubert,
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
So I may keep mine eyes. O, spare mine eyes,
Though to no use but still to look on you!
Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold
And would not harm me.

HUBERT.
I can heat it, boy.

ARTHUR.
No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief,
Being create for comfort, to be us’d
In undeserv’d extremes. See else yourself.
There is no malice in this burning coal;
The breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out
And strew’d repentant ashes on his head.

HUBERT.
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.

ARTHUR.
An if you do, you will but make it blush
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert.
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes;
And, like a dog that is compell’d to fight,
Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on.
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Deny their office. Only you do lack
That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.

HUBERT.
Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
Yet I am sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
With this same very iron to burn them out.

ARTHUR.
O, now you look like Hubert! All this while
You were disguised.

HUBERT.
Peace; no more. Adieu.
Your uncle must not know but you are dead.
I’ll fill these dogged spies with false reports.
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee.

ARTHUR.
O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.

HUBERT.
Silence; no more. Go closely in with me.
Much danger do I undergo for thee.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A Room of State in the Palace.

Enter King John, crowned, Pembroke, Salisbury and other Lords. The King
takes his State.

KING JOHN.
Here once again we sit, once again crown’d,
And look’d upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.

PEMBROKE.
This “once again,” but that your highness pleas’d,
Was once superfluous. You were crown’d before,
And that high royalty was ne’er pluck’d off,
The faiths of men ne’er stained with revolt;
Fresh expectation troubled not the land
With any long’d-for change or better state.

SALISBURY.
Therefore, to be possess’d with double pomp,
To guard a title that was rich before,
To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
To throw a perfume on the violet,
To smooth the ice, or add another hue
Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.

PEMBROKE.
But that your royal pleasure must be done,
This act is as an ancient tale new told,
And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.

SALISBURY.
In this the antique and well-noted face
Of plain old form is much disfigured;
And, like a shifted wind unto a sail,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Startles and frights consideration,
Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected,
For putting on so new a fashion’d robe.

PEMBROKE.
When workmen strive to do better than well,
They do confound their skill in covetousness;
And oftentimes excusing of a fault
Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse,
As patches set upon a little breach
Discredit more in hiding of the fault
Than did the fault before it was so patch’d.

SALISBURY.
To this effect, before you were new-crown’d,
We breath’d our counsel; but it pleas’d your highness
To overbear it, and we are all well pleas’d,
Since all and every part of what we would
Doth make a stand at what your highness will.

KING JOHN.
Some reasons of this double coronation
I have possess’d you with, and think them strong;
And more, more strong, when lesser is my fear,
I shall indue you with. Meantime but ask
What you would have reform’d that is not well,
And well shall you perceive how willingly
I will both hear and grant you your requests.

PEMBROKE.
Then I, as one that am the tongue of these,
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
Both for myself and them, but, chief of all,
Your safety, for the which myself and them
Bend their best studies, heartily request
Th’ enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
To break into this dangerous argument:
If what in rest you have in right you hold,
Why then your fears, which, as they say, attend
The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up
Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days
With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth
The rich advantage of good exercise?
That the time’s enemies may not have this
To grace occasions, let it be our suit
That you have bid us ask his liberty;
Which for our goods we do no further ask
Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
Counts it your weal he have his liberty.

KING JOHN.
Let it be so. I do commit his youth
To your direction.

Enter Hubert.

Hubert, what news with you?

[_Taking him apart._]

PEMBROKE.
This is the man should do the bloody deed.
He show’d his warrant to a friend of mine.
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
Doth show the mood of a much troubled breast;
And I do fearfully believe ’tis done
What we so fear’d he had a charge to do.

SALISBURY.
The colour of the King doth come and go
Between his purpose and his conscience,
Like heralds ’twixt two dreadful battles set.
His passion is so ripe it needs must break.

PEMBROKE.
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
The foul corruption of a sweet child’s death.

KING JOHN.
We cannot hold mortality’s strong hand.
Good lords, although my will to give is living,
The suit which you demand is gone and dead.
He tells us Arthur is deceas’d tonight.

SALISBURY.
Indeed, we fear’d his sickness was past cure.

PEMBROKE.
Indeed, we heard how near his death he was,
Before the child himself felt he was sick.
This must be answer’d either here or hence.

KING JOHN.
Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
Have I commandment on the pulse of life?

SALISBURY.
It is apparent foul-play; and ’tis shame
That greatness should so grossly offer it.
So thrive it in your game, and so, farewell.

PEMBROKE.
Stay yet, Lord Salisbury. I’ll go with thee
And find th’ inheritance of this poor child,
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
That blood which ow’d the breadth of all this isle
Three foot of it doth hold. Bad world the while!
This must not be thus borne; this will break out
To all our sorrows, and ere long, I doubt.

[_Exeunt Lords._]

KING JOHN.
They burn in indignation. I repent.
There is no sure foundation set on blood,
No certain life achiev’d by others’ death.

Enter a Messenger.

A fearful eye thou hast. Where is that blood
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
So foul a sky clears not without a storm.
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?

MESSENGER.
From France to England. Never such a power
For any foreign preparation
Was levied in the body of a land.
The copy of your speed is learn’d by them;
For when you should be told they do prepare,
The tidings comes that they are all arriv’d.

KING JOHN.
O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
Where hath it slept? Where is my mother’s care,
That such an army could be drawn in France,
And she not hear of it?

MESSENGER.
My liege, her ear
Is stopp’d with dust. The first of April died
Your noble mother; and as I hear, my lord,
The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
Three days before. But this from rumour’s tongue
I idly heard; if true or false I know not.

KING JOHN.
Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
O, make a league with me, till I have pleas’d
My discontented peers! What! Mother dead?
How wildly then walks my estate in France!
Under whose conduct came those powers of France
That thou for truth giv’st out are landed here?

MESSENGER.
Under the Dauphin.

KING JOHN.
Thou hast made me giddy
With these in tidings.

Enter the Bastard and Peter of Pomfret.

Now, what says the world
To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
My head with more ill news, for it is full.

BASTARD.
But if you be afeard to hear the worst,
Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head.

KING JOHN.
Bear with me, cousin, for I was amaz’d
Under the tide, but now I breathe again
Aloft the flood, and can give audience
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.

BASTARD.
How I have sped among the clergymen
The sums I have collected shall express.
But as I travaill’d hither through the land,
I find the people strangely fantasied;
Possess’d with rumours, full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear.
And here’s a prophet that I brought with me
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
With many hundreds treading on his heels;
To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes,
That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
Your highness should deliver up your crown.

KING JOHN.
Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?

PETER OF POMFRET.
Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.

KING JOHN.
Hubert, away with him; imprison him.
And on that day at noon, whereon he says
I shall yield up my crown, let him be hang’d.
Deliver him to safety, and return,
For I must use thee.

[_Exit Hubert with Peter._]

O my gentle cousin,
Hear’st thou the news abroad, who are arriv’d?

BASTARD.
The French, my lord. Men’s mouths are full of it.
Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury,
With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,
And others more, going to seek the grave
Of Arthur, whom they say is kill’d tonight
On your suggestion.

KING JOHN.
Gentle kinsman, go
And thrust thyself into their companies.
I have a way to will their loves again.
Bring them before me.

BASTARD.
I will seek them out.

KING JOHN.
Nay, but make haste, the better foot before!
O, let me have no subject enemies
When adverse foreigners affright my towns
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion!
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
And fly like thought from them to me again.

BASTARD.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.

[_Exit Bastard._]

KING JOHN.
Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman!
Go after him; for he perhaps shall need
Some messenger betwixt me and the peers;
And be thou he.

MESSENGER.
With all my heart, my liege.

[_Exit._]

KING JOHN.
My mother dead!

Enter Hubert.

HUBERT.
My lord, they say five moons were seen tonight—
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
The other four in wondrous motion.

KING JOHN.
Five moons!

HUBERT.
Old men and beldams in the streets
Do prophesy upon it dangerously.
Young Arthur’s death is common in their mouths.
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads
And whisper one another in the ear;
And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer’s wrist,
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus,
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a tailor’s news;
Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French
That were embattailed and rank’d in Kent.
Another lean unwash’d artificer
Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur’s death.

KING JOHN.
Why seek’st thou to possess me with these fears?
Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur’s death?
Thy hand hath murder’d him. I had a mighty cause
To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.

HUBERT.
No had, my lord! Why, did you not provoke me?

KING JOHN.
It is the curse of kings to be attended
By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
To break within the bloody house of life,
And, on the winking of authority
To understand a law, to know the meaning
Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
More upon humour than advis’d respect.

HUBERT.
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.

KING JOHN.
O, when the last account ’twixt heaven and earth
Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
Witness against us to damnation!
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
A fellow by the hand of nature mark’d,
Quoted and sign’d to do a deed of shame,
This murder had not come into my mind.
But taking note of thy abhorr’d aspect,
Finding thee fit for bloody villainy,
Apt, liable to be employ’d in danger,
I faintly broke with thee of Arthur’s death;
And thou, to be endeared to a king,
Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.

HUBERT.
My lord—

KING JOHN.
Hadst thou but shook thy head or made pause
When I spake darkly what I purpos’d,
Or turn’d an eye of doubt upon my face,
As bid me tell my tale in express words,
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me.
But thou didst understand me by my signs
And didst in signs again parley with sin;
Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent,
And consequently thy rude hand to act
The deed which both our tongues held vile to name.
Out of my sight, and never see me more!
My nobles leave me, and my state is brav’d,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers.
Nay, in the body of the fleshly land,
This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
Hostility and civil tumult reigns
Between my conscience and my cousin’s death.

HUBERT.
Arm you against your other enemies,
I’ll make a peace between your soul and you.
Young Arthur is alive. This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
Within this bosom never enter’d yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought;
And you have slander’d nature in my form,
Which, howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
Than to be butcher of an innocent child.

KING JOHN.
Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
And make them tame to their obedience!
Forgive the comment that my passion made
Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind,
And foul imaginary eyes of blood
Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
O, answer not, but to my closet bring
The angry lords with all expedient haste.
I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. Before the castle.

Enter Arthur on the walls.

ARTHUR.
The wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
There’s few or none do know me, If they did,
This ship-boy’s semblance hath disguis’d me quite.
I am afraid; and yet I’ll venture it.
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
I’ll find a thousand shifts to get away.
As good to die and go, as die and stay.

[_Leaps down._]

O me, my uncle’s spirit is in these stones.
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!

[_Dies._]

Enter Pembroke, Salisbury and Bigot.

SALISBURY.
Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury;
It is our safety, and we must embrace
This gentle offer of the perilous time.

PEMBROKE.
Who brought that letter from the cardinal?

SALISBURY.
The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
Whose private with me of the Dauphin’s love
Is much more general than these lines import.

BIGOT.
Tomorrow morning let us meet him then.

SALISBURY.
Or rather then set forward; for ’twill be
Two long days’ journey, lords, or ere we meet.

Enter the Bastard.

BASTARD.
Once more today well met, distemper’d lords!
The King by me requests your presence straight.

SALISBURY.
The King hath dispossess’d himself of us.
We will not line his thin bestained cloak
With our pure honours, nor attend the foot
That leaves the print of blood where’er it walks.
Return and tell him so. We know the worst.

BASTARD.
Whate’er you think, good words, I think, were best.

SALISBURY.
Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.

BASTARD.
But there is little reason in your grief;
Therefore ’twere reason you had manners now.

PEMBROKE.
Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.

BASTARD.
’Tis true, to hurt his master, no man’s else.

SALISBURY.
This is the prison. What is he lies here?

[_Seeing Arthur._]

PEMBROKE.
O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.

SALISBURY.
Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.

BIGOT.
Or, when he doom’d this beauty to a grave,
Found it too precious-princely for a grave.

SALISBURY.
Sir Richard, what think you? Have you beheld,
Or have you read or heard, or could you think,
Or do you almost think, although you see,
That you do see? Could thought, without this object,
Form such another? This is the very top,
The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
Of murder’s arms. This is the bloodiest shame,
The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
That ever wall-ey’d wrath or staring rage
Presented to the tears of soft remorse.

PEMBROKE.
All murders past do stand excus’d in this.
And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To the yet unbegotten sin of times;
And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.

BASTARD.
It is a damned and a bloody work;
The graceless action of a heavy hand,
If that it be the work of any hand.

SALISBURY.
If that it be the work of any hand?
We had a kind of light what would ensue.
It is the shameful work of Hubert’s hand,
The practice and the purpose of the King,
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
And breathing to his breathless excellence
The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
Till I have set a glory to this hand,
By giving it the worship of revenge.

PEMBROKE and BIGOT.
Our souls religiously confirm thy words.

Enter Hubert.

HUBERT.
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.
Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.

SALISBURY.
O, he is bold and blushes not at death.
Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!

HUBERT.
I am no villain.

SALISBURY.
Must I rob the law?

[_Drawing his sword._]

BASTARD.
Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again.

SALISBURY.
Not till I sheathe it in a murderer’s skin.

HUBERT.
Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say;
By heaven, I think my sword’s as sharp as yours.
I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
Your worth, your greatness, and nobility.

BIGOT.
Out, dunghill! Dar’st thou brave a nobleman?

HUBERT.
Not for my life. But yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an emperor.

SALISBURY.
Thou art a murderer.

HUBERT.
Do not prove me so.
Yet I am none. Whose tongue soe’er speaks false,
Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.

PEMBROKE.
Cut him to pieces.

BASTARD.
Keep the peace, I say.

SALISBURY.
Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.

BASTARD.
Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
I’ll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime,
Or I’ll so maul you and your toasting-iron
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.

BIGOT.
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Second a villain and a murderer?

HUBERT.
Lord Bigot, I am none.

BIGOT.
Who kill’d this prince?

HUBERT.
’Tis not an hour since I left him well.
I honour’d him, I lov’d him, and will weep
My date of life out for his sweet life’s loss.

SALISBURY.
Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
For villainy is not without such rheum;
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
Like rivers of remorse and innocency.
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
Th’ uncleanly savours of a slaughterhouse;
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.

BIGOT.
Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!

PEMBROKE.
There tell the King he may inquire us out.

[_Exeunt Lords._]

BASTARD.
Here’s a good world! Knew you of this fair work?
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
Art thou damn’d, Hubert.

HUBERT.
Do but hear me, sir.

BASTARD.
Ha! I’ll tell thee what;
Thou’rt damn’d as black—nay, nothing is so black;
Thou art more deep damn’d than Prince Lucifer.
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.

HUBERT.
Upon my soul—

BASTARD.
If thou didst but consent
To this most cruel act, do but despair;
And if thou want’st a cord, the smallest thread
That ever spider twisted from her womb
Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself,
Put but a little water in a spoon
And it shall be as all the ocean,
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
I do suspect thee very grievously.

HUBERT.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me!
I left him well.

BASTARD.
Go, bear him in thine arms.
I am amaz’d, methinks, and lose my way
Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
How easy dost thou take all England up!
From forth this morsel of dead royalty,
The life, the right, and truth of all this realm
Is fled to heaven; and England now is left
To tug and scamble, and to part by th’ teeth
The unow’d interest of proud-swelling state.
Now for the bare-pick’d bone of majesty
Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace.
Now powers from home and discontents at home
Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits,
As doth a raven on a sick-fall’n beast,
The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
And follow me with speed. I’ll to the King.
A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V


SCENE I. Northampton. A Room in the Palace.

Enter King John, Pandulph with the crown, and Attendants.

KING JOHN.
Thus have I yielded up into your hand
The circle of my glory.

PANDULPH.
[_Giving King John the crown._]
Take again
From this my hand, as holding of the pope,
Your sovereign greatness and authority.

KING JOHN.
Now keep your holy word. Go meet the French,
And from his holiness use all your power
To stop their marches ’fore we are inflam’d.
Our discontented counties do revolt;
Our people quarrel with obedience,
Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.
This inundation of mistemper’d humour
Rests by you only to be qualified.
Then pause not; for the present time’s so sick
That present med’cine must be minist’red
Or overthrow incurable ensues.

PANDULPH.
It was my breath that blew this tempest up,
Upon your stubborn usage of the pope;
But since you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war
And make fair weather in your blust’ring land.
On this Ascension-day, remember well,
Upon your oath of service to the pope,
Go I to make the French lay down their arms.

[_Exit._]

KING JOHN.
Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet
Say that before Ascension-day at noon
My crown I should give off? Even so I have.
I did suppose it should be on constraint;
But, heaven be thank’d, it is but voluntary.

Enter the Bastard.

BASTARD.
All Kent hath yielded. Nothing there holds out
But Dover Castle. London hath receiv’d,
Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers.
Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
To offer service to your enemy;
And wild amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends.

KING JOHN.
Would not my lords return to me again
After they heard young Arthur was alive?

BASTARD.
They found him dead and cast into the streets,
An empty casket, where the jewel of life
By some damn’d hand was robb’d and ta’en away.

KING JOHN.
That villain Hubert told me he did live.

BASTARD.
So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.
But wherefore do you droop? Why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought;
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye.
Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
Threaten the threat’ner, and outface the brow
Of bragging horror. So shall inferior eyes,
That borrow their behaviours from the great,
Grow great by your example and put on
The dauntless spirit of resolution.
Away, and glister like the god of war
When he intendeth to become the field.
Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
And fright him there? And make him tremble there?
O, let it not be said! Forage, and run
To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him ere he come so nigh.

KING JOHN.
The legate of the pope hath been with me,
And I have made a happy peace with him;
And he hath promis’d to dismiss the powers
Led by the Dauphin.

BASTARD.
O inglorious league!
Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
Send fair-play orders and make compromise,
Insinuation, parley, and base truce
To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy,
A cocker’d silken wanton, brave our fields,
And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,
Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms!
Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace;
Or if he do, let it at least be said
They saw we had a purpose of defence.

KING JOHN.
Have thou the ordering of this present time.

BASTARD.
Away, then, with good courage! Yet, I know
Our party may well meet a prouder foe.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Near Saint Edmundsbury. The French Camp.

Enter, in arms, Louis, Salisbury, Melun, Pembroke, Bigot and soldiers.

LOUIS.
My Lord Melun, let this be copied out,
And keep it safe for our remembrance.
Return the precedent to these lords again;
That, having our fair order written down,
Both they and we, perusing o’er these notes,
May know wherefore we took the sacrament,
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.

SALISBURY.
Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear
A voluntary zeal and an unurg’d faith
To your proceedings; yet believe me, prince,
I am not glad that such a sore of time
Should seek a plaster by contemn’d revolt,
And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
By making many. O, it grieves my soul
That I must draw this metal from my side
To be a widow-maker! O, and there
Where honourable rescue and defence
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
But such is the infection of the time,
That, for the health and physic of our right,
We cannot deal but with the very hand
Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
And is’t not pity, O my grieved friends,
That we, the sons and children of this isle,
Were born to see so sad an hour as this;
Wherein we step after a stranger, march
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
Her enemies’ ranks? I must withdraw and weep
Upon the spot of this enforced cause,
To grace the gentry of a land remote,
And follow unacquainted colours here.
What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
That Neptune’s arms, who clippeth thee about,
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself
And grapple thee unto a pagan shore,
Where these two Christian armies might combine
The blood of malice in a vein of league,
And not to spend it so unneighbourly!

LOUIS.
A noble temper dost thou show in this;
And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
O, what a noble combat hast thou fought
Between compulsion and a brave respect!
Let me wipe off this honourable dew
That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.
My heart hath melted at a lady’s tears,
Being an ordinary inundation;
But this effusion of such manly drops,
This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,
Startles mine eyes and makes me more amaz’d
Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
Figur’d quite o’er with burning meteors.
Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
And with a great heart heave away this storm.
Commend these waters to those baby eyes
That never saw the giant world enrag’d,
Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,
Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
Into the purse of rich prosperity
As Louis himself.—So, nobles, shall you all,
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
And even there, methinks, an angel spake.

Enter Pandulph.

Look, where the holy legate comes apace,
To give us warrant from the hand of heaven,
And on our actions set the name of right
With holy breath.

PANDULPH.
Hail, noble prince of France!
The next is this: King John hath reconcil’d
Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in,
That so stood out against the holy church,
The great metropolis and see of Rome.
Therefore thy threat’ning colours now wind up,
And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
That, like a lion foster’d up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace
And be no further harmful than in show.

LOUIS.
Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back.
I am too high-born to be propertied,
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful serving-man and instrument
To any sovereign state throughout the world.
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
Between this chastis’d kingdom and myself,
And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
And now ’tis far too huge to be blown out
With that same weak wind which enkindled it.
You taught me how to know the face of right,
Acquainted me with interest to this land,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart;
And come ye now to tell me John hath made
His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
After young Arthur, claim this land for mine;
And, now it is half-conquer’d, must I back
Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
Am I Rome’s slave? What penny hath Rome borne,
What men provided, what munition sent,
To underprop this action? Is’t not I
That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
And such as to my claim are liable,
Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
Have I not heard these islanders shout out
_Vive le Roi!_ as I have bank’d their towns?
Have I not here the best cards for the game
To win this easy match play’d for a crown?
And shall I now give o’er the yielded set?
No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.

PANDULPH.
You look but on the outside of this work.

LOUIS.
Outside or inside, I will not return
Till my attempt so much be glorified
As to my ample hope was promised
Before I drew this gallant head of war,
And cull’d these fiery spirits from the world,
To outlook conquest and to win renown
Even in the jaws of danger and of death.

[_Trumpet sounds._]

What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?

Enter the Bastard, attended.

BASTARD.
According to the fair play of the world,
Let me have audience; I am sent to speak,
My holy lord of Milan, from the King
I come to learn how you have dealt for him;
And, as you answer, I do know the scope
And warrant limited unto my tongue.

PANDULPH.
The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,
And will not temporize with my entreaties;
He flatly says he’ll not lay down his arms.

BASTARD.
By all the blood that ever fury breath’d,
The youth says well. Now hear our English king,
For thus his royalty doth speak in me:
He is prepar’d, and reason too he should.
This apish and unmannerly approach,
This harness’d masque and unadvised revel,
This unhair’d sauciness and boyish troops,
The King doth smile at; and is well prepar’d
To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
From out the circle of his territories.
That hand which had the strength, even at your door,
To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
To lie like pawns lock’d up in chests and trunks,
To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
Even at the crying of your nation’s crow,
Thinking this voice an armed Englishman;
Shall that victorious hand be feebled here
That in your chambers gave you chastisement?
No! Know the gallant monarch is in arms
And like an eagle o’er his aery towers
To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.—
And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
Of your dear mother England, blush for shame!
For your own ladies and pale-visag’d maids
Like Amazons come tripping after drums,
Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
To fierce and bloody inclination.

LOUIS.
There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;
We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well;
We hold our time too precious to be spent
With such a brabbler.

PANDULPH.
Give me leave to speak.

BASTARD.
No, I will speak.

LOUIS.
We will attend to neither.
Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war,
Plead for our interest and our being here.

BASTARD.
Indeed, your drums, being beaten, will cry out;
And so shall you, being beaten. Do but start
And echo with the clamour of thy drum,
And even at hand a drum is ready brac’d
That shall reverberate all as loud as thine.
Sound but another, and another shall,
As loud as thine, rattle the welkin’s ear
And mock the deep-mouth’d thunder. For at hand,
Not trusting to this halting legate here,
Whom he hath us’d rather for sport than need,
Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits
A bare-ribb’d death, whose office is this day
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.

LOUIS.
Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.

BASTARD.
And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. The Field of Battle.

Alarums. Enter King John and Hubert.

KING JOHN.
How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.

HUBERT.
Badly, I fear. How fares your majesty?

KING JOHN.
This fever that hath troubled me so long
Lies heavy on me. O, my heart is sick!

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,
Desires your majesty to leave the field
And send him word by me which way you go.

KING JOHN.
Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.

MESSENGER.
Be of good comfort; for the great supply
That was expected by the Dauphin here
Are wrack’d three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.
This news was brought to Richard but even now.
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.

KING JOHN.
Ay me, this tyrant fever burns me up
And will not let me welcome this good news.
Set on toward Swinstead. To my litter straight.
Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. Another part of the same.

Enter Salisbury, Pembroke and Bigot.

SALISBURY.
I did not think the King so stor’d with friends.

PEMBROKE.
Up once again; put spirit in the French.
If they miscarry, we miscarry too.

SALISBURY.
That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,
In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.

PEMBROKE.
They say King John, sore sick, hath left the field.

Enter Melun wounded, and led by Soldiers.

MELUN.
Lead me to the revolts of England here.

SALISBURY.
When we were happy we had other names.

PEMBROKE.
It is the Count Melun.

SALISBURY.
Wounded to death.

MELUN.
Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold;
Unthread the rude eye of rebellion
And welcome home again discarded faith.
Seek out King John and fall before his feet;
For if the French be lords of this loud day,
He means to recompense the pains you take
By cutting off your heads. Thus hath he sworn,
And I with him, and many more with me,
Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;
Even on that altar where we swore to you
Dear amity and everlasting love.

SALISBURY.
May this be possible? May this be true?

MELUN.
Have I not hideous death within my view,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away even as a form of wax
Resolveth from his figure ’gainst the fire?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
Why should I then be false, since it is true
That I must die here and live hence by truth?
I say again, if Louis do win the day,
He is forsworn if e’er those eyes of yours
Behold another day break in the east.
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
Already smokes about the burning crest
Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied sun,
Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
Paying the fine of rated treachery
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,
If Louis by your assistance win the day.
Commend me to one Hubert, with your king;
The love of him, and this respect besides,
For that my grandsire was an Englishman,
Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence
From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
In peace, and part this body and my soul
With contemplation and devout desires.

SALISBURY.
We do believe thee, and beshrew my soul
But I do love the favour and the form
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
We will untread the steps of damned flight,
And like a bated and retired flood,
Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
Stoop low within those bounds we have o’erlook’d,
And calmly run on in obedience
Even to our ocean, to our great King John.
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence;
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Right in thine eye.—Away, my friends! New flight,
And happy newness, that intends old right.

[_Exeunt, leading off Melun._]

SCENE V. The same. The French camp.

Enter Louis and his train.

LOUIS.
The sun of heaven, methought, was loath to set,
But stay’d, and made the western welkin blush,
When the English measure backward their own ground
In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needless shot,
After such bloody toil, we bid good night,
And wound our tott’ring colours clearly up,
Last in the field, and almost lords of it!

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Where is my prince, the Dauphin?

LOUIS.
Here. What news?

MESSENGER.
The Count Melun is slain; the English lords
By his persuasion are again fall’n off,
And your supply, which you have wish’d so long,
Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.

LOUIS.
Ah, foul shrewd news! Beshrew thy very heart!
I did not think to be so sad tonight
As this hath made me. Who was he that said
King John did fly an hour or two before
The stumbling night did part our weary powers?

MESSENGER.
Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.

LOUIS.
Well, keep good quarter and good care tonight.
The day shall not be up so soon as I,
To try the fair adventure of tomorrow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. An open place in the neighborhood of Swinstead Abbey.

Enter the Bastard and Hubert, meeting.

HUBERT.
Who’s there? Speak, ho! Speak quickly, or I shoot.

BASTARD.
A friend. What art thou?

HUBERT.
Of the part of England.

BASTARD.
Whither dost thou go?

HUBERT.
What’s that to thee? Why may I not demand
Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?

BASTARD.
Hubert, I think.

HUBERT.
Thou hast a perfect thought.
I will, upon all hazards, well believe
Thou art my friend, that know’st my tongue so well.
Who art thou?

BASTARD.
Who thou wilt. And if thou please,
Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
I come one way of the Plantagenets.

HUBERT.
Unkind remembrance! Thou and eyeless night
Have done me shame. Brave soldier, pardon me,
That any accent breaking from thy tongue
Should ’scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.

BASTARD.
Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?

HUBERT.
Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,
To find you out.

BASTARD.
Brief, then; and what’s the news?

HUBERT.
O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.

BASTARD.
Show me the very wound of this ill news.
I am no woman, I’ll not swoon at it.

HUBERT.
The King, I fear, is poison’d by a monk.
I left him almost speechless, and broke out
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time,
Than if you had at leisure known of this.

BASTARD.
How did he take it? Who did taste to him?

HUBERT.
A monk, I tell you, a resolved villain,
Whose bowels suddenly burst out. The King
Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.

BASTARD.
Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?

HUBERT.
Why, know you not? The lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company;
At whose request the King hath pardon’d them,
And they are all about his majesty.

BASTARD.
Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
And tempt us not to bear above our power!
I’ll tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night,
Passing these flats, are taken by the tide;
These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;
Myself, well mounted, hardly have escap’d.
Away, before. Conduct me to the King;
I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The orchard of Swinstead Abbey.

Enter Prince Henry, Salisbury and Bigot.

PRINCE HENRY.
It is too late. The life of all his blood
Is touch’d corruptibly, and his pure brain,
Which some suppose the soul’s frail dwelling-house,
Doth, by the idle comments that it makes,
Foretell the ending of mortality.

Enter Pembroke.

PEMBROKE.
His Highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
That, being brought into the open air,
It would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poison which assaileth him.

PRINCE HENRY.
Let him be brought into the orchard here.
Doth he still rage?

[_Exit Bigot._]

PEMBROKE.
He is more patient
Than when you left him; even now he sung.

PRINCE HENRY.
O vanity of sickness! Fierce extremes
In their continuance will not feel themselves.
Death, having prey’d upon the outward parts,
Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of strange fantasies,
Which, in their throng and press to that last hold,
Confound themselves. ’Tis strange that death should sing.
I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan,
Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death
And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
His soul and body to their lasting rest.

SALISBURY.
Be of good comfort, prince; for you are born
To set a form upon that indigest
Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.

Enter Bigot and Attendants, who bring in King John in a chair.

KING JOHN.
Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room
It would not out at windows nor at doors.
There is so hot a summer in my bosom
That all my bowels crumble up to dust.
I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen
Upon a parchment, and against this fire
Do I shrink up.

PRINCE HENRY.
How fares your majesty?

KING JOHN.
Poison’d, ill fare; dead, forsook, cast off,
And none of you will bid the winter come
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
Nor let my kingdom’s rivers take their course
Through my burn’d bosom, nor entreat the north
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait,
And so ingrateful, you deny me that.

PRINCE HENRY.
O, that there were some virtue in my tears
That might relieve you!

KING JOHN.
The salt in them is hot.
Within me is a hell; and there the poison
Is, as a fiend, confin’d to tyrannize
On unreprievable condemned blood.

Enter the Bastard.

BASTARD.
O, I am scalded with my violent motion
And spleen of speed to see your majesty!

KING JOHN.
O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye.
The tackle of my heart is crack’d and burn’d,
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
Are turned to one thread, one little hair.
My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered;
And then all this thou seest is but a clod
And module of confounded royalty.

BASTARD.
The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
Where God He knows how we shall answer him;
For in a night the best part of my power,
As I upon advantage did remove,
Were in the Washes all unwarily
Devoured by the unexpected flood.

[_The King dies._]

SALISBURY.
You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
My liege! My lord!—But now a king, now thus.

PRINCE HENRY.
Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
When this was now a king, and now is clay?

BASTARD.
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
To do the office for thee of revenge,
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
As it on earth hath been thy servant still.
Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,
Where be your powers? Show now your mended faiths,
And instantly return with me again,
To push destruction and perpetual shame
Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
The Dauphin rages at our very heels.

SALISBURY.
It seems you know not, then, so much as we.
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,
And brings from him such offers of our peace
As we with honour and respect may take,
With purpose presently to leave this war.

BASTARD.
He will the rather do it when he sees
Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.

SALISBURY.
Nay, ’tis in a manner done already,
For many carriages he hath dispatch’d
To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
To the disposing of the cardinal,
With whom yourself, myself, and other lords,
If you think meet, this afternoon will post
To consummate this business happily.

BASTARD.
Let it be so. And you, my noble prince,
With other princes that may best be spar’d,
Shall wait upon your father’s funeral.

PRINCE HENRY.
At Worcester must his body be interr’d;
For so he will’d it.

BASTARD.
Thither shall it, then,
And happily may your sweet self put on
The lineal state and glory of the land!
To whom, with all submission, on my knee,
I do bequeath my faithful services
And true subjection everlastingly.

SALISBURY.
And the like tender of our love we make,
To rest without a spot for evermore.

PRINCE HENRY.
I have a kind soul that would give you thanks
And knows not how to do it but with tears.

BASTARD.
O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
This England never did, nor never shall,
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
But when it first did help to wound itself.
Now these her princes are come home again,
Come the three corners of the world in arms
And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
If England to itself do rest but true.

[_Exeunt._]




THE TRAGEDY OF JULIUS CAESAR




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Rome. A street
 Scene II. The same. A public place
 Scene III. The same. A street

 ACT II
 Scene I. Rome. Brutus’ orchard
 Scene II. A room in Caesar’s palace
 Scene III. A street near the Capitol
 Scene IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus

 ACT III
 Scene I. Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting
 Scene II. The same. The Forum
 Scene III. The same. A street

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A room in Antony’s house
 Scene II. Before Brutus’ tent, in the camp near Sardis
 Scene III. Within the tent of Brutus

 ACT V
 Scene I. The plains of Philippi
 Scene II. The same. The field of battle
 Scene III. Another part of the field
 Scene IV. Another part of the field
 Scene V. Another part of the field




 Dramatis Personæ


JULIUS CAESAR
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, Triumvir after his death.
MARCUS ANTONIUS,    ”    ”     ”
M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS,   ”    ”     ”
CICERO, PUBLIUS, POPILIUS LENA, Senators.
MARCUS BRUTUS, Conspirator against Caesar.
CASSIUS, ”    ”     ”
CASCA,   ”    ”     ”
TREBONIUS,     ”    ”     ”
LIGARIUS,”    ”     ”
DECIUS BRUTUS, ”    ”     ”
METELLUS CIMBER,     ”    ”     ”
CINNA,   ”    ”     ”
FLAVIUS, tribune
MARULLUS, tribune
ARTEMIDORUS, a Sophist of Cnidos.
A Soothsayer
CINNA, a poet.
Another Poet.
LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, young CATO, and VOLUMNIUS, Friends to
Brutus and Cassius.
VARRO, CLITUS, CLAUDIUS, STRATO, LUCIUS, DARDANIUS, Servants to Brutus
PINDARUS, Servant to Cassius

CALPHURNIA, wife to Caesar
PORTIA, wife to Brutus

The Ghost of Caesar

Senators, Citizens, Soldiers, Commoners, Messengers, and Servants.

SCENE: Rome, the conspirators’ camp near Sardis, and the plains of
Philippi.




ACT I

SCENE I. Rome. A street.


Enter Flavius, Marullus and a throng of Citizens.

FLAVIUS.
Hence! home, you idle creatures, get you home.
Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
Being mechanical, you ought not walk
Upon a labouring day without the sign
Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?

CARPENTER.
Why, sir, a carpenter.

MARULLUS.
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
You, sir, what trade are you?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as you would say, a
cobbler.

MARULLUS.
But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.

COBBLER.
A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience, which is
indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.

MARULLUS.
What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?

COBBLER.
Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me; yet, if you be out, sir, I
can mend you.

MARULLUS.
What mean’st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy fellow!

COBBLER.
Why, sir, cobble you.

FLAVIUS.
Thou art a cobbler, art thou?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl; I meddle with no
tradesman’s matters, nor women’s matters, but withal I am indeed, sir,
a surgeon to old shoes: when they are in great danger, I recover them.
As proper men as ever trod upon neat’s leather have gone upon my
handiwork.

FLAVIUS.
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself into more work. But
indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar, and to rejoice in his
triumph.

MARULLUS.
Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome,
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climb’d up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way,
That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.

FLAVIUS.
Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.

[_Exeunt Citizens._]

See whether their basest metal be not mov’d;
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
This way will I. Disrobe the images,
If you do find them deck’d with ceremonies.

MARULLUS.
May we do so?
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.

FLAVIUS.
It is no matter; let no images
Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about
And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers pluck’d from Caesar’s wing
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men,
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A public place.

Enter, in procession, with music, Caesar; Antony, for the course;
Calphurnia, Portia, Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius and Casca; a great
crowd following, among them a Soothsayer.

CAESAR.
Calphurnia.

CASCA.
Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.

[_Music ceases._]

CAESAR.
Calphurnia.

CALPHURNIA.
Here, my lord.

CAESAR.
Stand you directly in Antonius’ way,
When he doth run his course. Antonius.

ANTONY.
Caesar, my lord?

CAESAR.
Forget not in your speed, Antonius,
To touch Calphurnia; for our elders say,
The barren, touched in this holy chase,
Shake off their sterile curse.

ANTONY.
I shall remember.
When Caesar says “Do this,” it is perform’d.

CAESAR.
Set on; and leave no ceremony out.

[_Music._]

SOOTHSAYER.
Caesar!

CAESAR.
Ha! Who calls?

CASCA.
Bid every noise be still; peace yet again!

[_Music ceases._]

CAESAR.
Who is it in the press that calls on me?
I hear a tongue shriller than all the music,
Cry “Caesar”! Speak. Caesar is turn’d to hear.

SOOTHSAYER.
Beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
What man is that?

BRUTUS.
A soothsayer bids you beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
Set him before me; let me see his face.

CASSIUS.
Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.

CAESAR.
What say’st thou to me now? Speak once again.

SOOTHSAYER.
Beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
He is a dreamer; let us leave him. Pass.

[_Sennet. Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius._]

CASSIUS.
Will you go see the order of the course?

BRUTUS.
Not I.

CASSIUS.
I pray you, do.

BRUTUS.
I am not gamesome: I do lack some part
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;
I’ll leave you.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, I do observe you now of late:
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
And show of love as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.

BRUTUS.
Cassius,
Be not deceived: if I have veil’d my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
Of late with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself,
Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved
(Among which number, Cassius, be you one)
Nor construe any further my neglect,
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.

CASSIUS.
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion;
By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?

BRUTUS.
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
But by reflection, by some other thing.

CASSIUS.
’Tis just:
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirrors as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
(Except immortal Caesar) speaking of Brutus,
And groaning underneath this age’s yoke,
Have wish’d that noble Brutus had his eyes.

BRUTUS.
Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself
For that which is not in me?

CASSIUS.
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear;
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:
Were I a common laugher, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protester; if you know
That I do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
And after scandal them; or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting,
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.

[_Flourish and shout._]

BRUTUS.
What means this shouting? I do fear the people
Choose Caesar for their king.

CASSIUS.
Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.

BRUTUS.
I would not, Cassius; yet I love him well,
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
Set honour in one eye and death i’ the other,
And I will look on both indifferently;
For let the gods so speed me as I love
The name of honour more than I fear death.

CASSIUS.
I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favour.
Well, honour is the subject of my story.
I cannot tell what you and other men
Think of this life; but, for my single self,
I had as lief not be as live to be
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar; so were you;
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter’s cold as well as he:
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me, “Dar’st thou, Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point?” Upon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bade him follow: so indeed he did.
The torrent roar’d, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point propos’d,
Caesar cried, “Help me, Cassius, or I sink!”
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
Is now become a god; and Cassius is
A wretched creature, and must bend his body,
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him I did mark
How he did shake: ’tis true, this god did shake:
His coward lips did from their colour fly,
And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
Did lose his lustre. I did hear him groan:
Ay, and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
Alas, it cried, “Give me some drink, Titinius,”
As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me,
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world,
And bear the palm alone.

[_Shout. Flourish._]

BRUTUS.
Another general shout?
I do believe that these applauses are
For some new honours that are heap’d on Caesar.

CASSIUS.
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about
To find ourselves dishonourable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates:
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
“Brutus” and “Caesar”: what should be in that “Caesar”?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with ’em,
“Brutus” will start a spirit as soon as “Caesar.”
Now in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art sham’d!
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
When went there by an age since the great flood,
But it was fam’d with more than with one man?
When could they say, till now, that talk’d of Rome,
That her wide walls encompass’d but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
When there is in it but one only man.
O, you and I have heard our fathers say,
There was a Brutus once that would have brook’d
Th’ eternal devil to keep his state in Rome,
As easily as a king!

BRUTUS.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
What you would work me to, I have some aim:
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not, so with love I might entreat you,
Be any further mov’d. What you have said,
I will consider; what you have to say
I will with patience hear; and find a time
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
Than to repute himself a son of Rome
Under these hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us.

CASSIUS.
I am glad that my weak words
Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.

Enter Caesar and his Train.

BRUTUS.
The games are done, and Caesar is returning.

CASSIUS.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note today.

BRUTUS.
I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,
The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow,
And all the rest look like a chidden train:
Calphurnia’s cheek is pale; and Cicero
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol,
Being cross’d in conference by some senators.

CASSIUS.
Casca will tell us what the matter is.

CAESAR.
Antonius.

ANTONY.
Caesar?

CAESAR.
Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights:
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;
He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.

ANTONY.
Fear him not, Caesar; he’s not dangerous;
He is a noble Roman and well given.

CAESAR.
Would he were fatter! But I fear him not:
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great observer, and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music.
Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort
As if he mock’d himself and scorn’d his spirit
That could be mov’d to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart’s ease
Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be fear’d
Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.

[_Exeunt Caesar and his Train. Casca stays._]

CASCA.
You pull’d me by the cloak; would you speak with me?

BRUTUS.
Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanc’d today,
That Caesar looks so sad.

CASCA.
Why, you were with him, were you not?

BRUTUS.
I should not then ask Casca what had chanc’d.

CASCA.
Why, there was a crown offer’d him; and being offer’d him, he put it by
with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.

BRUTUS.
What was the second noise for?

CASCA.
Why, for that too.

CASSIUS.
They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?

CASCA.
Why, for that too.

BRUTUS.
Was the crown offer’d him thrice?

CASCA.
Ay, marry, was’t, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than
other; and at every putting-by mine honest neighbours shouted.

CASSIUS.
Who offer’d him the crown?

CASCA.
Why, Antony.

BRUTUS.
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.

CASCA.
I can as well be hang’d, as tell the manner of it: it was mere foolery;
I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown; yet ’twas not a
crown neither, ’twas one of these coronets; and, as I told you, he put
it by once: but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had
it. Then he offered it to him again: then he put it by again: but, to
my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he
offered it the third time; he put it the third time by; and still, as
he refus’d it, the rabblement hooted, and clapp’d their chopt hands,
and threw up their sweaty night-caps, and uttered such a deal of
stinking breath because Caesar refus’d the crown, that it had, almost,
choked Caesar, for he swooned, and fell down at it. And for mine own
part, I durst not laugh, for fear of opening my lips and receiving the
bad air.

CASSIUS.
But, soft! I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?

CASCA.
He fell down in the market-place, and foam’d at mouth, and was
speechless.

BRUTUS.
’Tis very like: he hath the falling-sickness.

CASSIUS.
No, Caesar hath it not; but you, and I,
And honest Casca, we have the falling-sickness.

CASCA.
I know not what you mean by that; but I am sure Caesar fell down. If
the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him, according as he
pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the
theatre, I am no true man.

BRUTUS.
What said he when he came unto himself?

CASCA.
Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad
he refused the crown, he pluck’d me ope his doublet, and offer’d them
his throat to cut. And I had been a man of any occupation, if I would
not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the
rogues. And so he fell. When he came to himself again, he said, if he
had done or said anything amiss, he desir’d their worships to think it
was his infirmity. Three or four wenches where I stood cried, “Alas,
good soul!” and forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no heed
to be taken of them: if Caesar had stabb’d their mothers, they would
have done no less.

BRUTUS.
And, after that, he came thus sad away?

CASCA.
Ay.

CASSIUS.
Did Cicero say anything?

CASCA.
Ay, he spoke Greek.

CASSIUS.
To what effect?

CASCA.
Nay, and I tell you that, I’ll ne’er look you i’ the face again. But
those that understood him smil’d at one another and shook their heads;
but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more news
too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar’s images, are
put to silence. Fare you well. There was more foolery yet, if I could
remember it.

CASSIUS.
Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?

CASCA.
No, I am promis’d forth.

CASSIUS.
Will you dine with me tomorrow?

CASCA.
Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner worth the
eating.

CASSIUS.
Good. I will expect you.

CASCA.
Do so; farewell both.

[_Exit Casca._]

BRUTUS.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
He was quick mettle when he went to school.

CASSIUS.
So is he now in execution
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
However he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better appetite.

BRUTUS.
And so it is. For this time I will leave you:
Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you; or, if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.

CASSIUS.
I will do so: till then, think of the world.

[_Exit Brutus._]

Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet I see,
Thy honourable metal may be wrought
From that it is dispos’d: therefore ’tis meet
That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduc’d?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,
He should not humour me. I will this night,
In several hands, in at his windows throw,
As if they came from several citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his name; wherein obscurely
Caesar’s ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,
For we will shake him, or worse days endure.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. The same. A street.

Thunder and lightning. Enter, from opposite sides, Casca with his sword
drawn, and Cicero.

CICERO.
Good even, Casca: brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?

CASCA.
Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
I have seen tempests, when the scolding winds
Have riv’d the knotty oaks; and I have seen
Th’ ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam,
To be exalted with the threatening clouds:
But never till tonight, never till now,
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
Or else the world too saucy with the gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.

CICERO.
Why, saw you anything more wonderful?

CASCA.
A common slave, you’d know him well by sight,
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty torches join’d, and yet his hand,
Not sensible of fire remain’d unscorch’d.
Besides, I ha’ not since put up my sword,
Against the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glared upon me, and went surly by,
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Transformed with their fear; who swore they saw
Men, all in fire, walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday the bird of night did sit,
Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say,
“These are their reasons; they are natural”;
For I believe, they are portentous things
Unto the climate that they point upon.

CICERO.
Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?

CASCA.
He doth, for he did bid Antonius
Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.

CICERO.
Goodnight then, Casca: this disturbed sky
Is not to walk in.

CASCA.
Farewell, Cicero.

[_Exit Cicero._]

Enter Cassius.

CASSIUS.
Who’s there?

CASCA.
A Roman.

CASSIUS.
Casca, by your voice.

CASCA.
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!

CASSIUS.
A very pleasing night to honest men.

CASCA.
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?

CASSIUS.
Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walk’d about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous night;
And, thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
Have bar’d my bosom to the thunder-stone;
And when the cross blue lightning seem’d to open
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
Even in the aim and very flash of it.

CASCA.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the Heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble,
When the most mighty gods by tokens send
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.

CASSIUS.
You are dull, Casca; and those sparks of life
That should be in a Roman you do want,
Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze,
And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the Heavens:
But if you would consider the true cause
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Why birds and beasts, from quality and kind;
Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
Their natures, and pre-formed faculties,
To monstrous quality; why, you shall find
That Heaven hath infus’d them with these spirits,
To make them instruments of fear and warning
Unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Most like this dreadful night,
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars,
As doth the lion in the Capitol;
A man no mightier than thyself, or me,
In personal action; yet prodigious grown,
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.

CASCA.
’Tis Caesar that you mean; is it not, Cassius?

CASSIUS.
Let it be who it is: for Romans now
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors;
But, woe the while! our fathers’ minds are dead,
And we are govern’d with our mothers’ spirits;
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.

CASCA.
Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a king;
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,
In every place, save here in Italy.

CASSIUS.
I know where I will wear this dagger then;
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius:
Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
That part of tyranny that I do bear
I can shake off at pleasure.

[_Thunder still._]

CASCA.
So can I:
So every bondman in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his captivity.

CASSIUS.
And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf,
But that he sees the Romans are but sheep:
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves
For the base matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Where hast thou led me? I, perhaps, speak this
Before a willing bondman: then I know
My answer must be made; but I am arm’d,
And dangers are to me indifferent.

CASCA.
You speak to Casca, and to such a man
That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand:
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far
As who goes farthest.

CASSIUS.
There’s a bargain made.
Now know you, Casca, I have mov’d already
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
To undergo with me an enterprise
Of honourable-dangerous consequence;
And I do know by this, they stay for me
In Pompey’s Porch: for now, this fearful night,
There is no stir or walking in the streets;
And the complexion of the element
In favour’s like the work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

Enter Cinna.

CASCA.
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.

CASSIUS.
’Tis Cinna; I do know him by his gait;
He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?

CINNA.
To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?

CASSIUS.
No, it is Casca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Am I not stay’d for, Cinna?

CINNA.
I am glad on’t. What a fearful night is this!
There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.

CASSIUS.
Am I not stay’d for? tell me.

CINNA.
Yes, you are. O Cassius, if you could
But win the noble Brutus to our party—

CASSIUS.
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
And look you lay it in the praetor’s chair,
Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this
In at his window; set this up with wax
Upon old Brutus’ statue: all this done,
Repair to Pompey’s Porch, where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?

CINNA.
All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,
And so bestow these papers as you bade me.

CASSIUS.
That done, repair to Pompey’s theatre.

[_Exit Cinna._]

Come, Casca, you and I will yet, ere day,
See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter, yields him ours.

CASCA.
O, he sits high in all the people’s hearts!
And that which would appear offence in us,
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.

CASSIUS.
Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
For it is after midnight; and ere day,
We will awake him, and be sure of him.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Rome. Brutus’ orchard.


Enter Brutus.

BRUTUS.
What, Lucius, ho!
I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
Give guess how near to day.—Lucius, I say!
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Call’d you, my lord?

BRUTUS.
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here.

LUCIUS.
I will, my lord.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
It must be by his death: and for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general. He would be crown’d:
How that might change his nature, there’s the question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking. Crown him?—that;
And then, I grant, we put a sting in him,
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th’ abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
Remorse from power; and, to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections sway’d
More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof,
That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may;
Then lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities:
And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg
Which hatch’d, would, as his kind grow mischievous;
And kill him in the shell.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint, I found
This paper, thus seal’d up, and I am sure
It did not lie there when I went to bed.

[_Gives him the letter._]

BRUTUS.
Get you to bed again; it is not day.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the Ides of March?

LUCIUS.
I know not, sir.

BRUTUS.
Look in the calendar, and bring me word.

LUCIUS.
I will, sir.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
The exhalations, whizzing in the air
Give so much light that I may read by them.

[_Opens the letter and reads._]

_Brutus, thou sleep’st: awake and see thyself.
Shall Rome, &c. Speak, strike, redress!_
“Brutus, thou sleep’st: awake!”
Such instigations have been often dropp’d
Where I have took them up.
“Shall Rome, &c.” Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe? What, Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive, when he was call’d a king.
“Speak, strike, redress!” Am I entreated
To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.

[_Knock within._]

BRUTUS.
’Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.

[_Exit Lucius._]

Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream:
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council; and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth desire to see you.

BRUTUS.
Is he alone?

LUCIUS.
No, sir, there are moe with him.

BRUTUS.
Do you know them?

LUCIUS.
No, sir, their hats are pluck’d about their ears,
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
By any mark of favour.

BRUTUS.
Let ’em enter.

[_Exit Lucius._]

They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sham’st thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
When evils are most free? O, then, by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy;
Hide it in smiles and affability:
For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.

Enter Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna, Metellus Cimber and Trebonius.

CASSIUS.
I think we are too bold upon your rest:
Good morrow, Brutus; do we trouble you?

BRUTUS.
I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you?

CASSIUS.
Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honours you; and everyone doth wish
You had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.

BRUTUS.
He is welcome hither.

CASSIUS.
This Decius Brutus.

BRUTUS.
He is welcome too.

CASSIUS.
This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.

BRUTUS.
They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?

CASSIUS.
Shall I entreat a word?

[_They whisper._]

DECIUS.
Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?

CASCA.
No.

CINNA.
O, pardon, sir, it doth; and yon grey lines
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.

CASCA.
You shall confess that you are both deceiv’d.
Here, as I point my sword, the Sun arises;
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the North
He first presents his fire; and the high East
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.

BRUTUS.
Give me your hands all over, one by one.

CASSIUS.
And let us swear our resolution.

BRUTUS.
No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse—
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence to his idle bed.
So let high-sighted tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
To kindle cowards, and to steel with valour
The melting spirits of women; then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? what other bond
Than secret Romans, that have spoke the word,
And will not palter? and what other oath
Than honesty to honesty engag’d,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards, and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions, and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor th’ insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath; when every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy,
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath pass’d from him.

CASSIUS.
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with us.

CASCA.
Let us not leave him out.

CINNA.
No, by no means.

METELLUS.
O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
Will purchase us a good opinion,
And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds.
It shall be said, his judgement rul’d our hands;
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.

BRUTUS.
O, name him not; let us not break with him;
For he will never follow anything
That other men begin.

CASSIUS.
Then leave him out.

CASCA.
Indeed, he is not fit.

DECIUS.
Shall no man else be touch’d but only Caesar?

CASSIUS.
Decius, well urg’d. I think it is not meet,
Mark Antony, so well belov’d of Caesar,
Should outlive Caesar: we shall find of him
A shrewd contriver; and you know, his means,
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all; which to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.

BRUTUS.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the head off, and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death, and envy afterwards;
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
O, that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit,
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage,
And after seem to chide ’em. This shall mark
Our purpose necessary, and not envious;
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be call’d purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him;
For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm
When Caesar’s head is off.

CASSIUS.
Yet I fear him;
For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar—

BRUTUS.
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself; take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should; for he is given
To sports, to wildness, and much company.

TREBONIUS.
There is no fear in him; let him not die;
For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.

[_Clock strikes._]

BRUTUS.
Peace! count the clock.

CASSIUS.
The clock hath stricken three.

TREBONIUS.
’Tis time to part.

CASSIUS.
But it is doubtful yet
Whether Caesar will come forth today or no;
For he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
The unaccustom’d terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his augurers,
May hold him from the Capitol today.

DECIUS.
Never fear that: if he be so resolved,
I can o’ersway him, for he loves to hear
That unicorns may be betray’d with trees,
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Lions with toils, and men with flatterers.
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
He says he does, being then most flattered.
Let me work;
For I can give his humour the true bent,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.

CASSIUS.
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.

BRUTUS.
By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost?

CINNA.
Be that the uttermost; and fail not then.

METELLUS.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey;
I wonder none of you have thought of him.

BRUTUS.
Now, good Metellus, go along by him:
He loves me well, and I have given him reason;
Send him but hither, and I’ll fashion him.

CASSIUS.
The morning comes upon’s. We’ll leave you, Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves; but all remember
What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.

BRUTUS.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so, good morrow to you everyone.

[_Exeunt all but Brutus._]

Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter;
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber:
Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.

Enter Portia.

PORTIA.
Brutus, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.

PORTIA.
Nor for yours neither. Y’ have ungently, Brutus,
Stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper,
You suddenly arose, and walk’d about,
Musing and sighing, with your arms across;
And when I ask’d you what the matter was,
You star’d upon me with ungentle looks.
I urg’d you further; then you scratch’d your head,
And too impatiently stamp’d with your foot;
Yet I insisted, yet you answer’d not,
But with an angry wafture of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seem’d too much enkindled; and withal
Hoping it was but an effect of humour,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep;
And could it work so much upon your shape
As it hath much prevail’d on your condition,
I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.

BRUTUS.
I am not well in health, and that is all.

PORTIA.
Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.

BRUTUS.
Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.

PORTIA.
Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
To walk unbraced and suck up the humours
Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the night,
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus;
You have some sick offence within your mind,
Which, by the right and virtue of my place,
I ought to know of: and, upon my knees,
I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
By all your vows of love, and that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one,
That you unfold to me, your self, your half,
Why you are heavy, and what men tonight
Have had resort to you; for here have been
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.

BRUTUS.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.

PORTIA.
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
Is it excepted I should know no secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your self
But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus’ harlot, not his wife.

BRUTUS.
You are my true and honourable wife,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.

PORTIA.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife;
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman well reputed, Cato’s daughter.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
Being so father’d and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose ’em.
I have made strong proof of my constancy,
Giving myself a voluntary wound
Here, in the thigh: can I bear that with patience
And not my husband’s secrets?

BRUTUS.
O ye gods,
Render me worthy of this noble wife!

[_Knock._]

Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile;
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
All the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste.

[_Exit Portia._]

Enter Lucius with Ligarius.

Lucius, who’s that knocks?

LUCIUS.
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.

BRUTUS.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?

LIGARIUS.
Vouchsafe good-morrow from a feeble tongue.

BRUTUS.
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!

LIGARIUS.
I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of honour.

BRUTUS.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.

LIGARIUS.
By all the gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness. Soul of Rome!
Brave son, derived from honourable loins!
Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjur’d up
My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible,
Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?

BRUTUS.
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.

LIGARIUS.
But are not some whole that we must make sick?

BRUTUS.
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
I shall unfold to thee, as we are going,
To whom it must be done.

LIGARIUS.
Set on your foot,
And with a heart new-fir’d I follow you,
To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
That Brutus leads me on.

[_Thunder._]

BRUTUS.
Follow me then.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in Caesar’s palace.

Thunder and lightning. Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

CAESAR.
Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight:
Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out,
“Help, ho! They murder Caesar!” Who’s within?

Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
My lord?

CAESAR.
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of success.

SERVANT.
I will, my lord.

[_Exit._]

Enter Calphurnia.

CALPHURNIA.
What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house today.

CAESAR.
Caesar shall forth. The things that threaten’d me
Ne’er look’d but on my back; when they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.

CALPHURNIA.
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
A lioness hath whelped in the streets,
And graves have yawn’d, and yielded up their dead;
Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all use,
And I do fear them!

CAESAR.
What can be avoided
Whose end is purpos’d by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth; for these predictions
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.

CALPHURNIA.
When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.

CAESAR.
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.

Enter Servant.

What say the augurers?

SERVANT.
They would not have you to stir forth today.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.

CAESAR.
The gods do this in shame of cowardice:
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home today for fear.
No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions litter’d in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caesar shall go forth.

CALPHURNIA.
Alas, my lord,
Your wisdom is consum’d in confidence.
Do not go forth today: call it my fear
That keeps you in the house, and not your own.
We’ll send Mark Antony to the Senate-house,
And he shall say you are not well today.
Let me upon my knee prevail in this.

CAESAR.
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humour, I will stay at home.

Enter Decius.

Here’s Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.

DECIUS.
Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar.
I come to fetch you to the Senate-house.

CAESAR.
And you are come in very happy time
To bear my greeting to the Senators,
And tell them that I will not come today.
Cannot, is false; and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.

CALPHURNIA.
Say he is sick.

CAESAR.
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretch’d mine arm so far,
To be afeard to tell grey-beards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.

DECIUS.
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
Lest I be laugh’d at when I tell them so.

CAESAR.
The cause is in my will; I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know:
Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.
She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
Which like a fountain with an hundred spouts
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans
Came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
And evils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg’d that I will stay at home today.

DECIUS.
This dream is all amiss interpreted:
It was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bath’d,
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calphurnia’s dream is signified.

CAESAR.
And this way have you well expounded it.

DECIUS.
I have, when you have heard what I can say;
And know it now. The Senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be render’d, for someone to say,
“Break up the Senate till another time,
When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.”
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
“Lo, Caesar is afraid”?
Pardon me, Caesar; for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
And reason to my love is liable.

CAESAR.
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.

Enter Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca, Trebonius, Cinna and Publius.

And look where Publius is come to fetch me.

PUBLIUS.
Good morrow, Caesar.

CAESAR.
Welcome, Publius.
What, Brutus, are you stirr’d so early too?
Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne’er so much your enemy
As that same ague which hath made you lean.
What is’t o’clock?

BRUTUS.
Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.

CAESAR.
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

Enter Antony.

See! Antony, that revels long a-nights,
Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.

ANTONY.
So to most noble Caesar.

CAESAR.
Bid them prepare within.
I am to blame to be thus waited for.
Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius!
I have an hour’s talk in store for you:
Remember that you call on me today;
Be near me, that I may remember you.

TREBONIUS.
Caesar, I will. [_Aside._] and so near will I be,
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.

CAESAR.
Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me;
And we, like friends, will straightway go together.

BRUTUS.
[_Aside._] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A street near the Capitol.

Enter Artemidorus, reading a paper.

ARTEMIDORUS.
_“Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come not near Casca;
have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark well Metellus Cimber;
Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast wrong’d Caius Ligarius. There
is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar. If
thou be’st not immortal, look about you: security gives way to
conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee!
Thy lover, Artemidorus.”_ Here will I stand till Caesar pass along, And
as a suitor will I give him this. My heart laments that virtue cannot
live Out of the teeth of emulation. If thou read this, O Caesar, thou
mayest live; If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.


[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.

Enter Portia and Lucius.

PORTIA.
I pr’ythee, boy, run to the Senate-house;
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why dost thou stay?

LUCIUS.
To know my errand, madam.

PORTIA.
I would have had thee there and here again,
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
[_Aside._] O constancy, be strong upon my side,
Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue!
I have a man’s mind, but a woman’s might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
Art thou here yet?

LUCIUS.
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?

PORTIA.
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?

LUCIUS.
I hear none, madam.

PORTIA.
Pr’ythee, listen well.
I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray,
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.

LUCIUS.
Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

Enter the Soothsayer.

PORTIA.
Come hither, fellow:
Which way hast thou been?

SOOTHSAYER.
At mine own house, good lady.

PORTIA.
What is’t o’clock?

SOOTHSAYER.
About the ninth hour, lady.

PORTIA.
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?

SOOTHSAYER.
Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand,
To see him pass on to the Capitol.

PORTIA.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?

SOOTHSAYER.
That I have, lady, if it will please Caesar
To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.

PORTIA.
Why, know’st thou any harm’s intended towards him?

SOOTHSAYER.
None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow.
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Of Senators, of Praetors, common suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man almost to death:
I’ll get me to a place more void, and there
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.

[_Exit._]

PORTIA.
I must go in.
[_Aside._] Ay me, how weak a thing
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
Say I am merry; come to me again,
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting.


A crowd of people in the street leading to the Capitol. Flourish. Enter
Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius, Cinna,
Antony, Lepidus, Artemidorus, Publius, Popilius and the Soothsayer.

CAESAR.
The Ides of March are come.

SOOTHSAYER.
Ay, Caesar; but not gone.

ARTEMIDORUS.
Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.

DECIUS.
Trebonius doth desire you to o’er-read,
At your best leisure, this his humble suit.

ARTEMIDORUS.
O Caesar, read mine first; for mine’s a suit
That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.

CAESAR.
What touches us ourself shall be last serv’d.

ARTEMIDORUS.
Delay not, Caesar. Read it instantly.

CAESAR.
What, is the fellow mad?

PUBLIUS.
Sirrah, give place.

CASSIUS.
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.

Caesar enters the Capitol, the rest following. All the Senators rise.

POPILIUS.
I wish your enterprise today may thrive.

CASSIUS.
What enterprise, Popilius?

POPILIUS.
Fare you well.

[_Advances to Caesar._]

BRUTUS.
What said Popilius Lena?

CASSIUS.
He wish’d today our enterprise might thrive.
I fear our purpose is discovered.

BRUTUS.
Look how he makes to Caesar: mark him.

CASSIUS.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.

BRUTUS.
Cassius, be constant:
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
For look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.

CASSIUS.
Trebonius knows his time, for look you, Brutus,
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.

[_Exeunt Antony and Trebonius. Caesar and the Senators take their
seats._]

DECIUS.
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go,
And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.

BRUTUS.
He is address’d; press near and second him.

CINNA.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.

CAESAR.
Are we all ready? What is now amiss
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?

METELLUS.
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
An humble heart.

[_Kneeling._]

CAESAR.
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turn pre-ordinance and first decree
Into the law of children. Be not fond,
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
That will be thaw’d from the true quality
With that which melteth fools; I mean sweet words,
Low-crooked curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished:
If thou dost bend, and pray, and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar dost not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.

METELLUS.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar’s ear
For the repealing of my banish’d brother?

BRUTUS.
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar;
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.

CAESAR.
What, Brutus?

CASSIUS.
Pardon, Caesar; Caesar, pardon:
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.

CAESAR.
I could be well mov’d, if I were as you;
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:
But I am constant as the northern star,
Of whose true-fix’d and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumber’d sparks,
They are all fire, and every one doth shine;
But there’s but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world; ’tis furnish’d well with men,
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
Yet in the number I do know but one
That unassailable holds on his rank,
Unshak’d of motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little show it, even in this,
That I was constant Cimber should be banish’d,
And constant do remain to keep him so.

CINNA.
O Caesar,—

CAESAR.
Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?

DECIUS.
Great Caesar,—

CAESAR.
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?

CASCA.
Speak, hands, for me!

[_Casca stabs Caesar in the neck. Caesar catches hold of his arm. He is
then stabbed by several other Conspirators, and at last by Marcus
Brutus._]

CAESAR.
_Et tu, Brute?_—Then fall, Caesar!

[_Dies. The Senators and People retire in confusion._]

CINNA.
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.

CASSIUS.
Some to the common pulpits and cry out,
“Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!”

BRUTUS.
People and Senators, be not affrighted.
Fly not; stand still; ambition’s debt is paid.

CASCA.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.

DECIUS.
And Cassius too.

BRUTUS.
Where’s Publius?

CINNA.
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.

METELLUS.
Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar’s
Should chance—

BRUTUS.
Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer!
There is no harm intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.

CASSIUS.
And leave us, Publius; lest that the people
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.

BRUTUS.
Do so; and let no man abide this deed
But we the doers.

Enter Trebonius.

CASSIUS.
Where’s Antony?

TREBONIUS.
Fled to his house amaz’d.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run,
As it were doomsday.

BRUTUS.
Fates, we will know your pleasures.
That we shall die, we know; ’tis but the time
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.

CASCA.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.

BRUTUS.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit:
So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridg’d
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood
Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords:
Then walk we forth, even to the market-place,
And waving our red weapons o’er our heads,
Let’s all cry, “Peace, freedom, and liberty!”

CASSIUS.
Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In States unborn, and accents yet unknown!

BRUTUS.
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompey’s basis lies along,
No worthier than the dust!

CASSIUS.
So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of us be call’d
The men that gave their country liberty.

DECIUS.
What, shall we forth?

CASSIUS.
Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead; and we will grace his heels
With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

Enter a Servant.

BRUTUS.
Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.

SERVANT.
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down;
And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving;
Say I love Brutus and I honour him;
Say I fear’d Caesar, honour’d him, and lov’d him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
May safely come to him, and be resolv’d
How Caesar hath deserv’d to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living; but will follow
The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state,
With all true faith. So says my master Antony.

BRUTUS.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
He shall be satisfied and, by my honour,
Depart untouch’d.

SERVANT.
I’ll fetch him presently.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.

CASSIUS.
I wish we may: but yet have I a mind
That fears him much; and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

Enter Antony.

BRUTUS.
But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
As Caesar’s death’s hour; nor no instrument
Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
With the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
I shall not find myself so apt to die.
No place will please me so, no means of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The choice and master spirits of this age.

BRUTUS.
O Antony, beg not your death of us.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands and this our present act
You see we do; yet see you but our hands
And this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
And pity to the general wrong of Rome—
As fire drives out fire, so pity pity—
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
Of brothers’ temper, do receive you in
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.

CASSIUS.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man’s
In the disposing of new dignities.

BRUTUS.
Only be patient till we have appeas’d
The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
And then we will deliver you the cause
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.

ANTONY.
I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand.
Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all—alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a coward or a flatterer.
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, ’tis true:
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death,
To see thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
Most noble, in the presence of thy corse?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better than to close
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay’d, brave hart;
Here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand,
Sign’d in thy spoil, and crimson’d in thy lethe.
O world, thou wast the forest to this hart;
And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes,
Dost thou here lie!

CASSIUS.
Mark Antony,—

ANTONY.
Pardon me, Caius Cassius:
The enemies of Caesar shall say this;
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

CASSIUS.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
But what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be prick’d in number of our friends,
Or shall we on, and not depend on you?

ANTONY.
Therefore I took your hands; but was indeed
Sway’d from the point, by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all, and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
Why, and wherein, Caesar was dangerous.

BRUTUS.
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard
That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.

ANTONY.
That’s all I seek,
And am moreover suitor that I may
Produce his body to the market-place;
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
Speak in the order of his funeral.

BRUTUS.
You shall, Mark Antony.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, a word with you.
[_Aside to Brutus._] You know not what you do. Do not consent
That Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be mov’d
By that which he will utter?

BRUTUS.
[_Aside to Cassius._] By your pardon:
I will myself into the pulpit first,
And show the reason of our Caesar’s death.
What Antony shall speak, I will protest
He speaks by leave and by permission;
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true rights and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.

CASSIUS.
[_Aside to Brutus._] I know not what may fall; I like it not.

BRUTUS.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar’s body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
And say you do’t by our permission;
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his funeral. And you shall speak
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.

ANTONY.
Be it so;
I do desire no more.

BRUTUS.
Prepare the body, then, and follow us.

[_Exeunt all but Antony._]

ANTONY.
O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers.
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
Which, like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue,
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
And dreadful objects so familiar,
That mothers shall but smile when they behold
Their infants quartered with the hands of war;
All pity chok’d with custom of fell deeds:
And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his side come hot from Hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice
Cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
With carrion men, groaning for burial.

Enter a Servant.

You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?

SERVANT.
I do, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.

SERVANT.
He did receive his letters, and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth,—
[_Seeing the body._] O Caesar!

ANTONY.
Thy heart is big, get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching; for mine eyes,
Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy master coming?

SERVANT.
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.

ANTONY.
Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanc’d.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.
Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile;
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
Into the market-place: there shall I try,
In my oration, how the people take
The cruel issue of these bloody men;
According to the which thou shalt discourse
To young Octavius of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.

[_Exeunt with Caesar’s body._]

SCENE II. The same. The Forum.

Enter Brutus and goes into the pulpit, and Cassius, with a throng of
Citizens.

CITIZENS.
We will be satisfied; let us be satisfied.

BRUTUS.
Then follow me, and give me audience, friends.
Cassius, go you into the other street
And part the numbers.
Those that will hear me speak, let ’em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
And public reasons shall be rendered
Of Caesar’s death.

FIRST CITIZEN.
I will hear Brutus speak.

SECOND CITIZEN.
I will hear Cassius; and compare their reasons,
When severally we hear them rendered.

[_Exit Cassius, with some of the Citizens. Brutus goes into the
rostrum._]

THIRD CITIZEN.
The noble Brutus is ascended: silence!

BRUTUS.
Be patient till the last.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers, hear me for my cause; and be silent,
that you may hear. Believe me for mine honour, and have respect to mine
honour, that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your
senses, that you may the better judge. If there be any in this
assembly, any dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus’ love
to Caesar was no less than his. If then that friend demand why Brutus
rose against Caesar, this is my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living, and die
all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all free men? As Caesar
loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he
was valiant, I honour him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
is tears, for his love; joy for his fortune; honour for his valour; and
death, for his ambition. Who is here so base, that would be a bondman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so rude, that would
not be a Roman? If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so
vile, that will not love his country? If any, speak; for him have I
offended. I pause for a reply.

CITIZENS.
None, Brutus, none.

BRUTUS.
Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar than you shall
do to Brutus. The question of his death is enroll’d in the Capitol, his
glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc’d,
for which he suffered death.

Enter Antony and others, with Caesar’s body.

Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no hand
in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the
commonwealth; as which of you shall not? With this I depart, that, as I
slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the same dagger for
myself, when it shall please my country to need my death.

CITIZENS.
Live, Brutus! live, live!

FIRST CITIZEN.
Bring him with triumph home unto his house.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Give him a statue with his ancestors.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Let him be Caesar.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Caesar’s better parts
Shall be crown’d in Brutus.

FIRST CITIZEN.
We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and clamours.

BRUTUS.
My countrymen,—

SECOND CITIZEN.
Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Peace, ho!

BRUTUS.
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar’s corpse, and grace his speech
Tending to Caesar’s glories, which Mark Antony,
By our permission, is allow’d to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.

[_Exit._]

FIRST CITIZEN.
Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Let him go up into the public chair.
We’ll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.

ANTONY.
For Brutus’ sake, I am beholding to you.

[_Goes up._]

FOURTH CITIZEN.
What does he say of Brutus?

THIRD CITIZEN.
He says, for Brutus’ sake
He finds himself beholding to us all.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
’Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here!

FIRST CITIZEN.
This Caesar was a tyrant.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Nay, that’s certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Peace! let us hear what Antony can say.

ANTONY.
You gentle Romans,—

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho! let us hear him.

ANTONY.
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them,
The good is oft interred with their bones;
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answer’d it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest,
For Brutus is an honourable man,
So are they all, all honourable men,
Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
But Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honourable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And sure he is an honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause;
What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason. Bear with me.
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.

SECOND CITIZEN.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Mark’d ye his words? He would not take the crown;
Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.

FIRST CITIZEN.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.

THIRD CITIZEN.
There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Now mark him; he begins again to speak.

ANTONY.
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world; now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.
O masters! If I were dispos’d to stir
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
Who, you all know, are honourable men.
I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honourable men.
But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar,
I found it in his closet; ’tis his will:
Let but the commons hear this testament,
Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds,
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
We’ll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.

CITIZENS.
The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.

ANTONY.
Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
And being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
’Tis good you know not that you are his heirs;
For if you should, O, what would come of it?

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Read the will! We’ll hear it, Antony;
You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will!

ANTONY.
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
I have o’ershot myself to tell you of it.
I fear I wrong the honourable men
Whose daggers have stabb’d Caesar; I do fear it.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
They were traitors. Honourable men!

CITIZENS.
The will! The testament!

SECOND CITIZEN.
They were villains, murderers. The will! Read the will!

ANTONY.
You will compel me then to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
And let me show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?

CITIZENS.
Come down.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Descend.

[_He comes down._]

THIRD CITIZEN.
You shall have leave.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
A ring! Stand round.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Room for Antony, most noble Antony!

ANTONY.
Nay, press not so upon me; stand far off.

CITIZENS.
Stand back; room! bear back.

ANTONY.
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on;
’Twas on a Summer’s evening, in his tent,
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through:
See what a rent the envious Casca made:
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb’d;
And as he pluck’d his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar follow’d it,
As rushing out of doors, to be resolv’d
If Brutus so unkindly knock’d, or no;
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar lov’d him.
This was the most unkindest cut of all;
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,
Quite vanquish’d him: then burst his mighty heart;
And in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue
Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
Whilst bloody treason flourish’d over us.
O, now you weep; and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here,
Here is himself, marr’d, as you see, with traitors.

FIRST CITIZEN.
O piteous spectacle!

SECOND CITIZEN.
O noble Caesar!

THIRD CITIZEN.
O woeful day!

FOURTH CITIZEN.
O traitors, villains!

FIRST CITIZEN.
O most bloody sight!

SECOND CITIZEN.
We will be revenged.

CITIZENS.
Revenge,—about,—seek,—burn,—fire,—kill,—slay,—let not a traitor live!

ANTONY.
Stay, countrymen.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.

SECOND CITIZEN.
We’ll hear him, we’ll follow him, we’ll die with him.

ANTONY.
Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honourable.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it. They’re wise and honourable,
And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is;
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
That love my friend; and that they know full well
That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
To stir men’s blood. I only speak right on.
I tell you that which you yourselves do know,
Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar, that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

CITIZENS.
We’ll mutiny.

FIRST CITIZEN.
We’ll burn the house of Brutus.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Away, then! come, seek the conspirators.

ANTONY.
Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho! Hear Antony; most noble Antony.

ANTONY.
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.

CITIZENS.
Most true; the will!—let’s stay, and hear the will.

ANTONY.
Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal.
To every Roman citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.

THIRD CITIZEN.
O, royal Caesar!

ANTONY.
Hear me with patience.

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho!

ANTONY.
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
And to your heirs forever; common pleasures,
To walk abroad, and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar! when comes such another?

FIRST CITIZEN.
Never, never. Come, away, away!
We’ll burn his body in the holy place,
And with the brands fire the traitors’ houses.
Take up the body.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Go, fetch fire.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Pluck down benches.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Pluck down forms, windows, anything.

[_Exeunt Citizens, with the body._]

ANTONY.
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
Take thou what course thou wilt!

Enter a Servant.

How now, fellow?

SERVANT.
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.

ANTONY.
Where is he?

SERVANT.
He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.

ANTONY.
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will give us anything.

SERVANT.
I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.

ANTONY.
Belike they had some notice of the people,
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A street.

Enter Cinna, the poet, and after him the citizens.

CINNA.
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Yet something leads me forth.

FIRST CITIZEN.
What is your name?

SECOND CITIZEN.
Whither are you going?

THIRD CITIZEN.
Where do you dwell?

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Are you a married man or a bachelor?

SECOND CITIZEN.
Answer every man directly.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Ay, and briefly.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Ay, and wisely.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Ay, and truly, you were best.

CINNA.
What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married
man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and briefly,
wisely and truly. Wisely I say I am a bachelor.

SECOND CITIZEN.
That’s as much as to say they are fools that marry; you’ll bear me a
bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.

CINNA.
Directly, I am going to Caesar’s funeral.

FIRST CITIZEN.
As a friend, or an enemy?

CINNA.
As a friend.

SECOND CITIZEN.
That matter is answered directly.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
For your dwelling, briefly.

CINNA.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Your name, sir, truly.

CINNA.
Truly, my name is Cinna.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Tear him to pieces! He’s a conspirator.

CINNA.
I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses.

CINNA.
I am not Cinna the conspirator.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
It is no matter, his name’s Cinna; pluck but his name out of his heart,
and turn him going.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Tear him, tear him! Come; brands, ho! firebrands. To Brutus’, to
Cassius’; burn all. Some to Decius’ house, and some to Casca’s, some to
Ligarius’. Away, go!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Rome. A room in Antony’s house.


Enter Antony, Octavius and Lepidus, seated at a table.

ANTONY.
These many then shall die; their names are prick’d.

OCTAVIUS.
Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?

LEPIDUS.
I do consent,—

OCTAVIUS.
Prick him down, Antony.

LEPIDUS.
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house;
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in legacies.

LEPIDUS.
What, shall I find you here?

OCTAVIUS.
Or here, or at the Capitol.

[_Exit Lepidus._]

ANTONY.
This is a slight unmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
The three-fold world divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?

OCTAVIUS.
So you thought him,
And took his voice who should be prick’d to die
In our black sentence and proscription.

ANTONY.
Octavius, I have seen more days than you;
And though we lay these honours on this man,
To ease ourselves of divers sland’rous loads,
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
To groan and sweat under the business,
Either led or driven, as we point the way;
And having brought our treasure where we will,
Then take we down his load, and turn him off,
Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears,
And graze in commons.

OCTAVIUS.
You may do your will;
But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.

ANTONY.
So is my horse, Octavius; and for that
I do appoint him store of provender.
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
His corporal motion govern’d by my spirit.
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
He must be taught, and train’d, and bid go forth:
A barren-spirited fellow; one that feeds
On objects, arts, and imitations,
Which, out of use and stal’d by other men,
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying powers; we must straight make head.
Therefore let our alliance be combin’d,
Our best friends made, our means stretch’d;
And let us presently go sit in council,
How covert matters may be best disclos’d,
And open perils surest answered.

OCTAVIUS.
Let us do so: for we are at the stake,
And bay’d about with many enemies;
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Millions of mischiefs.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Before Brutus’ tent, in the camp near Sardis.

Drum. Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Titinius and Soldiers; Pindarus meeting
them; Lucius at some distance.

BRUTUS.
Stand, ho!

LUCILIUS.
Give the word, ho! and stand.

BRUTUS.
What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near?

LUCILIUS.
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his master.

[_Pindarus gives a letter to Brutus._]

BRUTUS.
He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
In his own change, or by ill officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done, undone: but, if he be at hand,
I shall be satisfied.

PINDARUS.
I do not doubt
But that my noble master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honour.

BRUTUS.
He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius;
How he received you, let me be resolv’d.

LUCILIUS.
With courtesy and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances,
Nor with such free and friendly conference,
As he hath us’d of old.

BRUTUS.
Thou hast describ’d
A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
When love begins to sicken and decay
It useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;

[_Low march within._]

But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fall their crests, and like deceitful jades
Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?

LUCILIUS.
They meant this night in Sardis to be quarter’d;
The greater part, the horse in general,
Are come with Cassius.

Enter Cassius and Soldiers.

BRUTUS.
Hark! he is arriv’d.
March gently on to meet him.

CASSIUS.
Stand, ho!

BRUTUS.
Stand, ho! Speak the word along.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Stand!

SECOND SOLDIER.
Stand!

THIRD SOLDIER.
Stand!

CASSIUS.
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.

BRUTUS.
Judge me, you gods; wrong I mine enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?

CASSIUS.
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs;
And when you do them—

BRUTUS.
Cassius, be content.
Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here,
Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
And I will give you audience.

CASSIUS.
Pindarus,
Bid our commanders lead their charges off
A little from this ground.

BRUTUS.
Lucilius, do you the like; and let no man
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
Lucius and Titinius, guard our door.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Within the tent of Brutus.

Enter Brutus and Cassius.

CASSIUS.
That you have wrong’d me doth appear in this:
You have condemn’d and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my letters, praying on his side
Because I knew the man, were slighted off.

BRUTUS.
You wrong’d yourself to write in such a case.

CASSIUS.
In such a time as this it is not meet
That every nice offence should bear his comment.

BRUTUS.
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemn’d to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.

CASSIUS.
I an itching palm!
You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.

BRUTUS.
The name of Cassius honours this corruption,
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.

CASSIUS.
Chastisement!

BRUTUS.
Remember March, the Ides of March remember:
Did not great Julius bleed for justice’ sake?
What villain touch’d his body, that did stab,
And not for justice? What! Shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world
But for supporting robbers, shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
And sell the mighty space of our large honours
For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
Than such a Roman.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, bait not me,
I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself,
To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.

BRUTUS.
Go to; you are not, Cassius.

CASSIUS.
I am.

BRUTUS.
I say you are not.

CASSIUS.
Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.

BRUTUS.
Away, slight man!

CASSIUS.
Is’t possible?

BRUTUS.
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

CASSIUS.
O ye gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?

BRUTUS.
All this? ay, more: fret till your proud heart break;
Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humour? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,
I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.

CASSIUS.
Is it come to this?

BRUTUS.
You say you are a better soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

CASSIUS.
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
Did I say better?

BRUTUS.
If you did, I care not.

CASSIUS.
When Caesar liv’d, he durst not thus have mov’d me.

BRUTUS.
Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.

CASSIUS.
I durst not?

BRUTUS.
No.

CASSIUS.
What? durst not tempt him?

BRUTUS.
For your life you durst not.

CASSIUS.
Do not presume too much upon my love.
I may do that I shall be sorry for.

BRUTUS.
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
For I am arm’d so strong in honesty,
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;
For I can raise no money by vile means:
By Heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answer’d Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces!

CASSIUS.
I denied you not.

BRUTUS.
You did.

CASSIUS.
I did not. He was but a fool
That brought my answer back. Brutus hath riv’d my heart.
A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

BRUTUS.
I do not, till you practise them on me.

CASSIUS.
You love me not.

BRUTUS.
I do not like your faults.

CASSIUS.
A friendly eye could never see such faults.

BRUTUS.
A flatterer’s would not, though they do appear
As huge as high Olympus.

CASSIUS.
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is a-weary of the world:
Hated by one he loves; brav’d by his brother;
Check’d like a bondman; all his faults observ’d,
Set in a note-book, learn’d and conn’d by rote,
To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold:
If that thou be’st a Roman, take it forth.
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
Strike as thou didst at Caesar; for I know,
When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.

BRUTUS.
Sheathe your dagger.
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.

CASSIUS.
Hath Cassius liv’d
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
When grief and blood ill-temper’d vexeth him?

BRUTUS.
When I spoke that, I was ill-temper’d too.

CASSIUS.
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

BRUTUS.
And my heart too.

CASSIUS.
O Brutus!

BRUTUS.
What’s the matter?

CASSIUS.
Have not you love enough to bear with me,
When that rash humour which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?

BRUTUS.
Yes, Cassius; and from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He’ll think your mother chides, and leave you so.

Enter Poet, followed by Lucilius, Titinius and Lucius.

POET.
[_Within._] Let me go in to see the generals,
There is some grudge between ’em; ’tis not meet
They be alone.

LUCILIUS.
[_Within._] You shall not come to them.

POET.
[_Within._] Nothing but death shall stay me.

CASSIUS.
How now! What’s the matter?

POET.
For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.

CASSIUS.
Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!

BRUTUS.
Get you hence, sirrah. Saucy fellow, hence!

CASSIUS.
Bear with him, Brutus; ’tis his fashion.

BRUTUS.
I’ll know his humour when he knows his time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
Companion, hence!

CASSIUS.
Away, away, be gone!

[_Exit Poet._]

BRUTUS.
Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.

CASSIUS.
And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
Immediately to us.

[_Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius._]

BRUTUS.
Lucius, a bowl of wine.

[_Exit Lucius._]

CASSIUS.
I did not think you could have been so angry.

BRUTUS.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.

CASSIUS.
Of your philosophy you make no use,
If you give place to accidental evils.

BRUTUS.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.

CASSIUS.
Ha? Portia?

BRUTUS.
She is dead.

CASSIUS.
How ’scap’d I killing, when I cross’d you so?
O insupportable and touching loss!
Upon what sickness?

BRUTUS.
Impatient of my absence,
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong; for with her death
That tidings came. With this she fell distract,
And, her attendants absent, swallow’d fire.

CASSIUS.
And died so?

BRUTUS.
Even so.

CASSIUS.
O ye immortal gods!

Enter Lucius, with wine and a taper.

BRUTUS.
Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.

[_Drinks._]

CASSIUS.
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o’erswell the cup.
I cannot drink too much of Brutus’ love.

[_Drinks._]

[_Exit Lucius._]

Enter Titinius and Messala.

BRUTUS.
Come in, Titinius!
Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here,
And call in question our necessities.

CASSIUS.
Portia, art thou gone?

BRUTUS.
No more, I pray you.
Messala, I have here received letters,
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.

MESSALA.
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.

BRUTUS.
With what addition?

MESSALA.
That by proscription and bills of outlawry
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
Have put to death an hundred Senators.

BRUTUS.
Therein our letters do not well agree.
Mine speak of seventy Senators that died
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.

CASSIUS.
Cicero one!

MESSALA.
Cicero is dead,
And by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?

BRUTUS.
No, Messala.

MESSALA.
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?

BRUTUS.
Nothing, Messala.

MESSALA.
That, methinks, is strange.

BRUTUS.
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?

MESSALA.
No, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Now as you are a Roman, tell me true.

MESSALA.
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell,
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.

BRUTUS.
Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she must die once,
I have the patience to endure it now.

MESSALA.
Even so great men great losses should endure.

CASSIUS.
I have as much of this in art as you,
But yet my nature could not bear it so.

BRUTUS.
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippi presently?

CASSIUS.
I do not think it good.

BRUTUS.
Your reason?

CASSIUS.
This it is:
’Tis better that the enemy seek us;
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still,
Are full of rest, defence, and nimbleness.

BRUTUS.
Good reasons must of force give place to better.
The people ’twixt Philippi and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection;
For they have grudg’d us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refresh’d, new-added, and encourag’d;
From which advantage shall we cut him off
If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our back.

CASSIUS.
Hear me, good brother.

BRUTUS.
Under your pardon. You must note besides,
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe.
The enemy increaseth every day;
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.

CASSIUS.
Then, with your will, go on:
We’ll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
And nature must obey necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say?

CASSIUS.
No more. Good night:
Early tomorrow will we rise, and hence.

Enter Lucius.

BRUTUS.
Lucius! My gown.

[_Exit Lucius._]

Farewell now, good Messala.
Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius,
Good night, and good repose.

CASSIUS.
O my dear brother!
This was an ill beginning of the night.
Never come such division ’tween our souls!
Let it not, Brutus.

Enter Lucius with the gown.

BRUTUS.
Everything is well.

CASSIUS.
Good night, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Good night, good brother.

TITINIUS and MESSALA.
Good night, Lord Brutus.

BRUTUS.
Farewell, everyone.

[_Exeunt Cassius, Titinius and Messala._]

Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?

LUCIUS.
Here in the tent.

BRUTUS.
What, thou speak’st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o’er-watch’d.
Call Claudius and some other of my men;
I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.

LUCIUS.
Varro and Claudius!

Enter Varro and Claudius.

VARRO.
Calls my lord?

BRUTUS.
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
It may be I shall raise you by-and-by
On business to my brother Cassius.

VARRO.
So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.

BRUTUS.
I will not have it so; lie down, good sirs,
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so;
I put it in the pocket of my gown.

[_Servants lie down._]

LUCIUS.
I was sure your lordship did not give it me.

BRUTUS.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?

LUCIUS.
Ay, my lord, an’t please you.

BRUTUS.
It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.

LUCIUS.
It is my duty, sir.

BRUTUS.
I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.

LUCIUS.
I have slept, my lord, already.

BRUTUS.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
I will be good to thee.

[_Lucius plays and sings till he falls asleep._]

This is a sleepy tune. O murd’rous slumber,
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night;
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument;
I’ll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn’d down
Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.

Enter the Ghost of Caesar.

How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me. Art thou anything?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
That mak’st my blood cold and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.

GHOST.
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.

BRUTUS.
Why com’st thou?

GHOST.
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
Well; then I shall see thee again?

GHOST.
Ay, at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.

[_Ghost vanishes._]

Now I have taken heart, thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudius! Sirs, awake! Claudius!

LUCIUS.
The strings, my lord, are false.

BRUTUS.
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake!

LUCIUS.
My lord?

BRUTUS.
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?

LUCIUS.
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.

BRUTUS.
Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?

LUCIUS.
Nothing, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius!
Fellow thou, awake!

VARRO.
My lord?

CLAUDIUS.
My lord?

BRUTUS.
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?

VARRO. CLAUDIUS.
Did we, my lord?

BRUTUS.
Ay. Saw you anything?

VARRO.
No, my lord, I saw nothing.

CLAUDIUS.
Nor I, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
And we will follow.

VARRO. CLAUDIUS.
It shall be done, my lord.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The plains of Philippi.


Enter Octavius, Antony and their Army.

OCTAVIUS.
Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
You said the enemy would not come down,
But keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so; their battles are at hand,
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Answering before we do demand of them.

ANTONY.
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
Wherefore they do it. They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
But ’tis not so.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallant show;
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.

ANTONY.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even field.

OCTAVIUS.
Upon the right hand I. Keep thou the left.

ANTONY.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?

OCTAVIUS.
I do not cross you; but I will do so.

[_March._]

Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius and their Army; Lucilius, Titinius, Messala
and others.

BRUTUS.
They stand, and would have parley.

CASSIUS.
Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.

OCTAVIUS.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?

ANTONY.
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth; the generals would have some words.

OCTAVIUS.
Stir not until the signal.

BRUTUS.
Words before blows: is it so, countrymen?

OCTAVIUS.
Not that we love words better, as you do.

BRUTUS.
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.

ANTONY.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words;
Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart,
Crying, “Long live! Hail, Caesar!”

CASSIUS.
Antony,
The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
And leave them honeyless.

ANTONY.
Not stingless too.

BRUTUS.
O yes, and soundless too,
For you have stol’n their buzzing, Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.

ANTONY.
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers
Hack’d one another in the sides of Caesar:
You show’d your teeth like apes, and fawn’d like hounds,
And bow’d like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet;
Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!

CASSIUS.
Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
This tongue had not offended so today,
If Cassius might have rul’d.

OCTAVIUS.
Come, come, the cause. If arguing makes us sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
Look, I draw a sword against conspirators.
When think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar’s three and thirty wounds
Be well aveng’d; or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.

BRUTUS.
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors’ hands,
Unless thou bring’st them with thee.

OCTAVIUS.
So I hope.
I was not born to die on Brutus’ sword.

BRUTUS.
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.

CASSIUS.
A peevish school-boy, worthless of such honour,
Join’d with a masker and a reveller.

ANTONY.
Old Cassius still!

OCTAVIUS.
Come, Antony; away!
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight today, come to the field;
If not, when you have stomachs.

[_Exeunt Octavius, Antony and their Army._]

CASSIUS.
Why now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark!
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.

BRUTUS.
Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.

LUCILIUS.
My lord?

[_Brutus and Lucilius talk apart._]

CASSIUS.
Messala.

MESSALA.
What says my General?

CASSIUS.
Messala,
This is my birth-day; as this very day
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala:
Be thou my witness that against my will
As Pompey was, am I compell’d to set
Upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong,
And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch’d,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers’ hands,
Who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
Fly o’er our heads, and downward look on us,
As we were sickly prey: their shadows seem
A canopy most fatal, under which
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.

MESSALA.
Believe not so.

CASSIUS.
I but believe it partly,
For I am fresh of spirit, and resolv’d
To meet all perils very constantly.

BRUTUS.
Even so, Lucilius.

CASSIUS.
Now, most noble Brutus,
The gods today stand friendly, that we may,
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
Let’s reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together:
What are you then determined to do?

BRUTUS.
Even by the rule of that philosophy
By which I did blame Cato for the death
Which he did give himself, I know not how,
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life, arming myself with patience
To stay the providence of some high powers
That govern us below.

CASSIUS.
Then, if we lose this battle,
You are contented to be led in triumph
Thorough the streets of Rome?

BRUTUS.
No, Cassius, no: think not, thou noble Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work the Ides of March begun;
And whether we shall meet again I know not.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius.
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.

CASSIUS.
For ever and for ever farewell, Brutus.
If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed;
If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.

BRUTUS.
Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
The end of this day’s business ere it come!
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And then the end is known. Come, ho! away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

BRUTUS.
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
Unto the legions on the other side.

[_Loud alarum._]

Let them set on at once; for I perceive
But cold demeanor in Octavius’ wing,
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala; let them all come down.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

CASSIUS.
O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
Myself have to mine own turn’d enemy:
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
I slew the coward, and did take it from him.

TITINIUS.
O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclos’d.

Enter Pindarus.

PINDARUS.
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord.
Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.

CASSIUS.
This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius;
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?

TITINIUS.
They are, my lord.

CASSIUS.
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
And here again, that I may rest assur’d
Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.

TITINIUS.
I will be here again, even with a thought.

[_Exit._]

CASSIUS.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill,
My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius,
And tell me what thou notest about the field.

[_Pindarus goes up._]

This day I breathed first. Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end.
My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?

PINDARUS.
[_Above._] O my lord!

CASSIUS.
What news?

PINDARUS.
[_Above._] Titinius is enclosed round about
With horsemen, that make to him on the spur,
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
He’s ta’en!

[_Shout._]

And, hark! they shout for joy.

CASSIUS.
Come down; behold no more.
O, coward that I am, to live so long,
To see my best friend ta’en before my face!

[_Pindarus descends._]

Come hither, sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner;
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath.
Now be a freeman; and with this good sword,
That ran through Caesar’s bowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer. Here, take thou the hilts;
And when my face is cover’d, as ’tis now,
Guide thou the sword.—Caesar, thou art reveng’d,
Even with the sword that kill’d thee.

[_Dies._]

PINDARUS.
So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him.

[_Exit._]

Enter Titinius with Messala.

MESSALA.
It is but change, Titinius; for Octavius
Is overthrown by noble Brutus’ power,
As Cassius’ legions are by Antony.

TITINIUS.
These tidings would well comfort Cassius.

MESSALA.
Where did you leave him?

TITINIUS.
All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.

MESSALA.
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?

TITINIUS.
He lies not like the living. O my heart!

MESSALA.
Is not that he?

TITINIUS.
No, this was he, Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
So in his red blood Cassius’ day is set.
The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone;
Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done.
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.

MESSALA.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
O hateful Error, Melancholy’s child!
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O Error, soon conceiv’d,
Thou never com’st unto a happy birth,
But kill’st the mother that engender’d thee!

TITINIUS.
What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus?

MESSALA.
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears. I may say thrusting it;
For piercing steel and darts envenomed
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
As tidings of this sight.

TITINIUS.
Hie you, Messala,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.

[_Exit Messala._]

Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
By your leave, gods. This is a Roman’s part.
Come, Cassius’ sword, and find Titinius’ heart.

[_Dies._]

Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, young Cato, Strato, Volumnius and
Lucilius.

BRUTUS.
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?

MESSALA.
Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.

BRUTUS.
Titinius’ face is upward.

CATO.
He is slain.

BRUTUS.
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.

[_Low alarums._]

CATO.
Brave Titinius!
Look whether he have not crown’d dead Cassius!

BRUTUS.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
It is impossible that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe more tears
To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
Come therefore, and to Thassos send his body.
His funerals shall not be in our camp,
Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come;
And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on.
’Tis three o’clock; and Romans, yet ere night
We shall try fortune in a second fight.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter fighting soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, Messala,
young Cato, Lucilius, Flavius and others.

BRUTUS.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!

CATO.
What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name about the field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants, and my country’s friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!

[_Charges the enemy._]

LUCILIUS.
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
Brutus, my country’s friend; know me for Brutus!

[_Exit, charging the enemy. Cato is overpowered, and falls._]

LUCILIUS.
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
And mayst be honour’d, being Cato’s son.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Yield, or thou diest.

LUCILIUS.
Only I yield to die:
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight;

[_Offering money_]

Kill Brutus, and be honour’d in his death.

FIRST SOLDIER.
We must not. A noble prisoner!

SECOND SOLDIER.
Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta’en.

FIRST SOLDIER.
I’ll tell the news. Here comes the General.

Enter Antony.

Brutus is ta’en, Brutus is ta’en, my lord.

ANTONY.
Where is he?

LUCILIUS.
Safe, Antony; Brutus is safe enough.
I dare assure thee that no enemy
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus.
The gods defend him from so great a shame!
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.

ANTONY.
This is not Brutus, friend; but, I assure you,
A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
And see whether Brutus be alive or dead;
And bring us word unto Octavius’ tent
How everything is chanc’d.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato and Volumnius.

BRUTUS.
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.

CLITUS.
Statilius show’d the torch-light; but, my lord,
He came not back: he is or ta’en or slain.

BRUTUS.
Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word;
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.

[_Whispering._]

CLITUS.
What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.

BRUTUS.
Peace then, no words.

CLITUS.
I’ll rather kill myself.

BRUTUS.
Hark thee, Dardanius.

[_Whispers him._]

DARDANIUS.
Shall I do such a deed?

CLITUS.
O Dardanius!

DARDANIUS.
O Clitus!

CLITUS.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?

DARDANIUS.
To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.

CLITUS.
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.

BRUTUS.
Come hither, good Volumnius; list a word.

VOLUMNIUS.
What says my lord?

BRUTUS.
Why, this, Volumnius:
The ghost of Caesar hath appear’d to me
Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
And this last night here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.

VOLUMNIUS.
Not so, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
Our enemies have beat us to the pit.

[_Low alarums._]

It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
Thou know’st that we two went to school together;
Even for that our love of old, I pr’ythee
Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.

VOLUMNIUS.
That’s not an office for a friend, my lord.

[_Alarums still._]

CLITUS.
Fly, fly, my lord! there is no tarrying here.

BRUTUS.
Farewell to you; and you; and you, Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
Farewell to thee too, Strato.—Countrymen,
My heart doth joy, that yet in all my life
I found no man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this losing day
More than Octavius and Mark Antony
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once; for Brutus’ tongue
Hath almost ended his life’s history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
That have but labour’d to attain this hour.

[_Alarums. Cry within, “Fly, fly, fly!”._]

CLITUS.
Fly, my lord, fly!

BRUTUS.
Hence! I will follow.

[_Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius and Volumnius._]

I pr’ythee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it.
Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?

STRATO.
Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Farewell, good Strato.—Caesar, now be still:
I kill’d not thee with half so good a will.

[_He runs on his sword, and dies._]

Alarum. Retreat. Enter Antony, Octavius, Messala, Lucilius and the
Army.

OCTAVIUS.
What man is that?

MESSALA.
My master’s man. Strato, where is thy master?

STRATO.
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala.
The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath honour by his death.

LUCILIUS.
So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
That thou hast prov’d Lucilius’ saying true.

OCTAVIUS.
All that serv’d Brutus, I will entertain them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?

STRATO.
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.

OCTAVIUS.
Do so, good Messala.

MESSALA.
How died my master, Strato?

STRATO.
I held the sword, and he did run on it.

MESSALA.
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my master.

ANTONY.
This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators save only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
He only, in a general honest thought
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the elements
So mix’d in him that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world, “This was a man!”

OCTAVIUS.
According to his virtue let us use him
With all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
Most like a soldier, order’d honourably.
So call the field to rest, and let’s away,
To part the glories of this happy day.

[_Exeunt._]




THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. A Room of State in King Lear’s Palace
Scene II. A Hall in the Earl of Gloucester’s Castle
Scene III. A Room in the Duke of Albany’s Palace
Scene IV. A Hall in Albany’s Palace
Scene V. Court before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

ACT II
Scene I. A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester
Scene II. Before Gloucester’s Castle
Scene III. The open Country
Scene IV. Before Gloucester’s Castle

ACT III
Scene I. A Heath
Scene II. Another part of the heath
Scene III. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene IV. A part of the Heath with a Hovel
Scene V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene VI. A Chamber in a Farmhouse adjoining the Castle
Scene VII. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

ACT IV
Scene I. The heath
Scene II. Before the Duke of Albany’s Palace
Scene III. The French camp near Dover
Scene IV. The French camp. A Tent
Scene V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene VI. The country near Dover
Scene VII. A Tent in the French Camp

ACT V
Scene I. The Camp of the British Forces near Dover
Scene II. A field between the two Camps
Scene III. The British Camp near Dover




 Dramatis Personæ 

LEAR, King of Britain.
GONERIL, eldest daughter to Lear.
REGAN, second daughter to Lear.
CORDELIA, youngest daughter to Lear.
DUKE of ALBANY, married to Goneril.
DUKE of CORNWALL, married to Regan.
KING of FRANCE.
DUKE of BURGUNDY.
EARL of GLOUCESTER.
EDGAR, elder son to Gloucester.
EDMUND, younger bastard son to Gloucester.
EARL of KENT.
FOOL.
OSWALD, steward to Goneril.
CURAN, a Courtier.
OLD MAN, Tenant to Gloucester.
Physician.
An Officer employed by Edmund.
Gentleman, attendant on Cordelia.
A Herald.
Servants to Cornwall.

Knights attending on the King, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers and
Attendants.

SCENE: Britain




ACT I

SCENE I. A Room of State in King Lear’s Palace


 Enter Kent, Gloucester and Edmund.

KENT.
I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.

GLOUCESTER.
It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the kingdom,
it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for qualities are so
weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.

KENT.
Is not this your son, my lord?

GLOUCESTER.
His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have so often
blush’d to acknowledge him that now I am braz’d to’t.

KENT.
I cannot conceive you.

GLOUCESTER.
Sir, this young fellow’s mother could; whereupon she grew
round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?

KENT.
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.

GLOUCESTER.
But I have a son, sir, by order of law, some year elder than
this, who yet is no dearer in my account: though this knave came
something saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was
his mother fair; there was good sport at his making, and the
whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this noble gentleman,
Edmund?

EDMUND.
No, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
My Lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.

EDMUND.
My services to your lordship.

KENT.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.

EDMUND.
Sir, I shall study deserving.

GLOUCESTER.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again. The King
is coming.

 [_Sennet within._]

 Enter Lear, Cornwall, Albany, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia and Attendants.

LEAR.
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy,
Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
I shall, my lord.

 [_Exeunt Gloucester and Edmund._]

LEAR.
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
In three our kingdom: and ’tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age;
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburden’d crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answer’d. Tell me, my daughters,—
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state,—
Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
That we our largest bounty may extend
Where nature doth with merit challenge.—Goneril,
Our eldest born, speak first.

GONERIL.
Sir, I love you more than word can wield the matter;
Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
Beyond what can be valu’d, rich or rare;
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
As much as child e’er lov’d, or father found;
A love that makes breath poor and speech unable;
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

CORDELIA.
[_Aside._] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.

LEAR.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains rich’d,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady: to thine and Albany’s issue
Be this perpetual.—What says our second daughter,
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.

REGAN.
Sir, I am made of the self mettle as my sister,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
I find she names my very deed of love;
Only she comes too short, that I profess
Myself an enemy to all other joys
Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear highness’ love.

CORDELIA.
[_Aside._] Then poor Cordelia,
And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love’s
More ponderous than my tongue.

LEAR.
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Than that conferr’d on Goneril.—Now, our joy,
Although the last and least; to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Strive to be interess’d; what can you say to draw
A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.

CORDELIA.
Nothing, my lord.

LEAR.
Nothing?

CORDELIA.
Nothing.

LEAR.
Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.

CORDELIA.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty
According to my bond; no more nor less.

LEAR.
How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Lest you may mar your fortunes.

CORDELIA.
Good my lord,
You have begot me, bred me, lov’d me: I
Return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
Why have my sisters husbands if they say
They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty:
Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
To love my father all.

LEAR.
But goes thy heart with this?

CORDELIA.
Ay, my good lord.

LEAR.
So young, and so untender?

CORDELIA.
So young, my lord, and true.

LEAR.
Let it be so, thy truth then be thy dower:
For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
By all the operation of the orbs,
From whom we do exist and cease to be;
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbour’d, pitied, and reliev’d,
As thou my sometime daughter.

KENT.
Good my liege,—

LEAR.
Peace, Kent!
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
I lov’d her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery. [_To Cordelia._] Hence and avoid my sight!
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Her father’s heart from her! Call France. Who stirs?
Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
With my two daughters’ dowers digest this third:
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights,
By you to be sustain’d, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain
The name, and all the addition to a king; the sway,
Revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
This coronet part between you.
 [_Giving the crown._]

KENT.
Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honour’d as my king,
Lov’d as my father, as my master follow’d,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers.—

LEAR.
The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

KENT.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly
When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour’s bound
When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy state;
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgement,
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;
Nor are those empty-hearted, whose low sounds
Reverb no hollowness.

LEAR.
Kent, on thy life, no more.

KENT.
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thine enemies; ne’er fear to lose it,
Thy safety being the motive.

LEAR.
Out of my sight!

KENT.
See better, Lear; and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.

LEAR.
Now, by Apollo,—

KENT.
Now by Apollo, King,
Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.

LEAR.
O vassal! Miscreant!

 [_Laying his hand on his sword._]

ALBANY and CORNWALL.
Dear sir, forbear!

KENT.
Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.

LEAR.
Hear me, recreant! on thine allegiance, hear me!
Since thou hast sought to make us break our vows,
Which we durst never yet, and with strain’d pride
To come betwixt our sentences and our power,
Which nor our nature, nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward.
Five days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from disasters of the world;
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom: if, on the next day following,
Thy banish’d trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
This shall not be revok’d.

KENT.
Fare thee well, King: sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
[_To Cordelia._] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
That justly think’st and hast most rightly said!
[_To Goneril and Regan._] And your large speeches may your deeds
approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
He’ll shape his old course in a country new.

 [_Exit._]

 Flourish. Re-enter Gloucester, with France, Burgundy and Attendants.

CORDELIA.
Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

LEAR.
My Lord of Burgundy,
We first address toward you, who with this king
Hath rivall’d for our daughter: what in the least
Will you require in present dower with her,
Or cease your quest of love?

BURGUNDY.
Most royal majesty,
I crave no more than hath your highness offer’d,
Nor will you tender less.

LEAR.
Right noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
But now her price is fall’n. Sir, there she stands:
If aught within that little-seeming substance,
Or all of it, with our displeasure piec’d,
And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,
She’s there, and she is yours.

BURGUNDY.
I know no answer.

LEAR.
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dower’d with our curse, and stranger’d with our oath,
Take her or leave her?

BURGUNDY.
Pardon me, royal sir;
Election makes not up in such conditions.

LEAR.
Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,
I tell you all her wealth. [_To France_] For you, great king,
I would not from your love make such a stray
To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
T’avert your liking a more worthier way
Than on a wretch whom nature is asham’d
Almost t’acknowledge hers.

FRANCE.
This is most strange,
That she, who even but now was your best object,
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
So many folds of favour. Sure her offence
Must be of such unnatural degree
That monsters it, or your fore-vouch’d affection
Fall into taint; which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.

CORDELIA.
I yet beseech your majesty,
If for I want that glib and oily art
To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
I’ll do’t before I speak,—that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonour’d step,
That hath depriv’d me of your grace and favour;
But even for want of that for which I am richer,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
Hath lost me in your liking.

LEAR.
Better thou hadst
Not been born than not to have pleas’d me better.

FRANCE.
Is it but this?—a tardiness in nature
Which often leaves the history unspoke
That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the lady? Love’s not love
When it is mingled with regards that stands
Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.

BURGUNDY.
Royal King,
Give but that portion which yourself propos’d,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.

LEAR.
Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.

BURGUNDY.
I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
That you must lose a husband.

CORDELIA.
Peace be with Burgundy!
Since that respects of fortunes are his love,
I shall not be his wife.

FRANCE.
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
Most choice forsaken; and most lov’d, despis’d!
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:
Be it lawful, I take up what’s cast away.
Gods, gods! ’Tis strange that from their cold’st neglect
My love should kindle to inflam’d respect.
Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy
Can buy this unpriz’d precious maid of me.
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:
Thou losest here, a better where to find.

LEAR.
Thou hast her, France: let her be thine; for we
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
Without our grace, our love, our benison.
Come, noble Burgundy.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, Cornwall, Albany, Gloucester and
 Attendants._]

FRANCE.
Bid farewell to your sisters.

CORDELIA.
The jewels of our father, with wash’d eyes
Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;
And like a sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are nam’d. Love well our father:
To your professed bosoms I commit him:
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place.
So farewell to you both.

REGAN.
Prescribe not us our duties.

GONERIL.
Let your study
Be to content your lord, who hath receiv’d you
At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

CORDELIA.
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides:
Who covers faults, at last shame derides.
Well may you prosper.

FRANCE.
Come, my fair Cordelia.

 [_Exeunt France and Cordelia._]

GONERIL.
Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
appertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.

REGAN.
That’s most certain, and with you; next month with us.

GONERIL.
You see how full of changes his age is; the observation we
have made of it hath not been little: he always loved our
sister most; and with what poor judgement he hath now cast her
off appears too grossly.

REGAN.
’Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever but slenderly
known himself.

GONERIL.
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must
we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of
long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness
that infirm and choleric years bring with them.

REGAN.
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s
banishment.

GONERIL.
There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
him. Pray you let us hit together: if our father carry authority
with such disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his
will but offend us.

REGAN.
We shall further think of it.

GONERIL.
We must do something, and i’ th’ heat.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Hall in the Earl of Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Edmund with a
letter.

EDMUND.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me?
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
Lag of a brother? Why bastard? Wherefore base?
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true
As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us
With base? With baseness? bastardy? Base, base?
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth within a dull stale tired bed
Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops
Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:
Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund
As to the legitimate: fine word: legitimate!
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
Shall top the legitimate. I grow, I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
Kent banish’d thus! and France in choler parted!
And the King gone tonight! Prescrib’d his pow’r!
Confin’d to exhibition! All this done
Upon the gad!—Edmund, how now! What news?

EDMUND.
So please your lordship, none.

 [_Putting up the letter._]

GLOUCESTER.
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?

EDMUND.
I know no news, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
What paper were you reading?

EDMUND.
Nothing, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? The
quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come,
if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.

EDMUND.
I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother that I
have not all o’er-read; and for so much as I have perus’d, I find it
not fit for your o’er-looking.

GLOUCESTER.
Give me the letter, sir.

EDMUND.
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as in
part I understand them, are to blame.

GLOUCESTER.
Let’s see, let’s see!

EDMUND.
I hope, for my brother’s justification, he wrote this but as an
essay, or taste of my virtue.

GLOUCESTER.
[_Reads._] ‘This policy and reverence of age makes the world
bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways
not as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to me, that
of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
the beloved of your brother EDGAR.’
Hum! Conspiracy? ‘Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half
his revenue.’—My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? A heart
and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?

EDMUND.
It was not brought me, my lord, there’s the cunning of it. I
found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

GLOUCESTER.
You know the character to be your brother’s?

EDMUND.
If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his; but
in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.

GLOUCESTER.
It is his.

EDMUND.
It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
contents.

GLOUCESTER.
Has he never before sounded you in this business?

EDMUND.
Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declined, the father
should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.

GLOUCESTER.
O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him; I’ll apprehend him. Abominable
villain, Where is he?

EDMUND.
I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour, and shake
in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
for him, that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
honour, and to no other pretence of danger.

GLOUCESTER.
Think you so?

EDMUND.
If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us
confer of this, and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction,
and that without any further delay than this very evening.

GLOUCESTER.
He cannot be such a monster.

EDMUND.
Nor is not, sure.

GLOUCESTER.
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. Heaven
and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray you:
frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself
to be in a due resolution.

EDMUND.
I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I shall
find means, and acquaint you withal.

GLOUCESTER.
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us:
though the wisdom of Nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools,
friendship falls off, brothers divide: in cities, mutinies; in
countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked
’twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
prediction; there’s son against father: the King falls from
bias of nature; there’s father against child. We have seen the
best of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
carefully.—And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his
offence, honesty! ’Tis strange.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
sick in fortune, often the surfeits of our own behaviour, we
make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as
if we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance;
drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of
planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his
goatish disposition to the charge of a star. My father compounded
with my mother under the dragon’s tail, and my nativity was under
Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut! I
should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the
firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.

 Enter Edgar.

Pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy: my cue
is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’Bedlam.—O,
these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.

EDGAR.
How now, brother Edmund, what serious contemplation are you in?

EDMUND.
I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
what should follow these eclipses.

EDGAR.
Do you busy yourself with that?

EDMUND.
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as of
unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death, dearth,
dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and
maledictions against King and nobles; needless diffidences,
banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches,
and I know not what.

EDGAR.
How long have you been a sectary astronomical?

EDMUND.
Come, come! when saw you my father last?

EDGAR.
The night gone by.

EDMUND.
Spake you with him?

EDGAR.
Ay, two hours together.

EDMUND.
Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him, by word
nor countenance?

EDGAR.
None at all.

EDMUND.
Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him: and at my
entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
qualified the heat of his displeasure; which at this instant so
rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
scarcely allay.

EDGAR.
Some villain hath done me wrong.

EDMUND.
That’s my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till the
speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me to
my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord
speak: pray ye, go; there’s my key. If you do stir abroad, go
armed.

EDGAR.
Armed, brother?

EDMUND.
Brother, I advise you to the best; I am no honest man
if there be any good meaning toward you: I have told you what I
have seen and heard. But faintly; nothing like the image and
horror of it: pray you, away!

EDGAR.
Shall I hear from you anon?

EDMUND.
I do serve you in this business.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

A credulous father! and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms
That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy! I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Goneril and Oswald.

GONERIL.
Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

GONERIL.
By day and night, he wrongs me; every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other,
That sets us all at odds; I’ll not endure it:
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him; say I am sick.
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer.

 [_Horns within._]

OSWALD.
He’s coming, madam; I hear him.

GONERIL.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your fellows; I’d have it come to question:
If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
Not to be overruled. Idle old man,
That still would manage those authorities
That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
Old fools are babes again; and must be us’d
With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus’d.
Remember what I have said.

OSWALD.
Very well, madam.

GONERIL.
And let his knights have colder looks among you;
What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so;
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Hall in Albany’s Palace

 Enter Kent, disguised.

KENT.
If but as well I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
May carry through itself to that full issue
For which I rais’d my likeness. Now, banish’d Kent,
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn’d,
So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov’st,
Shall find thee full of labours.

 Horns within. Enter King
Lear, Knights and Attendants.

LEAR.
Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

How now! what art thou?

KENT.
A man, sir.

LEAR.
What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?

KENT.
I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve him truly that
will put me in trust; to love him that is honest; to converse
with him that is wise and says little; to fear judgement; to fight
when I cannot choose; and to eat no fish.

LEAR.
What art thou?

KENT.
A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

LEAR.
If thou be’st as poor for a subject as he’s for a king, thou art
poor enough. What wouldst thou?

KENT.
Service.

LEAR.
Who wouldst thou serve?

KENT.
You.

LEAR.
Dost thou know me, fellow?

KENT.
No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would fain
call master.

LEAR.
What’s that?

KENT.
Authority.

LEAR.
What services canst thou do?

KENT.
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of
me is diligence.

LEAR.
How old art thou?

KENT.
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing; nor so old to
dote on her for anything: I have years on my back forty-eight.

LEAR.
Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after dinner, I
will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave? my
fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

 Enter Oswald.

You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?

OSWALD.
So please you,—

 [_Exit._]

LEAR.
What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.

 [_Exit a Knight._]

Where’s my fool? Ho, I think the world’s asleep.

 Re-enter Knight.

How now! where’s that mongrel?

KNIGHT.
He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.

LEAR.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?

KNIGHT.
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.

LEAR.
He would not?

KNIGHT.
My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgement your
highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as
you were wont; there’s a great abatement of kindness appears as
well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also, and
your daughter.

LEAR.
Ha! say’st thou so?

KNIGHT.
I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for my duty
cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.

LEAR.
Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I have perceived
a most faint neglect of late; which I have rather blamed as mine
own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence and purpose of
unkindness: I will look further into’t. But where’s my fool? I
have not seen him this two days.

KNIGHT.
Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much
pined away.

LEAR.
No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you and tell my
daughter I would speak with her.

 [_Exit Attendant._]

Go you, call hither my fool.

 [_Exit another Attendant._]

 Re-enter Oswald.

O, you, sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I, sir?

OSWALD.
My lady’s father.

LEAR.
My lady’s father! my lord’s knave: you whoreson dog! you slave! you
cur!

OSWALD.
I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.

LEAR.
Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?

 [_Striking him._]

OSWALD.
I’ll not be struck, my lord.

KENT.
Nor tripp’d neither, you base football player.

 [_Tripping up his heels._]

LEAR.
I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv’st me, and I’ll love thee.

KENT.
Come, sir, arise, away! I’ll teach you differences: away, away! If you
will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry; but away! go to; have
you wisdom? So.

 [_Pushes Oswald out._]

LEAR.
Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there’s earnest of thy service.

 [_Giving Kent money._]

 Enter Fool.

FOOL.
Let me hire him too; here’s my coxcomb.

 [_Giving Kent his cap._]

LEAR.
How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?

FOOL.
Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.

KENT.
Why, fool?

FOOL.
Why, for taking one’s part that’s out of favour. Nay, an thou
canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch cold shortly:
there, take my coxcomb: why, this fellow has banish’d two on’s
daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will; if
thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. How now,
nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!

LEAR.
Why, my boy?

FOOL.
If I gave them all my living, I’d keep my coxcombs myself. There’s
mine; beg another of thy daughters.

LEAR.
Take heed, sirrah, the whip.

FOOL.
Truth’s a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped out, when
the Lady Brach may stand by the fire and stink.

LEAR.
A pestilent gall to me!

FOOL.
Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.

LEAR.
Do.

FOOL.
Mark it, nuncle:
    Have more than thou showest,
    Speak less than thou knowest,
    Lend less than thou owest,
    Ride more than thou goest,
    Learn more than thou trowest,
    Set less than thou throwest;
    Leave thy drink and thy whore,
    And keep in-a-door,
    And thou shalt have more
    Than two tens to a score.

KENT.
This is nothing, fool.

FOOL.
Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer, you gave me
nothing for’t. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?

LEAR.
Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.

FOOL.
[_to Kent._] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
comes to: he will not believe a fool.

LEAR.
A bitter fool.

FOOL.
Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and
a sweet one?

LEAR.
No, lad; teach me.

FOOL.
   That lord that counsell’d thee
     To give away thy land,
   Come place him here by me,
     Do thou for him stand.
   The sweet and bitter fool
     Will presently appear;
   The one in motley here,
     The other found out there.

LEAR.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?

FOOL.
All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast born
with.

KENT.
This is not altogether fool, my lord.

FOOL.
No, faith; lords and great men will not let me; if I had a
monopoly out, they would have part on’t and ladies too, they
will not let me have all the fool to myself; they’ll be
snatching. Nuncle, give me an egg, and I’ll give thee two
crowns.

LEAR.
What two crowns shall they be?

FOOL.
Why, after I have cut the egg i’ the middle and eat up the
meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i’
the middle and gav’st away both parts, thou bor’st thine ass on
thy back o’er the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
when thou gav’st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.
[_Singing._]
   Fools had ne’er less grace in a year;
     For wise men are grown foppish,
   And know not how their wits to wear,
     Their manners are so apish.

LEAR.
When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?

FOOL.
I have used it, nuncle, e’er since thou mad’st thy daughters thy
mothers; for when thou gav’st them the rod, and put’st down thine
own breeches,
[_Singing._]
   Then they for sudden joy did weep,
     And I for sorrow sung,
   That such a king should play bo-peep,
     And go the fools among.
Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
lie; I would fain learn to lie.

LEAR.
An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.

FOOL.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are: they’ll have me
whipped for speaking true; thou’lt have me whipped for lying;
and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be
any kind o’thing than a fool: and yet I would not be thee,
nuncle: thou hast pared thy wit o’both sides, and left nothing
i’ the middle: here comes one o’ the parings.

 Enter Goneril.

LEAR.
How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
are too much of late i’ the frown.

FOOL.
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for
her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure: I am better
than thou art now. I am a fool, thou art nothing. [_To Goneril._]
Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face bids me, though
you say nothing. Mum, mum,
     He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
     Weary of all, shall want some.
[_Pointing to Lear_.] That’s a shealed peascod.

GONERIL.
Not only, sir, this your all-licens’d fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth
In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,
By what yourself too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course, and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Might in their working do you that offence
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.

FOOL.
For you know, nuncle,
   The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
   That it’s had it head bit off by it young.
So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.

LEAR.
Are you our daughter?

GONERIL.
Come, sir,
I would you would make use of that good wisdom,
Whereof I know you are fraught; and put away
These dispositions, which of late transform you
From what you rightly are.

FOOL.
May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I
love thee!

LEAR.
Doth any here know me? This is not Lear;
Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Either his notion weakens, his discernings
Are lethargied. Ha! waking? ’Tis not so!
Who is it that can tell me who I am?

FOOL.
Lear’s shadow.

LEAR.
I would learn that; for by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge and
reason, I should be false persuaded I had daughters.

FOOL.
Which they will make an obedient father.

LEAR.
Your name, fair gentlewoman?

GONERIL.
This admiration, sir, is much o’ the favour
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright:
As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
Men so disorder’d, so debosh’d and bold
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a grac’d palace. The shame itself doth speak
For instant remedy. Be, then, desir’d
By her that else will take the thing she begs
A little to disquantity your train;
And the remainder that shall still depend,
To be such men as may besort your age,
Which know themselves, and you.

LEAR.
Darkness and devils!
Saddle my horses; call my train together.
Degenerate bastard! I’ll not trouble thee:
Yet have I left a daughter.

GONERIL.
You strike my people; and your disorder’d rabble
Make servants of their betters.

 Enter Albany.

LEAR.
Woe that too late repents!—
[_To Albany._] O, sir, are you come?
Is it your will? Speak, sir.—Prepare my horses.
Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child
Than the sea-monster!

ALBANY.
Pray, sir, be patient.

LEAR.
[_to Goneril._] Detested kite, thou liest.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know;
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
Which, like an engine, wrench’d my frame of nature
From the fix’d place; drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
[_Striking his head._] Beat at this gate that let thy folly in
And thy dear judgement out! Go, go, my people.

ALBANY.
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.

LEAR.
It may be so, my lord.
Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear!
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
To make this creature fruitful!
Into her womb convey sterility!
Dry up in her the organs of increase;
And from her derogate body never spring
A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
Create her child of spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatur’d torment to her!
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;
Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits
To laughter and contempt; that she may feel
How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is
To have a thankless child! Away, away!

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?

GONERIL.
Never afflict yourself to know more of it;
But let his disposition have that scope
That dotage gives it.

 Re-enter Lear.

LEAR.
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?

ALBANY.
What’s the matter, sir?

LEAR.
I’ll tell thee. [_To Goneril._] Life and death! I am
asham’d
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
Th’untented woundings of a father’s curse
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, I’ll pluck ye out,
And cast you with the waters that you lose
To temper clay. Ha! Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think
I have cast off for ever.

 [_Exeunt Lear, Kent and Attendants._]

GONERIL.
Do you mark that?

ALBANY.
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
To the great love I bear you,—

GONERIL.
Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho!
[_To the Fool._] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.

FOOL.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool with thee.
   A fox when one has caught her,
   And such a daughter,
   Should sure to the slaughter,
   If my cap would buy a halter;
   So the fool follows after.

 [_Exit._]

GONERIL.
This man hath had good counsel.—A hundred knights!
’Tis politic and safe to let him keep
At point a hundred knights: yes, that on every dream,
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers,
And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!

ALBANY.
Well, you may fear too far.

GONERIL.
Safer than trust too far:
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.
What he hath utter’d I have writ my sister:
If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
When I have show’d th’unfitness,—

 Re-enter Oswald.

How now, Oswald!
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

GONERIL.
Take you some company, and away to horse:
Inform her full of my particular fear;
And thereto add such reasons of your own
As may compact it more. Get you gone;
And hasten your return.

 [_Exit Oswald._]

No, no, my lord!
This milky gentleness and course of yours,
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
You are much more attask’d for want of wisdom
Than prais’d for harmful mildness.

ALBANY.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell:
Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.

GONERIL.
Nay then,—

ALBANY.
Well, well; the event.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Court before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Lear, Kent and Fool.

LEAR.
Go you before to Gloucester with these letters: acquaint my
daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
shall be there afore you.

KENT.
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.

 [_Exit._]

FOOL.
If a man’s brains were in’s heels, were’t not in danger of
kibes?

LEAR.
Ay, boy.

FOOL.
Then I prithee be merry; thy wit shall not go slipshod.

LEAR.
Ha, ha, ha!

FOOL.
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though
she’s as like this as a crab’s like an apple, yet I can tell
what I can tell.

LEAR.
What canst tell, boy?

FOOL.
She’ll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
canst tell why one’s nose stands i’the middle on’s face?

LEAR.
No.

FOOL.
Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side’s nose, that what a man
cannot smell out, he may spy into.

LEAR.
I did her wrong.

FOOL.
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?

LEAR.
No.

FOOL.
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.

LEAR.
Why?

FOOL.
Why, to put’s head in; not to give it away to his daughters, and
leave his horns without a case.

LEAR.
I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my horses ready?

FOOL.
Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why the seven stars are
no more than seven is a pretty reason.

LEAR.
Because they are not eight?

FOOL.
Yes indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.

LEAR.
To tak’t again perforce!—Monster ingratitude!

FOOL.
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’d have thee beaten for being
old before thy time.

LEAR.
How’s that?

FOOL.
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.

LEAR.
O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

 Enter Gentleman.

How now? are the horses ready?

GENTLEMAN.
Ready, my lord.

LEAR.
Come, boy.

FOOL.
She that’s a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester


 Enter Edmund and Curan, meeting.

EDMUND.
Save thee, Curan.

CURAN.
And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
here with him this night.

EDMUND.
How comes that?

CURAN.
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad; I mean the
whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?

EDMUND.
Not I: pray you, what are they?

CURAN.
Have you heard of no likely wars toward, ’twixt the two dukes
of Cornwall and Albany?

EDMUND.
Not a word.

CURAN.
You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
The Duke be here tonight? The better! best!
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother;
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!
Brother, a word, descend, brother, I say!

 Enter Edgar.

My father watches: O sir, fly this place;
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night.
Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
He’s coming hither; now, i’ the night, i’ the haste,
And Regan with him: have you nothing said
Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.

EDGAR.
I am sure on’t, not a word.

EDMUND.
I hear my father coming:—pardon me;
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you:
Draw: seem to defend yourself: now quit you well.
Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!
Fly, brother. Torches, torches!—So farewell.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavour: [_Wounds his arm._]
I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport. Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?

 Enter Gloucester and
Servants with torches.

GLOUCESTER.
Now, Edmund, where’s the villain?

EDMUND.
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand auspicious mistress.

GLOUCESTER.
But where is he?

EDMUND.
Look, sir, I bleed.

GLOUCESTER.
Where is the villain, Edmund?

EDMUND.
Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could,—

GLOUCESTER.
Pursue him, ho! Go after.

 [_Exeunt Servants._]

—By no means what?

EDMUND.
Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;
But that I told him the revenging gods
’Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared sword, he charges home
My unprovided body, latch’d mine arm;
But when he saw my best alarum’d spirits,
Bold in the quarrel’s right, rous’d to th’encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.

GLOUCESTER.
Let him fly far;
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
And found—dispatch’d. The noble Duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight:
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
He that conceals him, death.

EDMUND.
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
I threaten’d to discover him: he replied,
‘Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faith’d? No: what I should deny
As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
My very character, I’d turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
To make thee seek it.

GLOUCESTER.
O strange and fast’ned villain!
Would he deny his letter, said he? I never got him.

 [_Tucket within._]

Hark, the Duke’s trumpets! I know not why he comes.
All ports I’ll bar; the villain shall not scape;
The Duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have due note of him; and of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means
To make thee capable.

 Enter Cornwall, Regan and
Attendants.

CORNWALL.
How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

REGAN.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th’offender. How dost, my lord?

GLOUCESTER.
O madam, my old heart is crack’d, it’s crack’d!

REGAN.
What, did my father’s godson seek your life?
He whom my father nam’d? your Edgar?

GLOUCESTER.
O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!

REGAN.
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
That tend upon my father?

GLOUCESTER.
I know not, madam; ’tis too bad, too bad.

EDMUND.
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.

REGAN.
No marvel then though he were ill affected:
’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,
To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
I have this present evening from my sister
Been well inform’d of them; and with such cautions
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
I’ll not be there.

CORNWALL.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A childlike office.

EDMUND.
It was my duty, sir.

GLOUCESTER.
He did bewray his practice; and receiv’d
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

CORNWALL.
Is he pursued?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, my good lord.

CORNWALL.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be fear’d of doing harm: make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
You we first seize on.

EDMUND.
I shall serve you, sir, truly, however else.

GLOUCESTER.
For him I thank your grace.

CORNWALL.
You know not why we came to visit you?

REGAN.
Thus out of season, threading dark-ey’d night:
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Wherein we must have use of your advice.
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
To answer from our home; the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
Your needful counsel to our business,
Which craves the instant use.

GLOUCESTER.
I serve you, madam:
Your graces are right welcome.

 [_Exeunt. Flourish._]

SCENE II. Before Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Kent and Oswald,
severally.

OSWALD.
Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?

KENT.
Ay.

OSWALD.
Where may we set our horses?

KENT.
I’ the mire.

OSWALD.
Prithee, if thou lov’st me, tell me.

KENT.
I love thee not.

OSWALD.
Why then, I care not for thee.

KENT.
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee care for me.

OSWALD.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.

KENT.
Fellow, I know thee.

OSWALD.
What dost thou know me for?

KENT.
A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking, whoreson,
glass-gazing, super-serviceable, finical rogue;
one trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
good service, and art nothing but the composition of a
knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel
bitch: one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou
deniest the least syllable of thy addition.

OSWALD.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that’s
neither known of thee nor knows thee?

KENT.
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me! Is
it two days ago since I tripped up thy heels and beat thee before
the King? Draw, you rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
shines; I’ll make a sop o’ the moonshine of you: draw, you
whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw!

 [_Drawing his sword._]

OSWALD.
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.

KENT.
Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the King; and
take vanity the puppet’s part against the royalty of her father:
draw, you rogue, or I’ll so carbonado your shanks:—draw, you rascal;
come your ways!

OSWALD.
Help, ho! murder! help!

KENT.
Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat slave, strike!

 [_Beating him._]

OSWALD.
Help, ho! murder! murder!

 Enter Edmund, Cornwall, Regan,
Gloucester and Servants.

EDMUND.
How now! What’s the matter? Part!

KENT.
With you, goodman boy, if you please: come, I’ll flesh ye; come
on, young master.

GLOUCESTER.
Weapons! arms! What’s the matter here?

CORNWALL.
Keep peace, upon your lives, he dies that strikes again. What is the
matter?

REGAN.
The messengers from our sister and the King.

CORNWALL.
What is your difference? Speak.

OSWALD.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.

KENT.
No marvel, you have so bestirr’d your valour. You cowardly
rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.

CORNWALL.
Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?

KENT.
Ay, a tailor, sir: a stonecutter or a painter could not have
made him so ill, though he had been but two years at the trade.

CORNWALL.
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?

OSWALD.
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his grey
beard,—

KENT.
Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if you’ll
give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and
daub the walls of a jakes with him. Spare my grey beard, you wagtail?

CORNWALL.
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

KENT.
Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.

CORNWALL.
Why art thou angry?

KENT.
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain
Which are too intrince t’unloose; smooth every passion
That in the natures of their lords rebel;
Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
I’d drive ye cackling home to Camelot.

CORNWALL.
What, art thou mad, old fellow?

GLOUCESTER.
How fell you out? Say that.

KENT.
No contraries hold more antipathy
Than I and such a knave.

CORNWALL.
Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?

KENT.
His countenance likes me not.

CORNWALL.
No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.

KENT.
Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.

CORNWALL.
This is some fellow
Who, having been prais’d for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain.
These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly-ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.

KENT.
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under th’allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flickering Phoebus’ front,—

CORNWALL.
What mean’st by this?

KENT.
To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I know,
sir, I am no flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain accent
was a plain knave; which, for my part, I will not be, though I
should win your displeasure to entreat me to’t.

CORNWALL.
What was the offence you gave him?

OSWALD.
I never gave him any:
It pleas’d the King his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure,
Tripp’d me behind; being down, insulted, rail’d
And put upon him such a deal of man,
That worthied him, got praises of the King
For him attempting who was self-subdu’d;
And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.

KENT.
None of these rogues and cowards
But Ajax is their fool.

CORNWALL.
Fetch forth the stocks!
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
We’ll teach you.

KENT.
Sir, I am too old to learn:
Call not your stocks for me: I serve the King;
On whose employment I was sent to you:
You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
Stocking his messenger.

CORNWALL.
Fetch forth the stocks!
As I have life and honour, there shall he sit till noon.

REGAN.
Till noon! Till night, my lord; and all night too!

KENT.
Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,
You should not use me so.

REGAN.
Sir, being his knave, I will.

 [_Stocks brought out._]

CORNWALL.
This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!

GLOUCESTER.
Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
His fault is much, and the good King his master
Will check him for’t: your purpos’d low correction
Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches
For pilferings and most common trespasses,
Are punish’d with. The King must take it ill
That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.

CORNWALL.
I’ll answer that.

REGAN.
My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her gentleman abus’d, assaulted,
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.

 [_Kent is put in the
stocks._]

CORNWALL.
Come, my good lord, away.

 [_Exeunt all but Gloucester and Kent._]

GLOUCESTER.
I am sorry for thee, friend; ’tis the Duke’s pleasure,
Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
Will not be rubb’d nor stopp’d; I’ll entreat for thee.

KENT.
Pray do not, sir: I have watch’d, and travell’d hard;
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I’ll whistle.
A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels:
Give you good morrow!

GLOUCESTER.
The Duke’s to blame in this: ’twill be ill taken.

 [_Exit._]

KENT.
Good King, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st
To the warm sun.
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been inform’d
Of my obscured course. And shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatch’d,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging.
Fortune, good night: smile once more, turn thy wheel!

 [_He sleeps._]

SCENE III. The open Country

 Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
I heard myself proclaim’d,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escap’d the hunt. No port is free, no place
That guard and most unusual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. While I may scape
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast: my face I’ll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins; elf all my hair in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numb’d and mortified bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom,
That’s something yet: Edgar I nothing am.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Before Gloucester’s Castle; Kent in the stocks

 Enter Lear, Fool and Gentleman.

LEAR.
’Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my messenger.

GENTLEMAN.
As I learn’d,
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.

KENT.
Hail to thee, noble master!

LEAR.
Ha! Mak’st thou this shame thy pastime?

KENT.
No, my lord.

FOOL.
Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
heads; dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the loins, and
men by the legs: when a man is overlusty at legs, then he
wears wooden nether-stocks.

LEAR.
What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?

KENT.
It is both he and she,
Your son and daughter.

LEAR.
No.

KENT.
Yes.

LEAR.
No, I say.

KENT.
I say, yea.

LEAR.
No, no; they would not.

KENT.
Yes, they have.

LEAR.
By Jupiter, I swear no.

KENT.
By Juno, I swear ay.

LEAR.
They durst not do’t.
They could not, would not do’t; ’tis worse than murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.

KENT.
My lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness’ letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that show’d
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stew’d in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Deliver’d letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on those contents,
They summon’d up their meiny, straight took horse;
Commanded me to follow and attend
The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceiv’d had poison’d mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Display’d so saucily against your highness,
Having more man than wit about me, drew;
He rais’d the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.

FOOL.
Winter’s not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.
  Fathers that wear rags
    Do make their children blind,
  But fathers that bear bags
    Shall see their children kind.
  Fortune, that arrant whore,
  Ne’er turns the key to th’ poor.
But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
daughters as thou canst tell in a year.

LEAR.
O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
_Hysterica passio_, down, thou climbing sorrow,
Thy element’s below! Where is this daughter?

KENT.
With the earl, sir, here within.

LEAR.
Follow me not; stay here.

 [_Exit._]

GENTLEMAN.
Made you no more offence but what you speak of?

KENT.
None.
How chance the King comes with so small a number?

FOOL.
An thou hadst been set i’ the stocks for that question,
thou hadst well deserved it.

KENT.
Why, fool?

FOOL.
We’ll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there’s no
labouring i’the winter. All that follow their noses are led by
their eyes but blind men; and there’s not a nose among twenty
but can smell him that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great
wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I
would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
             And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain,
             And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
             And let the wise man fly:
          The knave turns fool that runs away;
             The fool no knave perdy.
    

KENT.
Where learn’d you this, fool?

FOOL.
Not i’ the stocks, fool.

 Enter Lear and Gloucester.

LEAR.
Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
They have travell’d all the night? Mere fetches;
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.

GLOUCESTER.
My dear lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke;
How unremovable and fix’d he is
In his own course.

LEAR.
Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
I’d speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

GLOUCESTER.
Well, my good lord, I have inform’d them so.

LEAR.
Inform’d them! Dost thou understand me, man?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, my good lord.

LEAR.
The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends, service,
Are they inform’d of this? My breath and blood!
Fiery? The fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that—
No, but not yet: maybe he is not well:
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound: we are not ourselves
When nature, being oppress’d, commands the mind
To suffer with the body: I’ll forbear;
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indispos’d and sickly fit
For the sound man. [_Looking on Kent._]
Death on my state! Wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the Duke and’s wife I’d speak with them,
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum
Till it cry sleep to death.

GLOUCESTER.
I would have all well betwixt you.

 [_Exit._]

LEAR.
O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!

FOOL.
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put ’em
i’ the paste alive; she knapped ’em o’ the coxcombs
with a stick and cried ‘Down, wantons, down!’ ’Twas
her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse buttered his hay.

 Enter Cornwall, Regan,
Gloucester and Servants.

LEAR.
Good morrow to you both.

CORNWALL.
Hail to your grace!

 [_Kent here set at liberty._]

REGAN.
I am glad to see your highness.

LEAR.
Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,
Sepulchring an adultress. [_To Kent_] O, are you free?
Some other time for that.—Beloved Regan,
Thy sister’s naught: O Regan, she hath tied
Sharp-tooth’d unkindness, like a vulture, here.

 [_Points to his heart._]

I can scarce speak to thee; thou’lt not believe
With how deprav’d a quality—O Regan!

REGAN.
I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty.

LEAR.
Say, how is that?

REGAN.
I cannot think my sister in the least
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
She have restrain’d the riots of your followers,
’Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
As clears her from all blame.

LEAR.
My curses on her.

REGAN.
O, sir, you are old;
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of her confine: you should be rul’d and led
By some discretion, that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you,
That to our sister you do make return;
Say you have wrong’d her, sir.

LEAR.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house?
‘Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
[_Kneeling._]
Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg
That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.’

REGAN.
Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks:
Return you to my sister.

LEAR.
[_Rising._] Never, Regan:
She hath abated me of half my train;
Look’d black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
All the stor’d vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!

CORNWALL.
Fie, sir, fie!

LEAR.
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
You fen-suck’d fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
To fall and blast her pride!

REGAN.
O the blest gods!
So will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.

LEAR.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee o’er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce; but thine
Do comfort, and not burn. ’Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know’st
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;
Thy half o’ the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endow’d.

REGAN.
Good sir, to the purpose.

LEAR.
Who put my man i’ the stocks?

 [_Tucket within._]

CORNWALL.
What trumpet’s that?

REGAN.
I know’t, my sister’s: this approves her letter,
That she would soon be here.

 Enter Oswald.

Is your lady come?

LEAR.
This is a slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!

CORNWALL.
What means your grace?

LEAR.
Who stock’d my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou didst not know on’t. Who comes here? O heavens!

 Enter Goneril.

If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,
Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!
[_To Goneril._] Art not asham’d to look upon this beard?
O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?

GONERIL.
Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
All’s not offence that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.

LEAR.
O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold? How came my man i’ the stocks?

CORNWALL.
I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
Deserv’d much less advancement.

LEAR.
You? Did you?

REGAN.
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If, till the expiration of your month,
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

LEAR.
Return to her, and fifty men dismiss’d?
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity o’ the air;
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,
Necessity’s sharp pinch! Return with her?
Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.

 [_Pointing to Oswald._]

GONERIL.
At your choice, sir.

LEAR.
I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:
I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
We’ll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
A plague sore, or embossed carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee;
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:
Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred knights.

REGAN.
Not altogether so,
I look’d not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so—
But she knows what she does.

LEAR.
Is this well spoken?

REGAN.
I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speak ’gainst so great a number? How in one house
Should many people, under two commands,
Hold amity? ’Tis hard; almost impossible.

GONERIL.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

REGAN.
Why not, my lord? If then they chanc’d to slack ye,
We could control them. If you will come to me,—
For now I spy a danger,—I entreat you
To bring but five-and-twenty: to no more
Will I give place or notice.

LEAR.
I gave you all,—

REGAN.
And in good time you gave it.

LEAR.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five-and-twenty, Regan, said you so?

REGAN.
And speak’t again my lord; no more with me.

LEAR.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour’d
When others are more wicked; not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise.
[_To Goneril._] I’ll go with thee:
Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
And thou art twice her love.

GONERIL.
Hear me, my lord:
What need you five-and-twenty? Ten? Or five?
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?

REGAN.
What need one?

LEAR.
O, reason not the need: our basest beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man’s life is cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear’st
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,—
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
And let not women’s weapons, water-drops,
Stain my man’s cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both
That all the world shall,—I will do such things,—
What they are yet, I know not; but they shall be
The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep;
No, I’ll not weep:— [_Storm and tempest._]
I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere I’ll weep.—O fool, I shall go mad!

 [_Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent and Fool._]

CORNWALL.
Let us withdraw; ’twill be a storm.

REGAN.
This house is little: the old man and his people
Cannot be well bestow’d.

GONERIL.
’Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
And must needs taste his folly.

REGAN.
For his particular, I’ll receive him gladly,
But not one follower.

GONERIL.
So am I purpos’d.
Where is my lord of Gloucester?

 Enter Gloucester.

CORNWALL.
Followed the old man forth, he is return’d.

GLOUCESTER.
The King is in high rage.

CORNWALL.
Whither is he going?

GLOUCESTER.
He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.

CORNWALL.
’Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.

GONERIL.
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
There’s scarce a bush.

REGAN.
O, sir, to wilful men
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abus’d, wisdom bids fear.

CORNWALL.
Shut up your doors, my lord; ’tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well: come out o’ the storm.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A Heath


 A storm with thunder and lightning. Enter Kent and a Gentleman,
severally.

KENT.
Who’s there, besides foul weather?

GENTLEMAN.
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.

KENT.
I know you. Where’s the King?

GENTLEMAN.
Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled waters ’bove the main,
That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyeless rage,
Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
And bids what will take all.

KENT.
But who is with him?

GENTLEMAN.
None but the fool, who labours to out-jest
His heart-struck injuries.

KENT.
Sir, I do know you;
And dare, upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Although as yet the face of it be cover’d
With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall;
Who have, as who have not, that their great stars
Throne’d and set high; servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes;
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Against the old kind King; or something deeper,
Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings;—
But, true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scatter’d kingdom; who already,
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports, and are at point
To show their open banner.—Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;
And from some knowledge and assurance
Offer this office to you.

GENTLEMAN.
I will talk further with you.

KENT.
No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,
As fear not but you shall, show her this ring;
And she will tell you who your fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
I will go seek the King.

GENTLEMAN.
Give me your hand: have you no more to say?

KENT.
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
That, when we have found the King, in which your pain
That way, I’ll this; he that first lights on him
Holla the other.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the heath

 Storm continues. Enter Lear
and Fool.

LEAR.
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage! blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks!
You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o’ the world!
Crack nature’s moulds, all germens spill at once,
That make ingrateful man!

FOOL.
O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry house is better than this
rain-water out o’ door. Good nuncle, in; and ask thy daughters
blessing: here’s a night pities neither wise men nor fools.

LEAR.
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters;
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
I never gave you kingdom, call’d you children;
You owe me no subscription: then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and despis’d old man:
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That will with two pernicious daughters join
Your high-engender’d battles ’gainst a head
So old and white as this! O! O! ’tis foul!

FOOL.
He that has a house to put’s head in has a good head-piece.
   The codpiece that will house
     Before the head has any,
   The head and he shall louse:
     So beggars marry many.
   The man that makes his toe
     What he his heart should make
   Shall of a corn cry woe,
     And turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.

LEAR.
No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
I will say nothing.

 Enter Kent.

KENT.
Who’s there?

FOOL.
Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece; that’s a wise man and a
fool.

KENT.
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never
Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry
Th’affliction, nor the fear.

LEAR.
Let the great gods,
That keep this dreadful pudder o’er our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
That hast within thee undivulged crimes
Unwhipp’d of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
Thou perjur’d, and thou simular of virtue
That art incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake
That under covert and convenient seeming
Hast practis’d on man’s life: close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents, and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinn’d against than sinning.

KENT.
Alack, bareheaded!
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
Some friendship will it lend you ’gainst the tempest:
Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house,—
More harder than the stones whereof ’tis rais’d;
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in,—return, and force
Their scanted courtesy.

LEAR.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange,
That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.
Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
That’s sorry yet for thee.

FOOL.
[_Singing._]
   He that has and a little tiny wit,
     With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain,
   Must make content with his fortunes fit,
     Though the rain it raineth every day.

LEAR.
True, boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.

 [_Exeunt Lear and Kent._]

FOOL.
This is a brave night to cool a courtezan. I’ll speak a prophecy
ere I go:
   When priests are more in word than matter;
   When brewers mar their malt with water;
   When nobles are their tailors’ tutors;
   No heretics burn’d, but wenches’ suitors;
   When every case in law is right;
   No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
   When slanders do not live in tongues;
   Nor cut-purses come not to throngs;
   When usurers tell their gold i’ the field;
   And bawds and whores do churches build,
   Then shall the realm of Albion
   Come to great confusion:
   Then comes the time, who lives to see’t,
   That going shall be us’d with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Gloucester and Edmund.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing. When I
desired their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the
use of mine own house; charged me on pain of perpetual displeasure,
neither to speak of him, entreat for him, or any way sustain him.

EDMUND.
Most savage and unnatural!

GLOUCESTER.
Go to; say you nothing. There is division between the Dukes,
and a worse matter than that: I have received a letter this
night;—’tis dangerous to be spoken;—I have locked the letter
in my closet: these injuries the King now bears will be revenged
home; there’s part of a power already footed: we must incline to
the King. I will look him, and privily relieve him: go you and
maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
perceived: if he ask for me, I am ill, and gone to bed. If I
die for it, as no less is threatened me, the King my old master
must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund;
pray you be careful.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
Instantly know; and of that letter too.
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses, no less than all:
The younger rises when the old doth fall.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. A part of the Heath with a Hovel

 Storm continues. Enter Lear,
Kent and Fool.

KENT.
Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:
The tyranny of the open night’s too rough
For nature to endure.

LEAR.
Let me alone.

KENT.
Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR.
Wilt break my heart?

KENT.
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.

LEAR.
Thou think’st ’tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin: so ’tis to thee,
But where the greater malady is fix’d,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear;
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Thou’dst meet the bear i’ the mouth. When the mind’s
free,
The body’s delicate: the tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to’t? But I will punish home;
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure:
In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,
O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
No more of that.

KENT.
Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR.
Prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease:
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I’ll go in.
[_To the Fool._] In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,
Nay, get thee in. I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep.

 [_Fool goes in._]

Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your loop’d and window’d raggedness, defend you
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta’en
Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
And show the heavens more just.

EDGAR.
[_Within._] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!

 [_The Fool runs out from the hovel._]

FOOL.
Come not in here, nuncle, here’s a spirit.
Help me, help me!

KENT.
Give me thy hand. Who’s there?

FOOL.
A spirit, a spirit: he says his name’s poor Tom.

KENT.
What art thou that dost grumble there i’ the straw?
Come forth.

 Enter Edgar, disguised as a
madman.

EDGAR.
Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn blows the
cold wind. Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.

LEAR.
Didst thou give all to thy two daughters?
And art thou come to this?

EDGAR.
Who gives anything to poor Tom? Whom the foul fiend hath led
through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o’er
bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and
halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge; made him proud
of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four-inched
bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five
wits! 	Tom’s a-cold. O, do, de, do, de, do, de. Bless thee from
whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity,
whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now, and
there,—and there again, and there.

 [_Storm continues._]

LEAR.
What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give ’em all?

FOOL.
Nay, he reserv’d a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

LEAR.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o’er men’s faults light on thy daughters!

KENT.
He hath no daughters, sir.

LEAR.
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu’d nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment! ’twas this flesh begot
Those pelican daughters.

EDGAR.
   Pillicock sat on Pillicock hill,
     Alow, alow, loo loo!

FOOL.
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

EDGAR.
Take heed o’ th’ foul fiend: obey thy parents; keep thy word
justly; swear not; commit not with man’s sworn spouse; set not
thy sweet-heart on proud array. Tom’s a-cold.

LEAR.
What hast thou been?

EDGAR.
A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled my hair;
wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of my mistress’ heart, and
did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven. One that
slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it. Wine loved
I deeply, dice dearly; and in woman out-paramour’d the Turk.
False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox
in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand
out of plackets, thy pen from lender’s book, and defy the foul
fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind: says
suum, mun, nonny. Dolphin my boy, boy, sessa! let him trot by.

 [_Storm still continues._]

LEAR.
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered
body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than this? Consider
him well. Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no
wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here’s three on’s are
sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself: unaccommodated man is no more
but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you
lendings! Come, unbutton here.

 [_Tears off his clothes._]

FOOL.
Prithee, nuncle, be contented; ’tis a naughty night to swim
in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher’s
heart, a small spark, all the rest on’s body cold. Look, here
comes a walking fire.

EDGAR.
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins at curfew, and walks
till the first cock; he gives the web and the pin, squints the eye, and
makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature
of earth.
   Swithold footed thrice the old;
   He met the nightmare, and her nine-fold;
     Bid her alight and her troth plight,
   And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

KENT.
How fares your grace?

 Enter Gloucester with a
torch.

LEAR.
What’s he?

KENT.
Who’s there? What is’t you seek?

GLOUCESTER.
What are you there? Your names?

EDGAR.
Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole, the
wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the
foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat
and the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the standing pool;
who is whipped from tithing to tithing, and stocked, punished,
and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts
to his body,
     Horse to ride, and weapon to wear.
     But mice and rats and such small deer,
     Have been Tom’s food for seven long year.
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!

GLOUCESTER.
What, hath your grace no better company?

EDGAR.
The prince of darkness is a gentleman:
Modo he’s call’d, and Mahu.

GLOUCESTER.
Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile
That it doth hate what gets it.

EDGAR.
Poor Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER.
Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
T’obey in all your daughters’ hard commands;
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventur’d to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.

LEAR.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
What is the cause of thunder?

KENT.
Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.

LEAR.
I’ll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
What is your study?

EDGAR.
How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.

LEAR.
Let me ask you one word in private.

KENT.
Importune him once more to go, my lord;
His wits begin t’unsettle.

GLOUCESTER.
Canst thou blame him?
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banish’d man!
Thou sayest the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee, friend,
I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
Now outlaw’d from my blood; he sought my life
But lately, very late: I lov’d him, friend,
No father his son dearer: true to tell thee,

 [_Storm continues._]

The grief hath craz’d my wits. What a night’s this!
I do beseech your grace.

LEAR.
O, cry you mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.

EDGAR.
Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER.
In, fellow, there, into the hovel; keep thee warm.

LEAR.
Come, let’s in all.

KENT.
This way, my lord.

LEAR.
With him;
I will keep still with my philosopher.

KENT.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.

GLOUCESTER.
Take him you on.

KENT.
Sirrah, come on; go along with us.

LEAR.
Come, good Athenian.

GLOUCESTER.
No words, no words, hush.

EDGAR.
   Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
   His word was still—Fie, foh, and fum,
   I smell the blood of a British man.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Cornwall and Edmund.

CORNWALL.
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.

EDMUND.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
loyalty, something fears me to think of.

CORNWALL.
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother’s evil
disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
a-work by a reproveable badness in himself.

EDMUND.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just! This
is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent
party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that this treason
were not; or not I the detector!

CORNWALL.
Go with me to the Duchess.

EDMUND.
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business
in hand.

CORNWALL.
True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek out
where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.

EDMUND.
[_Aside._] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his
suspicion more fully. I will persever in my course of loyalty,
though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.

CORNWALL.
I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a dearer father
in my love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. A Chamber in a Farmhouse adjoining the Castle

 Enter Gloucester, Lear, Kent,
Fool and Edgar.

GLOUCESTER.
Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
piece out the comfort with what addition I can: I will not be
long from you.

KENT.
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience:—
the gods reward your kindness!

 [_Exit Gloucester._]

EDGAR.
Frateretto calls me; and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake
of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.

FOOL.
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
yeoman.

LEAR.
A king, a king!

FOOL.
No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he’s a mad
yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.

LEAR.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon ’em.

EDGAR.
The foul fiend bites my back.

FOOL.
He’s mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse’s health,
a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath.

LEAR.
It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
[_To Edgar._] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;
[_To the Fool._] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she-foxes!—

EDGAR.
Look, where he stands and glares! Want’st thou eyes at trial, madam?
  Come o’er the bourn, Bessy, to me.

FOOL.
   Her boat hath a leak,
   And she must not speak
   Why she dares not come over to thee.

EDGAR.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly for two white herring. Croak not, black
angel; I have no food for thee.

KENT.
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz’d;
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?

LEAR.
I’ll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
[_To Edgar._] Thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
[_To the Fool._] And thou, his yokefellow of equity,
Bench by his side. [_To Kent._] You are o’ the commission,
Sit you too.

EDGAR.
   Let us deal justly.
   Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
     Thy sheep be in the corn;
   And for one blast of thy minikin mouth
     Thy sheep shall take no harm.
Purr! the cat is grey.

LEAR.
Arraign her first; ’tis Goneril. I here take my oath before
this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor King her father.

FOOL.
Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?

LEAR.
She cannot deny it.

FOOL.
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.

LEAR.
And here’s another, whose warp’d looks proclaim
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape?

EDGAR.
Bless thy five wits!

KENT.
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
That you so oft have boasted to retain?

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] My tears begin to take his part so much
They mar my counterfeiting.

LEAR.
The little dogs and all,
Trey, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.

EDGAR.
Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
   Be thy mouth or black or white,
   Tooth that poisons if it bite;
   Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
   Hound or spaniel, brach or him,
   Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
   Tom will make them weep and wail;
   For, with throwing thus my head,
   Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
Do, de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns.
Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.

LEAR.
Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds about her
heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
hearts? [_To Edgar._] You, sir, I entertain you for one of my
hundred; only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You’ll
say they are Persian; but let them be changed.

KENT.
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.

LEAR.
Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
So, so. We’ll go to supper i’ the morning.

FOOL.
And I’ll go to bed at noon.

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
Come hither, friend;
Where is the King my master?

KENT.
Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.

GLOUCESTER.
Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;
I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him;
There is a litter ready; lay him in’t
And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master;
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up;
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.

KENT.
Oppressed nature sleeps.
This rest might yet have balm’d thy broken sinews,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure. Come, help to bear thy master;
[_To the Fool._] Thou must not stay behind.

GLOUCESTER.
Come, come, away!

 [_Exeunt Kent, Gloucester and the Fool bearing off Lear._]

EDGAR.
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers, suffers most i’ the mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
But then the mind much sufferance doth o’erskip
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the King bow;
He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,
When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe ’scape the King!
Lurk, lurk.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VII. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril,
Edmund and Servants.

CORNWALL.
Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him this letter: the army
of France is landed. Seek out the traitor Gloucester.

 [_Exeunt some of the Servants._]

REGAN.
Hang him instantly.

GONERIL.
Pluck out his eyes.

CORNWALL.
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our sister
company: the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
are going, to a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
Farewell, dear sister, farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

 Enter Oswald.

How now! Where’s the King?

OSWALD.
My lord of Gloucester hath convey’d him hence:
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
Who, with some other of the lord’s dependants,
Are gone with him toward Dover: where they boast
To have well-armed friends.

CORNWALL.
Get horses for your mistress.

GONERIL.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

CORNWALL.
Edmund, farewell.

 [_Exeunt Goneril, Edmund and Oswald._]

Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.

 [_Exeunt other Servants._]

Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control. Who’s there? The traitor?

 Enter Gloucester
and Servants.

REGAN.
Ingrateful fox! ’tis he.

CORNWALL.
Bind fast his corky arms.

GLOUCESTER.
What mean your graces?
Good my friends, consider you are my guests.
Do me no foul play, friends.

CORNWALL.
Bind him, I say.

 [_Servants bind him._]

REGAN.
Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!

GLOUCESTER.
Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.

CORNWALL.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find—

 [_Regan plucks his beard._]

GLOUCESTER.
By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard.

REGAN.
So white, and such a traitor!

GLOUCESTER.
Naughty lady,
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host:
With robber’s hands my hospitable favours
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

CORNWALL.
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?

REGAN.
Be simple answer’d, for we know the truth.

CORNWALL.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors,
Late footed in the kingdom?

REGAN.
To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
Speak.

GLOUCESTER.
I have a letter guessingly set down,
Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,
And not from one oppos’d.

CORNWALL.
Cunning.

REGAN.
And false.

CORNWALL.
Where hast thou sent the King?

GLOUCESTER.
To Dover.

REGAN.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charg’d at peril,—

CORNWALL.
Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.

GLOUCESTER.
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.

REGAN.
Wherefore to Dover, sir?

GLOUCESTER.
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endur’d, would have buoy’d up,
And quench’d the stelled fires;
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howl’d that stern time,
Thou shouldst have said, ‘Good porter, turn the key.’
All cruels else subscrib’d: but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.

CORNWALL.
See’t shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.

 [_Gloucester is held down in his chair, while Cornwall plucks out one
 of his eyes and sets his foot on it._]

GLOUCESTER.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help!—O cruel! O you gods!

REGAN.
One side will mock another; the other too!

CORNWALL.
If you see vengeance—

FIRST SERVANT.
Hold your hand, my lord:
I have serv’d you ever since I was a child;
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.

REGAN.
How now, you dog!

FIRST SERVANT.
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I’d shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?

CORNWALL.
My villain?

 [_Draws, and runs at him._]

FIRST SERVANT.
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

 [_Draws. They fight. Cornwall is wounded._]

REGAN.
[_To another servant._] Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?

 [_Snatches a sword, comes behind, and stabs him._]

FIRST SERVANT.
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischief on him. O!

 [_Dies._]

CORNWALL.
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Where is thy lustre now?

 [_Tears out Gloucester’s other eye and throws it on the ground._]

GLOUCESTER.
All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
To quit this horrid act.

REGAN.
Out, treacherous villain!
Thou call’st on him that hates thee: it was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
Who is too good to pity thee.

GLOUCESTER.
O my follies! Then Edgar was abus’d.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!

REGAN.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover. How is’t, my lord? How look you?

CORNWALL.
I have receiv’d a hurt: follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.

 [_Exit Cornwall, led by Regan; Servants unbind Gloucester and lead
 him out._]

SECOND SERVANT.
I’ll never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.

THIRD SERVANT.
If she live long,
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.

SECOND SERVANT.
Let’s follow the old Earl, and get the bedlam
To lead him where he would: his roguish madness
Allows itself to anything.

THIRD SERVANT.
Go thou: I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The heath


 Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
Yet better thus, and known to be contemn’d,
Than still contemn’d and flatter’d. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace;
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts.

 Enter Gloucester, led by an
Old Man.

But who comes here? My father, poorly led?
World, world, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.

OLD MAN.
O my good lord, I have been your tenant, and your father’s tenant
these fourscore years.

GLOUCESTER.
Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone.
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.

OLD MAN.
You cannot see your way.

GLOUCESTER.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused father’s wrath!
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I’d say I had eyes again!

OLD MAN.
How now! Who’s there?

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at the
worst’?
I am worse than e’er I was.

OLD MAN.
’Tis poor mad Tom.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
So long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’

OLD MAN.
Fellow, where goest?

GLOUCESTER.
Is it a beggar-man?

OLD MAN.
Madman, and beggar too.

GLOUCESTER.
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I’ the last night’s storm I such a fellow saw;
Which made me think a man a worm. My son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him.
I have heard more since.
As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods,
They kill us for their sport.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] How should this be?
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Angering itself and others. Bless thee, master!

GLOUCESTER.
Is that the naked fellow?

OLD MAN.
Ay, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
Then prithee get thee away. If for my sake
Thou wilt o’ertake us hence a mile or twain,
I’ the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Which I’ll entreat to lead me.

OLD MAN.
Alack, sir, he is mad.

GLOUCESTER.
’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
Above the rest, be gone.

OLD MAN.
I’ll bring him the best ’parel that I have,
Come on’t what will.

 [_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
Sirrah naked fellow.

EDGAR.
Poor Tom’s a-cold.
[_Aside._] I cannot daub it further.

GLOUCESTER.
Come hither, fellow.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] And yet I must. Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

GLOUCESTER.
Know’st thou the way to Dover?

EDGAR.
Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been
scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, good man’s son, from
the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of
lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of darkness; Mahu, of
stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and
mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women. So,
bless thee, master!

GLOUCESTER.
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heaven’s plagues
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier. Heavens deal so still!
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly;
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

EDGAR.
Ay, master.

GLOUCESTER.
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me: from that place
I shall no leading need.

EDGAR.
Give me thy arm:
Poor Tom shall lead thee.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Goneril, Edmund;
Oswald meeting them.

GONERIL.
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way. Now, where’s your master?

OSWALD.
Madam, within; but never man so chang’d.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smil’d at it: I told him you were coming;
His answer was, ‘The worse.’ Of Gloucester’s treachery
And of the loyal service of his son
When I inform’d him, then he call’d me sot,
And told me I had turn’d the wrong side out.
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.

GONERIL.
[_To Edmund._] Then shall you go no further.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.
I must change names at home, and give the distaff
Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear,
If you dare venture in your own behalf,
A mistress’s command. [_Giving a favour._]
Wear this; spare speech;
Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
Conceive, and fare thee well.

EDMUND.
Yours in the ranks of death.

 [_Exit Edmund._]

GONERIL.
My most dear Gloucester.
O, the difference of man and man!
To thee a woman’s services are due;
My fool usurps my body.

OSWALD.
Madam, here comes my lord.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Albany.

GONERIL.
I have been worth the whistle.

ALBANY.
O Goneril!
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face! I fear your disposition;
That nature which contemns its origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.

GONERIL.
No more; the text is foolish.

ALBANY.
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform’d?
A father, and a gracious aged man,
Whose reverence even the head-lugg’d bear would lick,
Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefitted!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
It will come,
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.

GONERIL.
Milk-liver’d man!
That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know’st
Fools do those villains pity who are punish’d
Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy drum?
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;
With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
Whilst thou, a moral fool, sitt’st still, and criest
‘Alack, why does he so?’

ALBANY.
See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.

GONERIL.
O vain fool!

ALBANY.
Thou changed and self-cover’d thing, for shame!
Be-monster not thy feature! Were’t my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones. Howe’er thou art a fiend,
A woman’s shape doth shield thee.

GONERIL.
Marry, your manhood, mew!

 Enter a Messenger.

ALBANY.
What news?

MESSENGER.
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead;
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.

ALBANY.
Gloucester’s eyes!

MESSENGER.
A servant that he bred, thrill’d with remorse,
Oppos’d against the act, bending his sword
To his great master; who, thereat enrag’d,
Flew on him, and amongst them fell’d him dead;
But not without that harmful stroke which since
Hath pluck’d him after.

ALBANY.
This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
Lost he his other eye?

MESSENGER.
Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
’Tis from your sister.

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] One way I like this well;
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The news is not so tart. I’ll read, and answer.

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?

MESSENGER.
Come with my lady hither.

ALBANY.
He is not here.

MESSENGER.
No, my good lord; I met him back again.

ALBANY.
Knows he the wickedness?

MESSENGER.
Ay, my good lord. ’Twas he inform’d against him;
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.

ALBANY.
Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou show’dst the King,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend,
Tell me what more thou know’st.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The French camp near Dover

 Enter Kent and a Gentleman.

KENT.
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back, know you no
reason?

GENTLEMAN.
Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his coming
forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much fear
and danger that his personal return was most required and
necessary.

KENT.
Who hath he left behind him general?

GENTLEMAN.
The Mareschal of France, Monsieur La Far.

KENT.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief?

GENTLEMAN.
Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;
And now and then an ample tear trill’d down
Her delicate cheek. It seem’d she was a queen
Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,
Sought to be king o’er her.

KENT.
O, then it mov’d her.

GENTLEMAN.
Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
Were like a better day. Those happy smilets
That play’d on her ripe lip seem’d not to know
What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence
As pearls from diamonds dropp’d. In brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most belov’d,
If all could so become it.

KENT.
Made she no verbal question?

GENTLEMAN.
Faith, once or twice she heav’d the name of ‘father’
Pantingly forth, as if it press’d her heart;
Cried ‘Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
Kent! father! sisters! What, i’ the storm? i’ the night?
Let pity not be believ’d!’ There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamour master’d her: then away she started
To deal with grief alone.

KENT.
It is the stars,
The stars above us govern our conditions;
Else one self mate and make could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?

GENTLEMAN.
No.

KENT.
Was this before the King return’d?

GENTLEMAN.
No, since.

KENT.
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear’s i’ the town;
Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.

GENTLEMAN.
Why, good sir?

KENT.
A sovereign shame so elbows him. His own unkindness,
That stripp’d her from his benediction, turn’d her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting
His mind so venomously that burning shame
Detains him from Cordelia.

GENTLEMAN.
Alack, poor gentleman!

KENT.
Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?

GENTLEMAN.
’Tis so; they are afoot.

KENT.
Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear
And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance.
I pray you, go along with me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The French camp. A Tent

 Enter with drum and colours, Cordelia, Physician
and Soldiers.

CORDELIA.
Alack, ’tis he: why, he was met even now
As mad as the vex’d sea; singing aloud;
Crown’d with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
With harlocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
Search every acre in the high-grown field,
And bring him to our eye.

 [_Exit an Officer._]

What can man’s wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved sense,
He that helps him take all my outward worth.

PHYSICIAN.
There is means, madam:
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks; that to provoke in him
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.

CORDELIA.
All bless’d secrets,
All you unpublish’d virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears! Be aidant and remediate
In the good man’s distress! Seek, seek for him;
Lest his ungovern’d rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
News, madam;
The British powers are marching hitherward.

CORDELIA.
’Tis known before. Our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about;
Therefore great France
My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our ag’d father’s right:
Soon may I hear and see him!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Regan and Oswald.

REGAN.
But are my brother’s powers set forth?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

REGAN.
Himself in person there?

OSWALD.
Madam, with much ado.
Your sister is the better soldier.

REGAN.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?

OSWALD.
No, madam.

REGAN.
What might import my sister’s letter to him?

OSWALD.
I know not, lady.

REGAN.
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,
To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life; moreover to descry
The strength o’ th’enemy.

OSWALD.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.

REGAN.
Our troops set forth tomorrow; stay with us;
The ways are dangerous.

OSWALD.
I may not, madam:
My lady charg’d my duty in this business.

REGAN.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Somethings, I know not what, I’ll love thee much.
Let me unseal the letter.

OSWALD.
Madam, I had rather—

REGAN.
I know your lady does not love her husband;
I am sure of that; and at her late being here
She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.

OSWALD.
I, madam?

REGAN.
I speak in understanding; y’are, I know’t:
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk’d,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your lady’s. You may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you give him this;
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
So, fare you well.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

OSWALD.
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
What party I do follow.

REGAN.
Fare thee well.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The country near Dover

 Enter Gloucester, and Edgar  dressed like a peasant.

GLOUCESTER.
When shall I come to the top of that same hill?

EDGAR.
You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.

GLOUCESTER.
Methinks the ground is even.

EDGAR.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?

GLOUCESTER.
No, truly.

EDGAR.
Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes’ anguish.

GLOUCESTER.
So may it be indeed.
Methinks thy voice is alter’d; and thou speak’st
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

EDGAR.
Y’are much deceiv’d: in nothing am I chang’d
But in my garments.

GLOUCESTER.
Methinks you’re better spoken.

EDGAR.
Come on, sir; here’s the place. Stand still. How fearful
And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
Diminish’d to her cock; her cock a buoy
Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge
That on th’unnumber’d idle pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more;
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.

GLOUCESTER.
Set me where you stand.

EDGAR.
Give me your hand.
You are now within a foot of th’extreme verge.
For all beneath the moon would I not leap upright.

GLOUCESTER.
Let go my hand.
Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel
Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

EDGAR.
Now fare ye well, good sir.

 [_Seems to go._]

GLOUCESTER.
With all my heart.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.

GLOUCESTER.
O you mighty gods!
This world I do renounce, and in your sights,
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
Now, fellow, fare thee well.

EDGAR.
Gone, sir, farewell.

 [_Gloucester leaps, and falls along_]

And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life when life itself
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
By this had thought been past. Alive or dead?
Ho you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir? speak!
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
What are you, sir?

GLOUCESTER.
Away, and let me die.

EDGAR.
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thou’dst shiver’d like an egg: but thou dost breathe;
Hast heavy substance; bleed’st not; speak’st; art sound.
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
Thy life is a miracle. Speak yet again.

GLOUCESTER.
But have I fall’n, or no?

EDGAR.
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height, the shrill-gorg’d lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness depriv’d that benefit
To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage
And frustrate his proud will.

EDGAR.
Give me your arm.
Up, so. How is’t? Feel you your legs? You stand.

GLOUCESTER.
Too well, too well.

EDGAR.
This is above all strangeness.
Upon the crown o’ the cliff what thing was that
Which parted from you?

GLOUCESTER.
A poor unfortunate beggar.

EDGAR.
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelk’d and waved like the enraged sea.
It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
Of men’s impossibilities, have preserv’d thee.

GLOUCESTER.
I do remember now: henceforth I’ll bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man; often ’twould say,
‘The fiend, the fiend’; he led me to that place.

EDGAR.
Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?

 Enter Lear, fantastically
dressed up with flowers.

The safer sense will ne’er accommodate
His master thus.

LEAR.
No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the King himself.

EDGAR.
O thou side-piercing sight!

LEAR.
Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your press money.
That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper: draw me a clothier’s
yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted cheese
will do’t. There’s my gauntlet; I’ll prove it on a giant.
Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i’ the clout, i’
the clout. Hewgh! Give the word.

EDGAR.
Sweet marjoram.

LEAR.
Pass.

GLOUCESTER.
I know that voice.

LEAR.
Ha! Goneril with a white beard! They flattered me like a dog; and told
me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. To say
‘ay’ and ‘no’ to everything I said ‘ay’
and ‘no’ to was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet
me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would not
peace at my bidding; there I found ’em, there I smelt ’em out.
Go to, they are not men o’ their words: they told me I was everything;
’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

GLOUCESTER.
The trick of that voice I do well remember:
Is’t not the King?

LEAR.
Ay, every inch a king.
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause?
Adultery? Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
The wren goes to’t, and the small gilded fly
Does lecher in my sight. Let copulation thrive;
For Gloucester’s bastard son was kinder to his father
Than my daughters got ’tween the lawful sheets.
To’t, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
Behold yond simp’ring dame,
Whose face between her forks presages snow;
That minces virtue, and does shake the head
To hear of pleasure’s name.
The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to’t with a more riotous
appetite. Down from the waist they are centaurs, though women all
above. But to the girdle do the gods inherit, beneath is all the
fiend’s; there’s hell, there’s darkness, there is the sulphurous pit;
burning, scalding, stench,
consumption. Fie, fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet, good
apothecary, to sweeten my imagination. There’s money for thee.

GLOUCESTER.
O, let me kiss that hand!

LEAR.
Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.

GLOUCESTER.
O ruin’d piece of nature, this great world
Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?

LEAR.
I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?
No, do thy worst, blind Cupid; I’ll not love.
Read thou this challenge; mark but the penning of it.

GLOUCESTER.
Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.

EDGAR.
I would not take this from report,
It is, and my heart breaks at it.

LEAR.
Read.

GLOUCESTER.
What, with the case of eyes?

LEAR.
O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money
in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a
light, yet you see how this world goes.

GLOUCESTER.
I see it feelingly.

LEAR.
What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
Look with thine ears. See how yon justice rails upon yon simple
thief. Hark, in thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which
is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer’s
dog bark at a beggar?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, sir.

LEAR.
And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold
the great image of authority: a dog’s obeyed in office.
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
For which thou whipp’st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
Through tatter’d clothes great vices do appear;
Robes and furr’d gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
Arm it in rags, a pygmy’s straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say none; I’ll able ’em;
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal the accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes,
And like a scurvy politician, seem
To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:
Pull off my boots: harder, harder, so.

EDGAR.
O, matter and impertinency mix’d!
Reason in madness!

LEAR.
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, alack the day!

LEAR.
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools. This a good block:
It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
A troop of horse with felt. I’ll put’t in proof
And when I have stol’n upon these son-in-laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

 Enter a Gentleman with
Attendants.

GENTLEMAN.
O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
Your most dear daughter—

LEAR.
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
I am cut to the brains.

GENTLEMAN.
You shall have anything.

LEAR.
No seconds? All myself?
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
Ay, and for laying autumn’s dust.

GENTLEMAN.
Good sir.

LEAR.
I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom.
What! I will be jovial. Come, come,
I am a king, my masters, know you that.

GENTLEMAN.
You are a royal one, and we obey you.

LEAR.
Then there’s life in’t. Come, and you get it,
You shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa!

 [_Exit running. Attendants follow._]

GENTLEMAN.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.

EDGAR.
Hail, gentle sir.

GENTLEMAN.
Sir, speed you. What’s your will?

EDGAR.
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?

GENTLEMAN.
Most sure and vulgar.
Everyone hears that, which can distinguish sound.

EDGAR.
But, by your favour,
How near’s the other army?

GENTLEMAN.
Near and on speedy foot; the main descry
Stands on the hourly thought.

EDGAR.
I thank you sir, that’s all.

GENTLEMAN.
Though that the queen on special cause is here,
Her army is mov’d on.

EDGAR.
I thank you, sir.

 [_Exit Gentleman._]

GLOUCESTER.
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
To die before you please.

EDGAR.
Well pray you, father.

GLOUCESTER.
Now, good sir, what are you?

EDGAR.
A most poor man, made tame to fortune’s blows;
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
I’ll lead you to some biding.

GLOUCESTER.
Hearty thanks:
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot.

 Enter Oswald.

OSWALD.
A proclaim’d prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first fram’d flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out
That must destroy thee.

GLOUCESTER.
Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough to’t.

 [_Edgar interposes._]

OSWALD.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
Dar’st thou support a publish’d traitor? Hence;
Lest that th’infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

EDGAR.
Chill not let go, zir, without vurther ’casion.

OSWALD.
Let go, slave, or thou diest!

EDGAR.
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volke pass. An chud ha’
bin zwaggered out of my life, ’twould not ha’ bin zo long
as ’tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th’old man; keep
out, che vor ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
harder: chill be plain with you.

OSWALD.
Out, dunghill!

EDGAR.
Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come! No matter vor your foins.

 [_They fight, and Edgar knocks him down._]

OSWALD.
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
And give the letters which thou find’st about me
To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
Upon the British party. O, untimely death!

 [_Dies._]

EDGAR.
I know thee well. A serviceable villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.

GLOUCESTER.
What, is he dead?

EDGAR.
Sit you down, father; rest you.
Let’s see these pockets; the letters that he speaks of
May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deathsman. Let us see:
Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not.
To know our enemies’ minds, we rip their hearts,
Their papers is more lawful.
[_Reads._] ‘Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have many
opportunities to cut him off: if your will want not, time and place
will be fruitfully offered. There is nothing done if he return the
conqueror: then am I the prisoner, and his bed my gaol; from the
loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your
labour. ‘Your (wife, so I would say) affectionate servant, ‘Goneril.’
O indistinguish’d space of woman’s will!
A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life,
And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practis’d Duke: for him ’tis well
That of thy death and business I can tell.

 [_Exit Edgar, dragging out the body._]

GLOUCESTER.
The King is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:
So should my thoughts be sever’d from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves.

 [_A drum afar off._]

EDGAR.
Give me your hand.
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. A Tent in the French Camp

Lear on a bed, asleep, soft
music playing; Physician, Gentleman and others
attending.

 Enter Cordelia and Kent.

CORDELIA.
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.

KENT.
To be acknowledg’d, madam, is o’erpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth;
Nor more, nor clipp’d, but so.

CORDELIA.
Be better suited,
These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
I prithee put them off.

KENT.
Pardon, dear madam;
Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
My boon I make it that you know me not
Till time and I think meet.

CORDELIA.
Then be’t so, my good lord. [_To the Physician._] How does the King?

PHYSICIAN.
Madam, sleeps still.

CORDELIA.
O you kind gods,
Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
The untun’d and jarring senses, O, wind up
Of this child-changed father.

PHYSICIAN.
So please your majesty
That we may wake the King: he hath slept long.

CORDELIA.
Be govern’d by your knowledge, and proceed
I’ the sway of your own will. Is he array’d?

PHYSICIAN.
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;
I doubt not of his temperance.

CORDELIA.
Very well.

PHYSICIAN.
Please you draw near. Louder the music there!

CORDELIA.
O my dear father! Restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made!

KENT.
Kind and dear princess!

CORDELIA.
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be oppos’d against the warring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross lightning? to watch, poor perdu!
With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.

PHYSICIAN.
Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.

CORDELIA.
How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?

LEAR.
You do me wrong to take me out o’ the grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.

CORDELIA.
Sir, do you know me?

LEAR.
You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?

CORDELIA.
Still, still, far wide!

PHYSICIAN.
He’s scarce awake: let him alone awhile.

LEAR.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
I am mightily abus’d. I should e’en die with pity,
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I will not swear these are my hands: let’s see;
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assur’d
Of my condition!

CORDELIA.
O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hands in benediction o’er me.
No, sir, you must not kneel.

LEAR.
Pray, do not mock me:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
And to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful: for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is; and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordelia.

CORDELIA.
And so I am. I am.

LEAR.
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray weep not:
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me; for your sisters
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
You have some cause, they have not.

CORDELIA.
No cause, no cause.

LEAR.
Am I in France?

KENT.
In your own kingdom, sir.

LEAR.
Do not abuse me.

PHYSICIAN.
Be comforted, good madam, the great rage,
You see, is kill’d in him: and yet it is danger
To make him even o’er the time he has lost.
Desire him to go in; trouble him no more
Till further settling.

CORDELIA.
Will’t please your highness walk?

LEAR.
You must bear with me:
Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.

 [_Exeunt Lear, Cordelia, Physician and Attendants._]

GENTLEMAN.
Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?

KENT.
Most certain, sir.

GENTLEMAN.
Who is conductor of his people?

KENT.
As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

GENTLEMAN.
They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl of Kent
in Germany.

KENT.
Report is changeable. ’Tis time to look about; the powers of
the kingdom approach apace.

GENTLEMAN.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody.
Fare you well, sir.

 [_Exit._]

KENT.
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.

 [_Exit._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The Camp of the British Forces near Dover


 Enter, with drum and colours Edmund, Regan, Officers, Soldiers and
 others.

EDMUND.
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advis’d by aught
To change the course, he’s full of alteration
And self-reproving, bring his constant pleasure.

 [_To an Officer, who goes out._]

REGAN.
Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.

EDMUND.
’Tis to be doubted, madam.

REGAN.
Now, sweet lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?

EDMUND.
In honour’d love.

REGAN.
But have you never found my brother’s way
To the forfended place?

EDMUND.
That thought abuses you.

REGAN.
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
And bosom’d with her, as far as we call hers.

EDMUND.
No, by mine honour, madam.

REGAN.
I never shall endure her, dear my lord,
Be not familiar with her.

EDMUND.
Fear not,
She and the Duke her husband!

 Enter with drum and colours Albany, Goneril and Soldiers.

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
Should loosen him and me.

ALBANY.
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigour of our state
Forc’d to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant. For this business,
It toucheth us as France invades our land,
Not bolds the King, with others whom I fear
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.

EDMUND.
Sir, you speak nobly.

REGAN.
Why is this reason’d?

GONERIL.
Combine together ’gainst the enemy;
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.

ALBANY.
Let’s, then, determine with the ancient of war
On our proceeding.

EDMUND.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.

REGAN.
Sister, you’ll go with us?

GONERIL.
No.

REGAN.
’Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.

GONERIL.
[_Aside_.] O, ho, I know the riddle. I will go.

 [_Exeunt Edmund, Regan, Goneril, Officers, Soldiers and Attendants._]

 As they are going out, enter Edgar disguised.

EDGAR.
If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.

ALBANY.
I’ll overtake you. Speak.

EDGAR.
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you!

ALBANY.
Stay till I have read the letter.

EDGAR.
I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
And I’ll appear again.

ALBANY.
Why, fare thee well. I will o’erlook thy paper.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

 Enter Edmund.

EDMUND.
The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery; but your haste
Is now urg’d on you.

ALBANY.
We will greet the time.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoy’d,
If both remain alive. To take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now, then, we’ll use
His countenance for the battle; which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon: for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. A field between the two Camps

 Alarum within. Enter with drum and colours, Lear, Cordelia and their
 Forces, and exeunt.

 Enter Edgar and Gloucester.

EDGAR.
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again,
I’ll bring you comfort.

GLOUCESTER.
Grace go with you, sir!

 [_Exit Edgar._]

 Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
Away, old man, give me thy hand, away!
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en:
Give me thy hand; come on!

GLOUCESTER.
No further, sir; a man may rot even here.

EDGAR.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
Ripeness is all. Come on.

GLOUCESTER.
And that’s true too.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The British Camp near Dover

 Enter in conquest with drum and colours, Edmund, Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Officers, Soldiers, &c.

EDMUND.
Some officers take them away: good guard
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.

CORDELIA.
We are not the first
Who with best meaning have incurr’d the worst.
For thee, oppressed King, I am cast down;
Myself could else out-frown false fortune’s frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

LEAR.
No, no, no, no. Come, let’s away to prison:
We two alone will sing like birds i’ the cage:
When thou dost ask me blessing I’ll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we’ll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news; and we’ll talk with them too,
Who loses and who wins; who’s in, who’s out;
And take upon’s the mystery of things,
As if we were God’s spies. And we’ll wear out,
In a wall’d prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow by the moon.

EDMUND.
Take them away.

LEAR.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep!
We’ll see ’em starve first: come.

 [_Exeunt Lear and Cordelia, guarded._]

EDMUND.
Come hither, captain, hark.
Take thou this note [_giving a paper_]; go follow them to prison.
One step I have advanc’d thee; if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
Will not bear question; either say thou’lt do’t,
Or thrive by other means.

CAPTAIN.
I’ll do’t, my lord.

EDMUND.
About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so
As I have set it down.

CAPTAIN.
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
If it be man’s work, I’ll do’t.

 [_Exit._]

 Flourish. Enter Albany, Goneril,
Regan, Officers and Attendants.

ALBANY.
Sir, you have show’d today your valiant strain,
And fortune led you well: you have the captives
Who were the opposites of this day’s strife:
I do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.

EDMUND.
Sir, I thought it fit
To send the old and miserable King
To some retention and appointed guard;
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
And turn our impress’d lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
My reason all the same; and they are ready
Tomorrow, or at further space, to appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
And the best quarrels in the heat are curs’d
By those that feel their sharpness.
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.

ALBANY.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.

REGAN.
That’s as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;
Bore the commission of my place and person;
The which immediacy may well stand up
And call itself your brother.

GONERIL.
Not so hot:
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
More than in your addition.

REGAN.
In my rights,
By me invested, he compeers the best.

ALBANY.
That were the most, if he should husband you.

REGAN.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.

GONERIL.
Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so look’d but asquint.

REGAN.
Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:
Witness the world that I create thee here
My lord and master.

GONERIL.
Mean you to enjoy him?

ALBANY.
The let-alone lies not in your good will.

EDMUND.
Nor in thine, lord.

ALBANY.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.

REGAN.
[_To Edmund._] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.

ALBANY.
Stay yet; hear reason: Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine arrest,
This gilded serpent. [_pointing to Goneril._]
For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife;
’Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
And I her husband contradict your bans.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My lady is bespoke.

GONERIL.
An interlude!

ALBANY.
Thou art arm’d, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy person
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge. [_Throwing down a glove._]
I’ll make it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaim’d thee.

REGAN.
Sick, O, sick!

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.

EDMUND.
There’s my exchange. [_Throwing down a glove._]
What in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.

ALBANY.
A herald, ho!

 Enter a Herald.

Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.

REGAN.
My sickness grows upon me.

ALBANY.
She is not well. Convey her to my tent.

 [_Exit Regan, led._]

Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound
And read out this.

OFFICER.
Sound, trumpet!

 [_A trumpet sounds._]

HERALD.
[_Reads._] ‘If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.’

EDMUND.
Sound!

 [_First trumpet._]

HERALD.
Again!

 [_Second trumpet._]

HERALD.
Again!

 Third trumpet. Trumpet answers within. Enter Edgar, armed, preceded by
 a trumpet.

ALBANY.
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o’ the trumpet.

HERALD.
What are you?
Your name, your quality? and why you answer
This present summons?

EDGAR.
Know my name is lost;
By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as the adversary
I come to cope.

ALBANY.
Which is that adversary?

EDGAR.
What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?

EDMUND.
Himself, what say’st thou to him?

EDGAR.
Draw thy sword,
That if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
My oath, and my profession: I protest,
Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
Conspirant ’gainst this high illustrious prince;
And, from the extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou ‘No,’
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.

EDMUND.
In wisdom I should ask thy name;
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss those treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart;
Which for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!

 [_Alarums. They fight. Edmund falls._]

ALBANY.
Save him, save him!

GONERIL.
This is mere practice, Gloucester:
By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish’d,
But cozen’d and beguil’d.

ALBANY.
Shut your mouth, dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it. Hold, sir;
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady; I perceive you know it.

 [_Gives the letter to Edmund._]

GONERIL.
Say if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:
Who can arraign me for’t?

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Most monstrous! O!
Know’st thou this paper?

EDMUND.
Ask me not what I know.

ALBANY.
[_To an Officer, who goes out._] Go after her; she’s desperate;
govern her.

EDMUND.
What you have charg’d me with, that have I done;
And more, much more; the time will bring it out.
’Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? If thou’rt noble,
I do forgive thee.

EDGAR.
Let’s exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
If more, the more thou hast wrong’d me.
My name is Edgar and thy father’s son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us:
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes.

EDMUND.
Thou hast spoken right, ’tis true;
The wheel is come full circle; I am here.

ALBANY.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father.

EDGAR.
Worthy prince, I know’t.

ALBANY.
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?

EDGAR.
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
And when ’tis told, O that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape
That follow’d me so near,—O, our lives’ sweetness!
That with the pain of death we’d hourly die
Rather than die at once!—taught me to shift
Into a madman’s rags; t’assume a semblance
That very dogs disdain’d; and in this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,
Led him, begg’d for him, sav’d him from despair;
Never,—O fault!—reveal’d myself unto him
Until some half hour past, when I was arm’d;
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
I ask’d his blessing, and from first to last
Told him my pilgrimage. But his flaw’d heart,
Alack, too weak the conflict to support!
’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.

EDMUND.
This speech of yours hath mov’d me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on;
You look as you had something more to say.

ALBANY.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.

EDGAR.
This would have seem’d a period
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more,
And top extremity.
Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunn’d my abhorr’d society; but then finding
Who ’twas that so endur’d, with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck, and bellow’d out
As he’d burst heaven; threw him on my father;
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear receiv’d, which in recounting
His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranc’d.

ALBANY.
But who was this?

EDGAR.
Kent, sir, the banish’d Kent; who in disguise
Follow’d his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.

 Enter a Gentleman hastily,
with a bloody knife.

GENTLEMAN.
Help, help! O, help!

EDGAR.
What kind of help?

ALBANY.
Speak, man.

EDGAR.
What means this bloody knife?

GENTLEMAN.
’Tis hot, it smokes;
It came even from the heart of—O! she’s dead!

ALBANY.
Who dead? Speak, man.

GENTLEMAN.
Your lady, sir, your lady; and her sister
By her is poisoned; she hath confesses it.

EDMUND.
I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an instant.

EDGAR.
Here comes Kent.

 Enter Kent.

ALBANY.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
This judgement of the heavens that makes us tremble
Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.

KENT.
I am come
To bid my King and master aye good night:
Is he not here?

ALBANY.
Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, where’s the King? and where’s Cordelia?

 The bodies of Goneril and
Regan are brought in.

Seest thou this object, Kent?

KENT.
Alack, why thus?

EDMUND.
Yet Edmund was belov’d.
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.

ALBANY.
Even so. Cover their faces.

EDMUND.
I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,
Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia;
Nay, send in time.

ALBANY.
Run, run, O, run!

EDGAR.
To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
Thy token of reprieve.

EDMUND.
Well thought on: take my sword,
Give it the captain.

EDGAR.
Haste thee for thy life.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

EDMUND.
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.

ALBANY.
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.

 [_Edmund is borne off._]

 Enter Lear with Cordelia dead in his arms; Edgar,
Officer and others following.

LEAR.
Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stone.
Had I your tongues and eyes, I’ld use them so
That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone for ever!
I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
She’s dead as earth. Lend me a looking glass;
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why, then she lives.

KENT.
Is this the promis’d end?

EDGAR.
Or image of that horror?

ALBANY.
Fall, and cease!

LEAR.
This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.

KENT.
O, my good master! [_Kneeling._]

LEAR.
Prithee, away!

EDGAR.
’Tis noble Kent, your friend.

LEAR.
A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
I might have sav’d her; now she’s gone for ever!
Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
What is’t thou say’st? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee.

OFFICER.
’Tis true, my lords, he did.

LEAR.
Did I not, fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
I would have made them skip. I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o’ the best, I’ll tell you straight.

KENT.
If Fortune brag of two she lov’d and hated,
One of them we behold.

LEAR.
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?

KENT.
The same,
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?

LEAR.
He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that;
He’ll strike, and quickly too:. He’s dead and rotten.

KENT.
No, my good lord; I am the very man.

LEAR.
I’ll see that straight.

KENT.
That from your first of difference and decay
Have follow’d your sad steps.

LEAR.
You are welcome hither.

KENT.
Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
And desperately are dead.

LEAR.
Ay, so I think.

ALBANY.
He knows not what he says; and vain is it
That we present us to him.

EDGAR.
Very bootless.

 Enter an Officer.

OFFICER.
Edmund is dead, my lord.

ALBANY.
That’s but a trifle here.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
During the life of this old majesty,
To him our absolute power;
[_to Edgar and Kent_] you to your rights;
With boot and such addition as your honours
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!

LEAR.
And my poor fool is hang’d! No, no, no life!
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou’lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never!
Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her: look, her lips,
Look there, look there!

 [_He dies._]

EDGAR.
He faints! My lord, my lord!

KENT.
Break, heart; I prithee break!

EDGAR.
Look up, my lord.

KENT.
Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! He hates him
That would upon the rack of this rough world
Stretch him out longer.

EDGAR.
He is gone indeed.

KENT.
The wonder is, he hath endur’d so long:
He but usurp’d his life.

ALBANY.
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe. [_To Edgar and Kent._] Friends of my soul, you twain,
Rule in this realm and the gor’d state sustain.

KENT.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
My master calls me, I must not say no.

EDGAR.
The weight of this sad time we must obey;
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

 [_Exeunt with a dead march._]




LOVE’S LABOUR’S LOST




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. The King of Navarre’s park
 Scene II. The park

 ACT II
 Scene I. The King of Navarre’s park. A pavilion and tents at a distance

 ACT III
 Scene I. The King of Navarre’s park

 ACT IV
 Scene I. The King of Navarre’s park
 Scene II. The same
 Scene III. The same

 ACT V
 Scene I. The King of Navarre’s park
 Scene II. The same. Before the Princess’s pavilion




Dramatis Personæ

KING of Navarre, also known as Ferdinand

BEROWNE, Lord attending on the King
LONGAVILLE, Lord attending on the King
DUMAINE, Lord attending on the King

The PRINCESS of France

ROSALINE, Lady attending on the Princess
MARIA, Lady attending on the Princess
KATHARINE, Lady attending on the Princess
BOYET, Lord attending on the Princess

Don Adriano de ARMADO, a fantastical Spaniard
MOTH, Page to Armado
JAQUENETTA, a country wench
COSTARD, a Clown
DULL, a Constable
HOLOFERNES, a Schoolmaster
Sir NATHANIEL, a Curate
A FORESTER
MARCADÉ, a messenger from France

Lords, Blackamoors, Officers and Others, Attendants on the King and
Princess.

SCENE: Navarre




ACT I

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park


Enter Ferdinand, King of Navarre, Berowne, Longaville and Dumaine.

KING.
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorant devouring time,
Th’ endeavour of this present breath may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythe’s keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors, for so you are
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the world’s desires,
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force.
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little academe,
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years’ term to live with me,
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are passed, and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honour down
That violates the smallest branch herein.
If you are armed to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.

LONGAVILLE.
I am resolved. ’Tis but a three years’ fast.
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.

[_He signs._]

DUMAINE.
My loving lord, Dumaine is mortified.
The grosser manner of these world’s delights
He throws upon the gross world’s baser slaves.
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
With all these living in philosophy.

[_He signs._]

BEROWNE.
I can but say their protestation over.
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food,
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day,
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep.

KING.
Your oath is passed to pass away from these.

BEROWNE.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please.
I only swore to study with your Grace
And stay here in your court for three years’ space.

LONGAVILLE.
You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.

BEROWNE.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?

KING.
Why, that to know which else we should not know.

BEROWNE.
Things hid and barred, you mean, from common sense?

KING.
Ay, that is study’s god-like recompense.

BEROWNE.
Come on, then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus, to study where I well may dine,
    When I to feast expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
    When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If study’s gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
Swear me to this, and I will ne’er say no.

KING.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.

BEROWNE.
Why, all delights are vain, but that most vain
Which, with pain purchased, doth inherit pain:
As painfully to pore upon a book
    To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
    Light seeking light doth light of light beguile;
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
    By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
    And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heaven’s glorious sun,
    That will not be deep-searched with saucy looks;
Small have continual plodders ever won,
    Save base authority from others’ books.
These earthly godfathers of heaven’s lights,
    That give a name to every fixed star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
    Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know naught but fame,
And every godfather can give a name.

KING.
How well he’s read, to reason against reading.

DUMAINE.
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.

LONGAVILLE.
He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.

BEROWNE.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.

DUMAINE.
How follows that?

BEROWNE.
Fit in his place and time.

DUMAINE.
In reason nothing.

BEROWNE.
Something then in rhyme.

LONGAVILLE.
Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.

BEROWNE.
Well, say I am. Why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May’s new-fangled shows,
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o’er the house to unlock the little gate.

KING.
Well, sit you out. Go home, Berowne. Adieu.

BEROWNE.
No, my good lord, I have sworn to stay with you,
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
    Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident I’ll keep what I have sworn
    And bide the penance of each three years’ day.
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I’ll write my name.

KING.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame.

BEROWNE.
[_Reads_.] _Item, That no woman shall come within a mile of my court._
Hath this been proclaimed?

LONGAVILLE.
Four days ago.

BEROWNE.
Let’s see the penalty. [_Reads_.] _On pain of losing her tongue._ Who
devised this penalty?

LONGAVILLE.
Marry, that did I.

BEROWNE.
Sweet lord, and why?

LONGAVILLE.
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.

BEROWNE.
A dangerous law against gentility.
[_Reads_.] _Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the
term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the rest of
the court can possibly devise._
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
    For well you know here comes in embassy
The French King’s daughter, with yourself to speak—
    A mild of grace and complete majesty—
About surrender up of Aquitaine
    To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father.
Therefore this article is made in vain,
    Or vainly comes th’ admired Princess hither.

KING.
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.

BEROWNE.
So study evermore is overshot.
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to do the thing it should;
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
’Tis won as towns with fire: so won, so lost.

KING.
We must of force dispense with this decree.
She must lie here on mere necessity.

BEROWNE.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years’ space;
For every man with his affects is born,
Not by might mastered, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the laws at large I write my name,
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to other as to me;
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.

[_He signs._]

But is there no quick recreation granted?

KING.
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain,
A man in all the world’s new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One who the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony,
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate
In high-born words the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost in the world’s debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.

BEROWNE.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion’s own knight.

LONGAVILLE.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport,
And so to study three years is but short.

Enter Dull, a Constable, with a letter, and Costard.

DULL.
Which is the Duke’s own person?

BEROWNE.
This, fellow. What wouldst?

DULL.
I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his Grace’s farborough. But
I would see his own person in flesh and blood.

BEROWNE.
This is he.

DULL.
Signior Arm… Arm… commends you. There’s villainy abroad. This letter
will tell you more.

COSTARD.
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.

KING.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.

BEROWNE.
How long soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.

LONGAVILLE.
A high hope for a low heaven. God grant us patience!

BEROWNE.
To hear, or forbear laughing?

LONGAVILLE.
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbear both.

BEROWNE.
Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to climb in the
merriness.

COSTARD.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta. The manner of it
is, I was taken with the manner.

BEROWNE.
In what manner?

COSTARD.
In manner and form following, sir, all those three. I was seen with her
in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form, and taken following
her into the park, which, put together, is “in manner and form
following”. Now, sir, for the manner. It is the manner of a man to
speak to a woman. For the form—in some form.

BEROWNE.
For the “following”, sir?

COSTARD.
As it shall follow in my correction, and God defend the right!

KING.
Will you hear this letter with attention?

BEROWNE.
As we would hear an oracle.

COSTARD.
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.

KING.
[_Reads_.] _Great deputy, the welkin’s vicegerent and sole dominator of
Navarre, my soul’s earth’s god and body’s fostering patron—_

COSTARD.
Not a word of Costard yet.

KING.
[_Reads_.] _So it is—_

COSTARD.
It may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling true, but so.

KING.
Peace!

COSTARD.
Be to me, and every man that dares not fight.

KING.
No words!

COSTARD.
Of other men’s secrets, I beseech you.

KING.
[_Reads_.] _So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I did
commend the black-oppressing humour to the most wholesome physic of thy
health-giving air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to walk. The
time when? About the sixth hour, when beasts most graze, birds best
peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper. So
much for the time when. Now for the ground which? Which, I mean, I
walked upon. It is ycleped thy park. Then for the place, where? Where,
I mean, I did encounter that obscene and most preposterous event that
draweth from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which here thou
viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest. But to the place where? It
standeth north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
curious-knotted garden. There did I see that low-spirited swain, that
base minnow of thy mirth—_

COSTARD.
Me?

KING.
[_Reads_.] _That unlettered small-knowing soul—_

COSTARD.
Me?

KING.
[_Reads_.] _That shallow vassal—_

COSTARD.
Still me?

KING.
[_Reads_.] _Which, as I remember, hight Costard—_

COSTARD.
O me!

KING.
[_Reads_.] _Sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established
proclaimed edict and continent canon, which with, O, with—but with this
I passion to say wherewith—_

COSTARD.
With a wench.

KING.
[_Reads_.] _With a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy
more sweet understanding, a woman. Him, I, as my ever-esteemed duty
pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of punishment, by
thy sweet Grace’s officer, Antony Dull, a man of good repute, carriage,
bearing, and estimation._

DULL.
Me, an’t shall please you; I am Antony Dull.

KING.
[_Reads_.] _For Jaquenetta, so is the weaker vessel called which I
apprehended with the aforesaid swain, I keep her as a vessel of thy
law’s fury, and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to
trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted and heartburning heat of
duty,
                    Don Adriano de Armado._

BEROWNE.
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that ever I heard.

KING.
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say you to this?

COSTARD.
Sir, I confess the wench.

KING.
Did you hear the proclamation?

COSTARD.
I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the marking of it.

KING.
It was proclaimed a year’s imprisonment to be taken with a wench.

COSTARD.
I was taken with none, sir. I was taken with a damsel.

KING.
Well, it was proclaimed “damsel”.

COSTARD.
This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.

KING.
It is so varied too, for it was proclaimed “virgin”.

COSTARD.
If it were, I deny her virginity. I was taken with a maid.

KING.
This maid will not serve your turn, sir.

COSTARD.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.

KING.
Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week with bran
and water.

COSTARD.
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.

KING.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o’er;
And go we, lords, to put in practice that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.

[_Exeunt King, Longaville and Dumaine._]

BEROWNE.
I’ll lay my head to any good man’s hat
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sirrah, come on.

COSTARD.
I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken with
Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl. And therefore welcome the
sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again, and till
then, sit thee down, sorrow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The park

Enter Armado and Moth, his Page.

ARMADO.
Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows melancholy?

MOTH.
A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.

ARMADO.
Why, sadness is one and the selfsame thing, dear imp.

MOTH.
No, no, O Lord, sir, no.

ARMADO.
How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender juvenal?

MOTH.
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.

ARMADO.
Why tough signior? Why tough signior?

MOTH.
Why tender juvenal? Why tender juvenal?

ARMADO.
I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton appertaining to
thy young days, which we may nominate tender.

MOTH.
And I, tough signior, as an appertinent title to your old time, which
we may name tough.

ARMADO.
Pretty and apt.

MOTH.
How mean you, sir? I pretty and my saying apt, or I apt, and my saying
pretty?

ARMADO.
Thou pretty, because little.

MOTH.
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?

ARMADO.
And therefore apt, because quick.

MOTH.
Speak you this in my praise, master?

ARMADO.
In thy condign praise.

MOTH.
I will praise an eel with the same praise.

ARMADO.
What, that an eel is ingenious?

MOTH.
That an eel is quick.

ARMADO.
I do say thou art quick in answers. Thou heat’st my blood.

MOTH.
I am answered, sir.

ARMADO.
I love not to be crossed.

MOTH.
[_Aside_.] He speaks the mere contrary; crosses love not him.

ARMADO.
I have promised to study three years with the Duke.

MOTH.
You may do it in an hour, sir.

ARMADO.
Impossible.

MOTH.
How many is one thrice told?

ARMADO.
I am ill at reckoning. It fitteth the spirit of a tapster.

MOTH.
You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.

ARMADO.
I confess both. They are both the varnish of a complete man.

MOTH.
Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace amounts to.

ARMADO.
It doth amount to one more than two.

MOTH.
Which the base vulgar do call three.

ARMADO.
True.

MOTH.
Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here’s three studied ere
ye’ll thrice wink. And how easy it is to put “years” to the word
“three”, and study three years in two words, the dancing horse will
tell you.

ARMADO.
A most fine figure!

MOTH.
[_Aside_.] To prove you a cipher.

ARMADO.
I will hereupon confess I am in love; and as it is base for a soldier
to love, so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing my sword against
the humour of affection would deliver me from the reprobate thought of
it, I would take desire prisoner, and ransom him to any French courtier
for a new-devised curtsy. I think scorn to sigh; methinks I should
outswear Cupid. Comfort me, boy. What great men have been in love?

MOTH.
Hercules, master.

ARMADO.
Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more; and, sweet my
child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.

MOTH.
Samson, master. He was a man of good carriage, great carriage, for he
carried the town gates on his back like a porter, and he was in love.

ARMADO.
O well-knit Samson, strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee in my rapier
as much as thou didst me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was
Samson’s love, my dear Moth?

MOTH.
A woman, master.

ARMADO.
Of what complexion?

MOTH.
Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.

ARMADO.
Tell me precisely of what complexion.

MOTH.
Of the sea-water green, sir.

ARMADO.
Is that one of the four complexions?

MOTH.
As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.

ARMADO.
Green indeed is the colour of lovers. But to have a love of that
colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it. He surely affected her
for her wit.

MOTH.
It was so, sir, for she had a green wit.

ARMADO.
My love is most immaculate white and red.

MOTH.
Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under such colours.

ARMADO.
Define, define, well-educated infant.

MOTH.
My father’s wit and my mother’s tongue assist me!

ARMADO.
Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty, and pathetical!

MOTH.
  If she be made of white and red,
     Her faults will ne’er be known;
  For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,
     And fears by pale white shown.
  Then if she fear, or be to blame,
     By this you shall not know,
  For still her cheeks possess the same
     Which native she doth owe.
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.

ARMADO.
Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?

MOTH.
The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages since, but I
think now ’tis not to be found; or if it were, it would neither serve
for the writing nor the tune.

ARMADO.
I will have that subject newly writ o’er, that I may example my
digression by some mighty precedent. Boy, I do love that country girl
that I took in the park with the rational hind Costard. She deserves
well.

MOTH.
[_Aside_.] To be whipped: and yet a better love than my master.

ARMADO.
Sing, boy. My spirit grows heavy in love.

MOTH.
And that’s great marvel, loving a light wench.

ARMADO.
I say, sing.

MOTH.
Forbear till this company be past.

Enter Costard the Clown, Dull the Constable and Jaquenetta a Wench.

DULL.
Sir, the Duke’s pleasure is that you keep Costard safe; and you must
suffer him to take no delight, nor no penance, but he must fast three
days a week. For this damsel, I must keep her at the park. She is
allowed for the dey-woman. Fare you well.

ARMADO.
I do betray myself with blushing.—Maid.

JAQUENETTA.
Man.

ARMADO.
I will visit thee at the lodge.

JAQUENETTA.
That’s hereby.

ARMADO.
I know where it is situate.

JAQUENETTA.
Lord, how wise you are!

ARMADO.
I will tell thee wonders.

JAQUENETTA.
With that face?

ARMADO.
I love thee.

JAQUENETTA.
So I heard you say.

ARMADO.
And so, farewell.

JAQUENETTA.
Fair weather after you!

DULL.
Come, Jaquenetta, away.

[_Exeunt Dull and Jaquenetta._]

ARMADO.
Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be pardoned.

COSTARD.
Well, sir, I hope when I do it I shall do it on a full stomach.

ARMADO.
Thou shalt be heavily punished.

COSTARD.
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but lightly
rewarded.

ARMADO.
Take away this villain. Shut him up.

MOTH.
Come, you transgressing slave, away!

COSTARD.
Let me not be pent up, sir. I will fast being loose.

MOTH.
No, sir, that were fast and loose. Thou shalt to prison.

COSTARD.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I have seen,
some shall see.

MOTH.
What shall some see?

COSTARD.
Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is not for
prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore I will say
nothing. I thank God I have as little patience as another man, and
therefore I can be quiet.

[_Exeunt Moth and Costard._]

ARMADO.
I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe, which is
baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread. I shall be
forsworn, which is a great argument of falsehood, if I love. And how
can that be true love which is falsely attempted? Love is a familiar;
Love is a devil. There is no evil angel but Love. Yet was Samson so
tempted, and he had an excellent strength; yet was Solomon so seduced,
and he had a very good wit. Cupid’s butt-shaft is too hard for
Hercules’ club, and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard’s rapier.
The first and second cause will not serve my turn; the _passado_ he
respects not, the _duello_ he regards not. His disgrace is to be called
boy, but his glory is to subdue men. Adieu, valour; rust, rapier; be
still, drum, for your manager is in love. Yea, he loveth. Assist me,
some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.
Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.

[_Exit._]




ACT II

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park. A pavilion and tents at a distance


Enter the Princess of France, with three attending Ladies: Rosaline,
Maria, Katharine and three Lords: Boyet, and two others.

BOYET.
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
Consider who the King your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what’s his embassy.
Yourself, held precious in the world’s esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.

PRINCESS.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,
Not uttered by base sale of chapmen’s tongues.
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant, all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court.
Therefore to’s seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his Grace.
Haste, signify so much, while we attend,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.

BOYET.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.

PRINCESS.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.

[_Exit Boyet._]

Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous Duke?

LORD.
Lord Longaville is one.

PRINCESS.
Know you the man?

MARIA.
I know him, madam. At a marriage feast
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville.
A man of sovereign parts, he is esteemed,
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms.
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue’s gloss,
If virtue’s gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will,
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.

PRINCESS.
Some merry mocking lord, belike. Is’t so?

MARIA.
They say so most that most his humours know.

PRINCESS.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?

KATHARINE.
The young Dumaine, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alençon’s once;
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.

ROSALINE.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour’s talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit’s expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.

PRINCESS.
God bless my ladies! Are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?

LORD.
Here comes Boyet.

Enter Boyet.

PRINCESS.
Now, what admittance, lord?

BOYET.
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all addressed to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learned:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his unpeopled house.

Enter King of Navarre, Longaville, Dumaine, Berowne and Attendants.

Here comes Navarre.

KING.
Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.

PRINCESS.
“Fair” I give you back again, and “welcome” I have not yet. The roof of
this court is too high to be yours, and welcome to the wide fields too
base to be mine.

KING.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.

PRINCESS.
I will be welcome then. Conduct me thither.

KING.
Hear me, dear lady. I have sworn an oath.

PRINCESS.
Our Lady help my lord! He’ll be forsworn.

KING.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.

PRINCESS.
Why, will shall break it; will, and nothing else.

KING.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.

PRINCESS.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your Grace hath sworn out housekeeping.
’Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold.
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.

[_She gives him a paper._]

KING.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.

PRINCESS.
You will the sooner that I were away,
For you’ll prove perjured if you make me stay.

[_The King reads the paper._]

BEROWNE.
[_To Rosaline_.] Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?

ROSALINE.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?

BEROWNE.
I know you did.

ROSALINE.
How needless was it then
To ask the question!

BEROWNE.
You must not be so quick.

ROSALINE.
’Tis long of you that spur me with such questions.

BEROWNE.
Your wit’s too hot, it speeds too fast, ’twill tire.

ROSALINE.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.

BEROWNE.
What time o’ day?

ROSALINE.
The hour that fools should ask.

BEROWNE.
Now fair befall your mask.

ROSALINE.
Fair fall the face it covers.

BEROWNE.
And send you many lovers!

ROSALINE.
Amen, so you be none.

BEROWNE.
Nay, then will I be gone.

KING.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money’s worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his majesty.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth;
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns, and not demands,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine,
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason’s yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding ’gainst some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.

PRINCESS.
You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.

KING.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And, if you prove it, I’ll repay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.

PRINCESS.
We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father.

KING.
Satisfy me so.

BOYET.
So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound.
Tomorrow you shall have a sight of them.

KING.
It shall suffice me; at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
As honour, without breach of honour, may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
You may not come, fair Princess, in my gates,
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
Tomorrow shall we visit you again.

PRINCESS.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your Grace.

KING.
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.

[_Exeunt the King, Longaville and Dumaine._]

BEROWNE.
Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.

ROSALINE.
Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.

BEROWNE.
I would you heard it groan.

ROSALINE.
Is the fool sick?

BEROWNE.
Sick at the heart.

ROSALINE.
Alack, let it blood.

BEROWNE.
Would that do it good?

ROSALINE.
My physic says “ay”.

BEROWNE.
Will you prick’t with your eye?

ROSALINE.
_Non point_, with my knife.

BEROWNE.
Now, God save thy life.

ROSALINE.
And yours from long living.

BEROWNE.
I cannot stay thanksgiving.

[_He exits._]

Enter Dumaine.

DUMAINE.
Sir, I pray you, a word. What lady is that same?

BOYET.
The heir of Alençon, Katharine her name.

DUMAINE.
A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.

[_He exits._]

Enter Longaville.

LONGAVILLE.
I beseech you a word. What is she in the white?

BOYET.
A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.

LONGAVILLE.
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.

BOYET.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.

LONGAVILLE.
Pray you, sir, whose daughter?

BOYET.
Her mother’s, I have heard.

LONGAVILLE.
God’s blessing on your beard!

BOYET.
Good sir, be not offended.
She is an heir of Falconbridge.

LONGAVILLE.
Nay, my choler is ended.
She is a most sweet lady.

BOYET.
Not unlike, sir; that may be.

[_Exit Longaville._]

Enter Berowne.

BEROWNE.
What’s her name in the cap?

BOYET.
Rosaline, by good hap.

BEROWNE.
Is she wedded or no?

BOYET.
To her will, sir, or so.

BEROWNE.
You are welcome, sir. Adieu.

BOYET.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.

[_Exit Berowne._]

MARIA.
That last is Berowne, the merry madcap lord.
Not a word with him but a jest.

BOYET.
And every jest but a word.

PRINCESS.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.

BOYET.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.

KATHARINE.
Two hot sheeps, marry!

BOYET.
And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.

KATHARINE.
You sheep and I pasture. Shall that finish the jest?

BOYET.
So you grant pasture for me.

[_He tries to kiss her._]

KATHARINE.
Not so, gentle beast.
My lips are no common, though several they be.

BOYET.
Belonging to whom?

KATHARINE.
To my fortunes and me.

PRINCESS.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree.
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his bookmen, for here ’tis abused.

BOYET.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the heart’s still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.

PRINCESS.
With what?

BOYET.
With that which we lovers entitle “affected”.

PRINCESS.
Your reason.

BOYET.
Why, all his behaviours did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair.
Methought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
Who, tend’ring their own worth from where they were glassed,
Did point you to buy them, along as you passed.
His face’s own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I’ll give you Aquitaine, and all that is his,
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.

PRINCESS.
Come, to our pavilion. Boyet is disposed.

BOYET.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclosed.
I only have made a mouth of his eye
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.

ROSALINE.
Thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.

MARIA.
He is Cupid’s grandfather, and learns news of him.

ROSALINE.
Then was Venus like her mother; for her father is but grim.

BOYET.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?

MARIA.
No.

BOYET.
What, then, do you see?

ROSALINE.
Ay, our way to be gone.

BOYET.
You are too hard for me.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park


Enter Armado the Braggart and Moth his Boy.

ARMADO.
Warble, child, make passionate my sense of hearing.

MOTH.
[_Singing_.]
Concolinel.

ARMADO.
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give enlargement to
the swain, bring him festinately hither. I must employ him in a letter
to my love.

MOTH.
Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?

ARMADO.
How meanest thou? Brawling in French?

MOTH.
No, my complete master; but to jig off a tune at the tongue’s end,
canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your eyelids,
sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you
swallowed love with singing love, sometime through the nose, as if you
snuffed up love by smelling love; with your hat penthouse-like o’er the
shop of your eyes, with your arms crossed on your thin-belly doublet
like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in your pocket like a man after
the old painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and
away. These are compliments, these are humours; these betray nice
wenches that would be betrayed without these; and make them men of
note—do you note me?—that most are affected to these.

ARMADO.
How hast thou purchased this experience?

MOTH.
By my penny of observation.

ARMADO.
But O—but O—

MOTH.
“The hobby-horse is forgot.”

ARMADO.
Call’st thou my love “hobby-horse”?

MOTH.
No, master. The hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love perhaps a
hackney. But have you forgot your love?

ARMADO.
Almost I had.

MOTH.
Negligent student! Learn her by heart.

ARMADO.
By heart and in heart, boy.

MOTH.
And out of heart, master. All those three I will prove.

ARMADO.
What wilt thou prove?

MOTH.
A man, if I live; and this, “by, in, and without,” upon the instant:
“by” heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her; “in”
heart you love her, because your heart is in love with her; and “out”
of heart you love her, being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her.

ARMADO.
I am all these three.

MOTH.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.

ARMADO.
Fetch hither the swain. He must carry me a letter.

MOTH.
A message well sympathized: a horse to be ambassador for an ass.

ARMADO.
Ha, ha, what sayest thou?

MOTH.
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is very
slow-gaited. But I go.

ARMADO.
The way is but short. Away!

MOTH.
As swift as lead, sir.

ARMADO.
The meaning, pretty ingenious?
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?

MOTH.
_Minime_, honest master; or rather, master, no.

ARMADO.
I say lead is slow.

MOTH.
You are too swift, sir, to say so.
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?

ARMADO.
Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that’s he.
I shoot thee at the swain.

MOTH.
Thump then, and I flee.

[_Exit._]

ARMADO.
A most acute juvenal, voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face.
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
My herald is returned.

Enter Moth and Costard.

MOTH.
A wonder, master! Here’s a costard broken in a shin.

ARMADO.
Some enigma, some riddle. Come, thy _l’envoi_ begin.

COSTARD.
No egma, no riddle, no _l’envoi_, no salve in the mail, sir. O, sir,
plantain, a plain plantain! No _l’envoi_, no _l’envoi_, no salve, sir,
but a plantain.

ARMADO.
By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, my spleen; the
heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my
stars! Doth the inconsiderate take _salve_ for _l’envoi_, and the word
_l’envoi_ for a _salve?_

MOTH.
Do the wise think them other? Is not _l’envoi_ a _salve?_

ARMADO.
No, page; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
I will example it:
    The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee
    Were still at odds, being but three.
There’s the moral. Now the _l’envoi_.

MOTH.
I will add the _l’envoi_. Say the moral again.

ARMADO.
    The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee
    Were still at odds, being but three.

MOTH.
    Until the goose came out of door,
    And stayed the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my _l’envoi_.
    The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee
    Were still at odds, being but three.

ARMADO.
    Until the goose came out of door,
    Staying the odds by adding four.

MOTH.
A good _l’envoi_, ending in the goose. Would you desire more?

COSTARD.
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that’s flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose.
Let me see: a fat _l’envoi_—ay, that’s a fat goose.

ARMADO.
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?

MOTH.
By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then called you for the _l’envoi_.

COSTARD.
True, and I for a plantain. Thus came your argument in. Then the boy’s
fat _l’envoi_, the goose that you bought; and he ended the market.

ARMADO.
But tell me, how was there a costard broken in a shin?

MOTH.
I will tell you sensibly.

COSTARD.
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth. I will speak that _l’envoi_.
    I, Costard, running out, that was safely within,
    Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.

ARMADO.
We will talk no more of this matter.

COSTARD.
Till there be more matter in the shin.

ARMADO.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.

COSTARD.
O, marry me to one Frances! I smell some _l’envoi_, some goose, in
this.

ARMADO.
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty, enfreedoming thy
person. Thou wert immured, restrained, captivated, bound.

COSTARD.
True, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let me loose.

ARMADO.
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance, and, in lieu thereof,
impose on thee nothing but this: [_Giving him a letter_.] bear this
significant to the country maid Jaquenetta. [_Giving money_.] There is
remuneration for the best ward of mine honour is rewarding my
dependents. Moth, follow.

[_Exit._]

MOTH.
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.

[_Exit Moth._]

COSTARD.
My sweet ounce of man’s flesh, my incony Jew!
Now will I look to his remuneration. “Remuneration”! O, that’s the
Latin word for three farthings. Three farthings—_remuneration_. “What’s
the price of this inkle?” “One penny.” “No, I’ll give you a
remuneration.” Why, it carries it! _Remuneration_. Why, it is a fairer
name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of this word.

Enter Berowne.

BEROWNE.
My good knave Costard, exceedingly well met.

COSTARD.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for a
remuneration?

BEROWNE.
What is a remuneration?

COSTARD.
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.

BEROWNE.
Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.

COSTARD.
I thank your worship. God be wi’ you.

BEROWNE.
Stay, slave. I must employ thee.
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.

COSTARD.
When would you have it done, sir?

BEROWNE.
This afternoon.

COSTARD.
Well, I will do it, sir. Fare you well.

BEROWNE.
Thou knowest not what it is.

COSTARD.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.

BEROWNE.
Why, villain, thou must know first.

COSTARD.
I will come to your worship tomorrow morning.

BEROWNE.
It must be done this afternoon. Hark, slave, it is but this:
The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This sealed-up counsel.

[_Gives him money._]

There’s thy guerdon. Go.

COSTARD.
Gardon, O sweet gardon! Better than remuneration, a ’levenpence
farthing better. Most sweet gardon! I will do it, sir, in print.
Gardon! Remuneration!

[_Exit._]

BEROWNE.
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love’s whip,
A very beadle to a humorous sigh,
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable,
A domineering pedant o’er the boy,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This Signior Junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
Th’ anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator, and great general
Of trotting paritors—O my little heart!
And I to be a corporal of his field
And wear his colours like a tumbler’s hoop!
What? I love, I sue, I seek a wife?
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watched that it may still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And, among three, to love the worst of all,
A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her! Go to, it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, and groan.
Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park


Enter the Princess, a Forester, Rosaline, Maria, Katharine, Boyet and
other Lords.

PRINCESS.
Was that the King that spurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?

BOYET.
I know not, but I think it was not he.

PRINCESS.
Whoe’er he was, he showed a mounting mind.
Well, lords, today we shall have our dispatch;
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?

FORESTER.
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
A stand where you may make “the fairest shoot”.

PRINCESS.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak’st the fairest shoot.

FORESTER.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.

PRINCESS.
What, what? First praise me, and again say no?
O short-lived pride! Not fair? Alack for woe!

FORESTER.
Yes, madam, fair.

PRINCESS.
Nay, never paint me now.
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:

[_She gives him money._]

Fair payment for foul words is more than due.

FORESTER.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.

PRINCESS.
See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit.
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow. Now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do’t;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes,
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When, for fame’s sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer’s blood, that my heart means no ill.

BOYET.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise’ sake, when they strive to be
Lords o’er their lords?

PRINCESS.
Only for praise; and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.

Enter Costard.

BOYET.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.

COSTARD.
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?

PRINCESS.
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.

COSTARD.
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?

PRINCESS.
The thickest and the tallest.

COSTARD.
The thickest and the tallest. It is so, truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One o’ these maids’ girdles for your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.

PRINCESS.
What’s your will, sir? What’s your will?

COSTARD.
I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one Lady Rosaline.

PRINCESS.
O, thy letter, thy letter! He’s a good friend of mine.
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve.
Break up this capon.

BOYET.
I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
It is writ to Jaquenetta.

PRINCESS.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax, and everyone give ear.

BOYET.
[_Reads_.] _By heaven, that thou art fair is most infallible; true that
thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art lovely. More fairer than
fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have
commiseration on thy heroical vassal. The magnanimous and most
illustrate King Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate
beggar Zenelophon, and he it was that might rightly say,_ “Veni, vidi,
vici,” _which to annothanize in the vulgar—O base and obscure
vulgar!_—videlicet, _He came, see, and overcame. He came, one; see,
two; overcame, three. Who came? The King. Why did he come? To see. Why
did he see? To overcome. To whom came he? To the beggar. What saw he?
The beggar. Who overcame he? The beggar. The conclusion is victory. On
whose side? The King’s. The captive is enriched. On whose side? The
beggar’s. The catastrophe is a nuptial. On whose side? The King’s? No,
on both in one, or one in both. I am the King, for so stands the
comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy lowliness. Shall I
command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy love? I could. Shall I
entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? Robes. For
tittles? Titles. For thyself? Me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane
my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every
part.
          Thine in the dearest design of industry,
                    Don Adriano de Armado.

Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
    ’Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
    And he from forage will incline to play.
But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den._

PRINCESS.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?

BOYET.
I am much deceived but I remember the style.

PRINCESS.
Else your memory is bad, going o’er it erewhile.

BOYET.
This Armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court,
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the Prince and his book-mates.

PRINCESS.
Thou, fellow, a word.
Who gave thee this letter?

COSTARD.
I told you: my lord.

PRINCESS.
To whom shouldst thou give it?

COSTARD.
From my lord to my lady.

PRINCESS.
From which lord to which lady?

COSTARD.
From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he called Rosaline.

PRINCESS.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
Here, sweet, put up this: ’twill be thine another day.

[_Exeunt all but Boyet, Rosaline, Maria and Costard._]

BOYET.
Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?

ROSALINE.
Shall I teach you to know?

BOYET.
Ay, my continent of beauty.

ROSALINE.
Why, she that bears the bow.
Finely put off!

BOYET.
My lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!

ROSALINE.
Well, then, I am the shooter.

BOYET.
And who is your deer?

ROSALINE.
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
Finely put on indeed!

MARIA.
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the brow.

BOYET.
But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?

ROSALINE.
Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man when King
Pepin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit it?

BOYET.
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman when Queen
Guinevere of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit it.

ROSALINE.
    Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
    Thou canst not hit it, my good man.

BOYET.
    An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
    An I cannot, another can.

[_Exeunt Rosaline._]

COSTARD.
By my troth, most pleasant. How both did fit it!

MARIA.
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.

BOYET.
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in’t, to mete at, if it may be.

MARIA.
Wide o’ the bow hand! I’ faith, your hand is out.

COSTARD.
Indeed, a’ must shoot nearer, or he’ll ne’er hit the clout.

BOYET.
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.

COSTARD.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.

MARIA.
Come, come, you talk greasily, your lips grow foul.

COSTARD.
She’s too hard for you at pricks, sir. Challenge her to bowl.

BOYET.
I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.

[_Exeunt Boyet and Maria._]

COSTARD.
By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
O’ my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit,
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
Armado, o’ the one side, O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
To see him kiss his hand and how most sweetly he will swear!
And his page o’ t’other side, that handful of wit!
Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit.

[_Shout within._]

Sola, sola!

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same

Enter Dull, Holofernes, the Pedant and Nathaniel.

NATHANIEL.
Very reverend sport, truly, and done in the testimony of a good
conscience.

HOLOFERNES.
The deer was, as you know, _sanguis_, in blood, ripe as the pomewater,
who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of _caelo_, the sky, the
welkin, the heaven, and anon falleth like a crab on the face of
_terra_, the soil, the land, the earth.

NATHANIEL.
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly varied, like a
scholar at the least. But, sir, I assure ye it was a buck of the first
head.

HOLOFERNES.
Sir Nathaniel, _haud credo_.

DULL.
’Twas not a “auld grey doe”, ’twas a pricket.

HOLOFERNES.
Most barbarous intimation! Yet a kind of insinuation, as it were, _in
via_, in way, of explication; _facere_, as it were, replication, or
rather, _ostentare_, to show, as it were, his inclination, after his
undressed, unpolished, uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather,
unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my _haud
credo_ for a deer.

DULL.
I said the deer was not a “auld grey doe”, ’twas a pricket.

HOLOFERNES.
Twice-sod simplicity, _bis coctus!_
O, thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!

NATHANIEL.
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred of a book.
He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink.
His intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible
in the duller parts.
And such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should be—
Which we of taste and feeling are—for those parts that do fructify in
us more than he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.
But, _omne bene_, say I, being of an old father’s mind;
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.

DULL.
You two are bookmen. Can you tell me by your wit
What was a month old at Cain’s birth, that’s not five weeks old as yet?

HOLOFERNES.
Dictynna, goodman Dull. Dictynna, goodman Dull.

DULL.
What is Dictynna?

NATHANIEL.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.

HOLOFERNES.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score.
Th’ allusion holds in the exchange.

DULL.
’Tis true, indeed. The collusion holds in the exchange.

HOLOFERNES.
God comfort thy capacity! I say, th’ allusion holds in the exchange.

DULL.
And I say the pollution holds in the exchange, for the moon is never
but a month old; and I say beside that ’twas a pricket that the
Princess killed.

HOLOFERNES.
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph on the death of the
deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call I the deer the Princess killed
a pricket.

NATHANIEL.
_Perge_, good Master Holofernes, _perge_, so it shall please you to
abrogate scurrility.

HOLOFERNES.
I will something affect the letter; for it argues facility.
The preyful Princess pierced and pricked a pretty pleasing pricket;
Some say a sore; but not a sore till now made sore with shooting.
The dogs did yell, put “l” to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket;
Or pricket sore, or else sorel, the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then “L” to “sore” makes fifty sores o’ sorel.
Of one sore I an hundred make, by adding but one more “L”.

NATHANIEL.
A rare talent!

DULL.
[_Aside_.] If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a talent.

HOLOFERNES.
This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a foolish extravagant
spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions,
motions, revolutions. These are begot in the ventricle of memory,
nourished in the womb of _pia mater_, and delivered upon the mellowing
of occasion. But the gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I
am thankful for it.

NATHANIEL.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my parishioners, for their
sons are well tutored by you, and their daughters profit very greatly
under you. You are a good member of the commonwealth.

HOLOFERNES.
_Mehercle!_ If their sons be ingenious, they shall want no instruction;
if their daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But, _vir sapit
qui pauca loquitur_. A soul feminine saluteth us.

Enter Jaquenetta and Costard.

JAQUENETTA.
God give you good morrow, Master Person.

HOLOFERNES.
Master Person, _quasi_ pierce one. And if one should be pierced, which
is the one?

COSTARD.
Marry, Master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.

HOLOFERNES.
Of piercing a hogshead! A good lustre or conceit in a turf of earth;
fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine. ’Tis pretty; it is
well.

JAQUENETTA.
Good Master Parson, be so good as read me this letter. It was given me
by Costard, and sent me from Don Armado. I beseech you read it.

[_Giving a letter to Nathaniel._]

HOLOFERNES.
_Fauste precor, gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra Ruminat_—
and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan, I may speak of thee as the
traveller doth of Venice:
    _Venetia, Venetia,
    Chi non ti vede, non ti pretia._
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! Who understandeth thee not, loves thee not.
[_He sings_.]
    Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? Or rather as Horace says in
his—What, my soul, verses?

NATHANIEL.
Ay, sir, and very learned.

HOLOFERNES.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse,
    _Lege, domine_.

NATHANIEL.
[_Reads_.]
_If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
    Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed.
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I’ll faithful prove.
    Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
    Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice.
    Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
    Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire.
Thy eye Jove’s lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
    Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon love this wrong,
That sings heaven’s praise with such an earthly tongue._

HOLOFERNES.
You find not the apostrophus, and so miss the accent. Let me supervise
the canzonet. [_He takes the letter_.] Here are only numbers ratified,
but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy, _caret_.
Ovidius Naso was the man. And why indeed “Naso,” but for smelling out
the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of invention? _Imitari_ is
nothing: so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper, the tired
horse his rider. But, damosella virgin, was this directed to you?

JAQUENETTA.
Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Berowne, one of the strange queen’s lords.

HOLOFERNES.
I will overglance the superscript: _To the snow-white hand of the most
beauteous Lady Rosaline._ I will look again on the intellect of the
letter, for the nomination of the party writing to the person written
unto: _Your Ladyship’s in all desired employment, Berowne._ Sir
Nathaniel, this Berowne is one of the votaries with the King, and here
he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger queen’s, which
accidentally, or by the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and
go, my sweet, deliver this paper into the royal hand of the King. It
may concern much. Stay not thy compliment. I forgive thy duty. Adieu.

JAQUENETTA.
Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life.

COSTARD.
Have with thee, my girl.

[_Exeunt Costard and Jaquenetta._]

NATHANIEL.
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very religiously; and, as a
certain Father saith—

HOLOFERNES.
Sir, tell not me of the Father, I do fear colourable colours. But to
return to the verses: did they please you, Sir Nathaniel?

NATHANIEL.
Marvellous well for the pen.

HOLOFERNES.
I do dine today at the father’s of a certain pupil of mine, where if,
before repast, it shall please you to gratify the table with a grace, I
will, on my privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid child or
pupil, undertake your _ben venuto;_ where I will prove those verses to
be very unlearned, neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention. I
beseech your society.

NATHANIEL.
And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the happiness of
life.

HOLOFERNES.
And certes, the text most infallibly concludes it. [_To Dull_.] Sir, I
do invite you too. You shall not say me nay. _Pauca verba_. Away! The
gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same

Enter Berowne with a paper in his hand, alone.

BEROWNE.
The King, he is hunting the deer; I am coursing myself. They have
pitched a toil; I am toiling in a pitch, pitch that defiles. Defile! A
foul word! Well, set thee down, sorrow, for so they say the fool said,
and so say I, and I the fool. Well proved, wit! By the Lord, this love
is as mad as Ajax. It kills sheep, it kills me, I a sheep. Well proved
again, o’ my side! I will not love; if I do, hang me! I’ faith, I will
not. O, but her eye! By this light, but for her eye, I would not love
her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing in the world but lie,
and lie in my throat. By heaven, I do love, and it hath taught me to
rhyme, and to be melancholy. And here is part of my rhyme, and here my
melancholy. Well, she hath one o’ my sonnets already. The clown bore
it, the fool sent it, and the lady hath it. Sweet clown, sweeter fool,
sweetest lady! By the world, I would not care a pin if the other three
were in. Here comes one with a paper. God give him grace to groan!

[_He stands aside._]

Enter the King with a paper.

KING.
Ay me!

BEROWNE.
[_Aside_.] Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid, thou hast thumped him
with thy birdbolt under the left pap. In faith, secrets!

KING.
[_Reads_.] [_So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
    To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
    The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows.
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
    Through the transparent bosom of the deep
As doth thy face, through tears of mine give light.
    Thou shin’st in every tear that I do weep.
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
    So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
    And they thy glory through my grief will show.
But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens, how far dost thou excel
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell._
How shall she know my griefs? I’ll drop the paper.
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?

[_Steps aside._]

What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, ear.

Enter Longaville with a paper.

BEROWNE.
[_Aside_.] Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!

LONGAVILLE.
Ay me! I am forsworn.

BEROWNE.
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.

KING.
In love, I hope. Sweet fellowship in shame.

BEROWNE.
One drunkard loves another of the name.

LONGAVILLE.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?

BEROWNE.
I could put thee in comfort: not by two that I know.
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
The shape of love’s Tyburn, that hangs up simplicity.

LONGAVILLE.
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
O sweet Maria, empress of my love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.

BEROWNE.
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid’s hose.
Disfigure not his shop.

LONGAVILLE.
This same shall go.

[_He reads the sonnet._]

_Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
    ’Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
    Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
    Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee.
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
    Thy grace being gained, cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is.
    Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhal’st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.
    If broken then, it is no fault of mine;
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To lose an oath to win a paradise?_

BEROWNE.
This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess. Pure, pure idolatry.
God amend us, God amend! We are much out o’ th’ way.

LONGAVILLE.
By whom shall I send this?—Company! Stay.

[_He steps aside._]

Enter Dumaine with a paper.

BEROWNE.
All hid, all hid, an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools’ secrets heedfully o’er-eye.
More sacks to the mill. O heavens, I have my wish.
Dumaine transformed! Four woodcocks in a dish!

DUMAINE.
O most divine Kate!

BEROWNE.
O most profane coxcomb!

DUMAINE.
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!

BEROWNE.
By earth, she is but corporal. There you lie.

DUMAINE.
Her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted.

BEROWNE.
An amber-coloured raven was well noted.

DUMAINE.
As upright as the cedar.

BEROWNE.
Stoop, I say.
Her shoulder is with child.

DUMAINE.
As fair as day.

BEROWNE.
Ay, as some days, but then no sun must shine.

DUMAINE.
O, that I had my wish!

LONGAVILLE.
And I had mine!

KING.
And I mine too, good Lord!

BEROWNE.
Amen, so I had mine. Is not that a good word?

DUMAINE.
I would forget her; but a fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will remembered be.

BEROWNE.
A fever in your blood? Why, then incision
Would let her out in saucers. Sweet misprision!

DUMAINE.
Once more I’ll read the ode that I have writ.

BEROWNE.
Once more I’ll mark how love can vary wit.

DUMAINE.
[_Dumaine reads his sonnet_.]
    _On a day—alack the day!—
    Love, whose month is ever May,
    Spied a blossom passing fair
    Playing in the wanton air.
    Through the velvet leaves the wind,
    All unseen, can passage find;
    That the lover, sick to death,
    Wished himself the heaven’s breath.
    “Air,” quoth he, “thy cheeks may blow;
    Air, would I might triumph so!”
    But, alack, my hand is sworn
    Ne’er to pluck thee from thy thorn.
    Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
    Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
    Do not call it sin in me,
    That I am forsworn for thee;
    Thou for whom Jove would swear
    Juno but an Ethiope were,
    And deny himself for Jove,
    Turning mortal for thy love._
This will I send, and something else more plain,
That shall express my true love’s fasting pain.
O, would the King, Berowne and Longaville
Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note,
For none offend where all alike do dote.

LONGAVILLE.
[_Comes forward_.] Dumaine, thy love is far from charity,
That in love’s grief desir’st society.
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o’erheard and taken napping so.

KING.
[_Comes forward_.] Come, sir, you blush. As his, your case is such.
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You do not love Maria? Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
“Ay, me!” says one. “O Jove!” the other cries.
One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other’s eyes.
[_To Longaville_.] You would for paradise break faith and troth;
[_To Dumaine_.] And Jove, for your love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.

BEROWNE.
[_Comes forward_.]
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears.
You’ll not be perjured, ’tis a hateful thing:
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed? Nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much o’ershot?
You found his mote, the King your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys.
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumaine?
And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege’s? All about the breast?
A caudle, ho!

KING.
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view?

BEROWNE.
Not you to me, but I betrayed by you.
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men like you, men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Joan? Or spend a minute’s time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb—

KING.
Soft! Whither away so fast?
A true man, or a thief, that gallops so?

BEROWNE.
I post from love. Good lover, let me go.

Enter Jaquenetta, with a letter, and Costard.

JAQUENETTA.
God bless the King!

KING.
What present hast thou there?

COSTARD.
Some certain treason.

KING.
What makes treason here?

COSTARD.
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.

KING.
If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.

JAQUENETTA.
I beseech your Grace, let this letter be read.
Our person misdoubts it; ’twas treason, he said.

KING.
Berowne, read it over.

[_Berowne reads the letter._]

Where hadst thou it?

JAQUENETTA.
Of Costard.

KING.
Where hadst thou it?

COSTARD.
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.

[_Berowne tears the letter._]

KING.
How now, what is in you? Why dost thou tear it?

BEROWNE.
A toy, my liege, a toy. Your Grace needs not fear it.

LONGAVILLE.
It did move him to passion, and therefore let’s hear it.

DUMAINE.
[_Picking up the pieces_.]
It is Berowne’s writing, and here is his name.

BEROWNE.
[_To Costard_.] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were born to do me
shame.
Guilty, my lord, guilty. I confess, I confess.

KING.
What?

BEROWNE.
That you three fools lacked me fool to make up the mess.
He, he, and you—and you, my liege—and I
Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.

DUMAINE.
Now the number is even.

BEROWNE.
True, true, we are four.
Will these turtles be gone?

KING.
Hence, sirs, away!

COSTARD.
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.

[_Exeunt Costard and Jaquenetta._]

BEROWNE.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
    As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.

KING.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?

BEROWNE.
“Did they?” quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline
That, like a rude and savage man of Ind,
At the first op’ning of the gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
That is not blinded by her majesty?

KING.
What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
She, an attending star, scarce seen a light.

BEROWNE.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the culled sovereignty
Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues—
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not.
To things of sale a seller’s praise belongs.
She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
A withered hermit, five-score winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye.
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new born,
And gives the crutch the cradle’s infancy.
O, ’tis the sun that maketh all things shine!

KING.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.

BEROWNE.
Is ebony like her? O word divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath? Where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack
If that she learn not of her eye to look.
No face is fair that is not full so black.

KING.
O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons and the school of night;
And beauty’s crest becomes the heavens well.

BEROWNE.
Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
O, if in black my lady’s brows be decked,
It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.

DUMAINE.
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.

LONGAVILLE.
And since her time are colliers counted bright.

KING.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.

DUMAINE.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.

BEROWNE.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colours should be washed away.

KING.
’Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
I’ll find a fairer face not washed today.

BEROWNE.
I’ll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.

KING.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.

DUMAINE.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.

LONGAVILLE.
[_Showing his shoe_.]
Look, here’s thy love, my foot and her face see.

BEROWNE.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.

DUMAINE.
O vile! Then, as she goes, what upward lies
The street should see as she walked over head.

KING.
But what of this? Are we not all in love?

BEROWNE.
Nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.

KING.
Then leave this chat, and, good Berowne, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

DUMAINE.
Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.

LONGAVILLE.
O, some authority how to proceed.
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.

DUMAINE.
Some salve for perjury.

BEROWNE.
O, ’tis more than need.
Have at you, then, affection’s men-at-arms.
Consider what you first did swear unto:
To fast, to study, and to see no woman—
Flat treason ’gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? Your stomachs are too young,
And abstinence engenders maladies.
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books;
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty’s tutors have enriched you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain,
And therefore, finding barren practisers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
But love, first learned in a lady’s eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain,
But with the motion of all elements
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye.
A lover’s eyes will gaze an eagle blind.
A lover’s ear will hear the lowest sound,
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped.
Love’s feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails.
Love’s tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx, as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo’s lute, strung with his hair.
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were tempered with Love’s sighs.
O, then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women’s eyes this doctrine I derive.
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain, and nourish, all the world;
Else none at all in aught proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or, keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
For wisdom’s sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love’s sake, a word that loves all men,
Or for men’s sake, the authors of these women,
Or women’s sake, by whom we men are men,
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
For charity itself fulfils the law,
And who can sever love from charity?

KING.
Saint Cupid, then, and, soldiers, to the field!

BEROWNE.
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords!
Pell-mell, down with them! But be first advised
In conflict that you get the sun of them.

LONGAVILLE.
Now to plain dealing. Lay these glozes by.
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?

KING.
And win them too. Therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.

BEROWNE.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither.
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masques, and merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.

KING.
Away, away! No time shall be omitted
That will betime and may by us be fitted.

BEROWNE.
_Allons! allons!_ Sowed cockle reaped no corn,
And justice always whirls in equal measure.
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park


Enter Holofernes, Sir Nathaniel and Dull.

HOLOFERNES.
_Satis quod sufficit._

NATHANIEL.
I praise God for you, sir. Your reasons at dinner have been sharp and
sententious, pleasant without scurrility, witty without affection,
audacious without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange
without heresy. I did converse this _quondam_ day with a companion of
the King’s, who is intituled, nominated, or called, Don Adriano de
Armado.

HOLOFERNES.
_Novi hominem tanquam te._ His humour is lofty, his discourse
peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gait majestical
and his general behaviour vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is too
picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate,
as I may call it.

NATHANIEL.
A most singular and choice epithet.

[_Draws out his table-book._]

HOLOFERNES.
He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his
argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
point-devise companions, such rackers of orthography, as to speak
“dout” _sine_ “b”, when he should say “doubt”, “det” when he should
pronounce “debt”—_d, e, b, t_, not _d, e, t_. He clepeth a calf “cauf”,
half “hauf”; neighbour _vocatur_ “nebour”, neigh abbreviated “ne”. This
is abhominable, which he would call “abominable”. It insinuateth me of
insanie. _Ne intelligis, domine?_ To make frantic, lunatic.

NATHANIEL.
_Laus Deo, bone intelligo._

HOLOFERNES.
_Bone? Bone_ for _bene?_ Priscian a little scratched; ’twill serve.

Enter Armado, Moth and Costard.

NATHANIEL.
_Videsne quis venit?_

HOLOFERNES.
_Video, et gaudeo._

ARMADO.
_Chirrah!_

HOLOFERNES.
_Quare_ “chirrah”, not “sirrah”?

ARMADO.
Men of peace, well encountered.

HOLOFERNES.
Most military sir, salutation.

MOTH.
[_Aside to Costard_.] They have been at a great feast of languages and
stolen the scraps.

COSTARD.
O, they have lived long on the almsbasket of words. I marvel thy master
hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as
_honorificabilitudinitatibus_. Thou art easier swallowed than a
flap-dragon.

MOTH.
Peace! The peal begins.

ARMADO.
[_To Holofernes_.] Monsieur, are you not lettered?

MOTH.
Yes, yes, he teaches boys the hornbook. What is _a, b_, spelt backward
with the horn on his head?

HOLOFERNES.
_Ba, pueritia_, with a horn added.

MOTH.
_Ba_, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.

HOLOFERNES.
_Quis, quis_, thou consonant?

MOTH.
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or the fifth, if I.

HOLOFERNES.
I will repeat them: _a, e, i_—

MOTH.
The sheep. The other two concludes it: _o, u_.

ARMADO.
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch, a quick
venue of wit! Snip, snap, quick and home! It rejoiceth my intellect.
True wit!

MOTH.
Offered by a child to an old man—which is wit-old.

HOLOFERNES.
What is the figure? What is the figure?

MOTH.
Horns.

HOLOFERNES.
Thou disputes like an infant. Go whip thy gig.

MOTH.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your infamy _unum
cita_. A gig of a cuckold’s horn.

COSTARD.
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it to buy
gingerbread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had of thy master,
thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an the
heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard, what a joyful
father wouldst thou make me! Go to, thou hast it _ad dunghill_, at the
fingers’ ends, as they say.

HOLOFERNES.
O, I smell false Latin! _Dunghill_ for _unguem_.

ARMADO.
Arts-man, preambulate. We will be singuled from the barbarous. Do you
not educate youth at the charge-house on the top of the mountain?

HOLOFERNES.
Or _mons_, the hill.

ARMADO.
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.

HOLOFERNES.
I do, _sans question_.

ARMADO.
Sir, it is the King’s most sweet pleasure and affection to congratulate
the Princess at her pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
rude multitude call the afternoon.

HOLOFERNES.
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent, and
measurable for the afternoon. The word is well culled, chose, sweet,
and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.

ARMADO.
Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do assure ye,
very good friend. For what is inward between us, let it pass. I do
beseech thee, remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy head.
And among other importunate and most serious designs, and of great
import indeed, too—but let that pass. For I must tell thee it will
please his Grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder
and with his royal finger thus dally with my excrement, with my
mustachio. But, sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
fable! Some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world. But
let that pass. The very all of all is—but, sweet heart, I do implore
secrecy—that the King would have me present the Princess, sweet chuck,
with some delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or antic, or
firework. Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet self are
good at such eruptions and sudden breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I
have acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your assistance.

HOLOFERNES.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Nathaniel, as
concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of
this day, to be rendered by our assistance, the King’s command, and
this most gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the
Princess, I say, none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.

NATHANIEL.
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?

HOLOFERNES.
Joshua, yourself; myself; and this gallant gentleman, Judas Maccabaeus.
This swain, because of his great limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the
Great; the page, Hercules.

ARMADO.
Pardon, sir; error. He is not quantity enough for that Worthy’s thumb;
he is not so big as the end of his club.

HOLOFERNES.
Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in minority. His enter
and exit shall be strangling a snake; and I will have an apology for
that purpose.

MOTH.
An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may cry “Well
done, Hercules, now thou crushest the snake!” That is the way to make
an offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.

ARMADO.
For the rest of the Worthies?

HOLOFERNES.
I will play three myself.

MOTH.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!

ARMADO.
Shall I tell you a thing?

HOLOFERNES.
We attend.

ARMADO.
We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech you, follow.

HOLOFERNES.
_Via_, goodman Dull! Thou has spoken no word all this while.

DULL.
Nor understood none neither, sir.

HOLOFERNES.
_Allons!_ we will employ thee.

DULL.
I’ll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play on the tabor to the
Worthies, and let them dance the hay.

HOLOFERNES.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. Before the Princess’s pavilion

Enter the Princess, Rosaline, Katharine and Maria.

PRINCESS.
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A lady walled about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving King.

ROSALINE.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?

PRINCESS.
Nothing but this? Yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper
Writ o’ both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid’s name.

ROSALINE.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand years a boy.

KATHARINE.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.

ROSALINE.
You’ll ne’er be friends with him. He killed your sister.

KATHARINE.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
And so she died. Had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might ha’ been a grandam ere she died.
And so may you, for a light heart lives long.

ROSALINE.
What’s your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?

KATHARINE.
A light condition in a beauty dark.

ROSALINE.
We need more light to find your meaning out.

KATHARINE.
You’ll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I’ll darkly end the argument.

ROSALINE.
Look what you do, you do it still i’ th’ dark.

KATHARINE.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.

ROSALINE.
Indeed, I weigh not you, and therefore light.

KATHARINE.
You weigh me not? O, that’s you care not for me.

ROSALINE.
Great reason, for past cure is still past care.

PRINCESS.
Well bandied both; a set of wit well played.
But, Rosaline, you have a favour too.
Who sent it? And what is it?

ROSALINE.
I would you knew.
An if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favour were as great. Be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
The numbers true, and, were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter.

PRINCESS.
Anything like?

ROSALINE.
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.

PRINCESS.
Beauteous as ink: a good conclusion.

KATHARINE.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.

ROSALINE.
’Ware pencils, how! Let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter.
O, that your face were not so full of O’s!

PRINCESS.
A pox of that jest! And beshrew all shrews.
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumaine?

KATHARINE.
Madam, this glove.

PRINCESS.
Did he not send you twain?

KATHARINE.
Yes, madam, and moreover,
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover.
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.

MARIA.
This, and these pearls, to me sent Longaville.
The letter is too long by half a mile.

PRINCESS.
I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
The chain were longer and the letter short?

MARIA.
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.

PRINCESS.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.

ROSALINE.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne I’ll torture ere I go.
O that I knew he were but in by th’ week!
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
And shape his service wholly to my hests,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So pair-taunt-like would I o’ersway his state,
That he should be my fool, and I his fate.

PRINCESS.
None are so surely caught, when they are catched,
As wit turned fool. Folly, in wisdom hatched,
Hath wisdom’s warrant and the help of school
And wit’s own grace to grace a learned fool.

ROSALINE.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess
As gravity’s revolt to wantonness.

MARIA.
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
As fool’ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

Enter Boyet.

PRINCESS.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.

BOYET.
O, I am stabbed with laughter! Where’s her Grace?

PRINCESS.
Thy news, Boyet?

BOYET.
Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm! Encounters mounted are
Against your peace. Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments. You’ll be surprised.
Muster your wits, stand in your own defence,
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.

PRINCESS.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.

BOYET.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour,
When, lo, to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addressed
The King and his companions. Warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And overheard what you shall overhear:
That, by and by, disguised they will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page
That well by heart hath conned his embassage.
Action and accent did they teach him there:
“Thus must thou speak,” and “thus thy body bear.”
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out;
“For,” quoth the King, “an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.”
The boy replied “An angel is not evil;
I should have feared her had she been a devil.”
With that all laughed and clapped him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elbow thus, and fleered, and swore
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another with his finger and his thumb
Cried “_Via_, we will do ’t, come what will come.”
The third he capered, and cried “All goes well!”
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell.
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To check their folly, passion’s solemn tears.

PRINCESS.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?

BOYET.
They do, they do, and are apparelled thus,
Like Muscovites, or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, court, and dance,
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which they’ll know
By favours several which they did bestow.

PRINCESS.
And will they so? The gallants shall be tasked;
For, ladies, we will every one be masked,
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady’s face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his dear.
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change you favours too; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.

ROSALINE.
Come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.

KATHARINE.
But in this changing, what is your intent?

PRINCESS.
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
They do it but in mocking merriment,
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mocked withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed to talk and greet.

ROSALINE.
But shall we dance, if they desire us to’t?

PRINCESS.
No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace,
But while ’tis spoke each turn away her face.

BOYET.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker’s heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.

PRINCESS.
Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt
The rest will ne’er come in, if he be out.
There’s no such sport as sport by sport o’erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own.
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mocked, depart away with shame.

[_Sound trumpet, within._]

BOYET.
The trumpet sounds. Be masked; the maskers come.

[_The Ladies mask._]

Enter Blackamoors with music, Moth, with a speech, the King, Berowne,
Longaville and Dumaine disguised.

MOTH.
_All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!_

BOYET.
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.

MOTH.
_A holy parcel of the fairest dames_

[_The Ladies turn their backs to him._]

_That ever turned their_—backs—_to mortal views!_

BEROWNE.
_Their eyes_, villain, _their eyes._

MOTH.
_That ever turned their eyes to mortal views.
Out_—

BOYET.
True; out indeed.

MOTH.
_Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold_—

BEROWNE.
_Once to behold_, rogue!

MOTH.
_Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes—
With your sun-beamed eyes_—

BOYET.
They will not answer to that epithet.
You were best call it “daughter-beamed eyes”.

MOTH.
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.

BEROWNE.
Is this your perfectness? Be gone, you rogue!

[_Exit Moth._]

ROSALINE.
What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.
If they do speak our language, ’tis our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would.

BOYET.
What would you with the Princess?

BEROWNE.
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

ROSALINE.
What would they, say they?

BOYET.
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

ROSALINE.
Why, that they have, and bid them so be gone.

BOYET.
She says you have it, and you may be gone.

KING.
Say to her we have measured many miles
To tread a measure with her on this grass.

BOYET.
They say that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.

ROSALINE.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easily told.

BOYET.
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.

BEROWNE.
Tell her we measure them by weary steps.

BOYET.
She hears herself.

ROSALINE.
How many weary steps
Of many weary miles you have o’ergone
Are numbered in the travel of one mile?

BEROWNE.
We number nothing that we spend for you.
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, may worship it.

ROSALINE.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.

KING.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.

ROSALINE.
O vain petitioner! Beg a greater matter!
Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.

KING.
Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bidd’st me beg; this begging is not strange.

ROSALINE.
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.

[_Music plays._]

Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.

KING.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?

ROSALINE.
You took the moon at full, but now she’s changed.

KING.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it.

ROSALINE.
Our ears vouchsafe it.

KING.
But your legs should do it.

ROSALINE.
Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
We’ll not be nice. Take hands. We will not dance.

KING.
Why take we hands then?

ROSALINE.
Only to part friends.
Curtsy, sweet hearts, and so the measure ends.

KING.
More measure of this measure! Be not nice.

ROSALINE.
We can afford no more at such a price.

KING.
Price you yourselves? What buys your company?

ROSALINE.
Your absence only.

KING.
That can never be.

ROSALINE.
Then cannot we be bought. And so adieu—
Twice to your visor, and half once to you!

KING.
If you deny to dance, let’s hold more chat.

ROSALINE.
In private then.

KING.
I am best pleased with that.

[_They converse apart._]

BEROWNE.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.

PRINCESS.
Honey, and milk, and sugar: there is three.

BEROWNE.
Nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey. Well run, dice!
There’s half a dozen sweets.

PRINCESS.
Seventh sweet, adieu.
Since you can cog, I’ll play no more with you.

BEROWNE.
One word in secret.

PRINCESS.
Let it not be sweet.

BEROWNE.
Thou griev’st my gall.

PRINCESS.
Gall! Bitter.

BEROWNE.
Therefore meet.

[_They converse apart._]

DUMAINE.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?

MARIA.
Name it.

DUMAINE.
Fair lady—

MARIA.
Say you so? Fair lord!
Take that for your “fair lady”.

DUMAINE.
Please it you,
As much in private, and I’ll bid adieu.

[_They converse apart._]

KATHARINE.
What, was your visor made without a tongue?

LONGAVILLE.
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.

KATHARINE.
O, for your reason! Quickly, sir, I long.

LONGAVILLE.
You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless visor half.

KATHARINE.
“Veal”, quoth the Dutchman. Is not veal a calf?

LONGAVILLE.
A calf, fair lady?

KATHARINE.
No, a fair lord calf.

LONGAVILLE.
Let’s part the word.

KATHARINE.
No, I’ll not be your half.
Take all and wean it; it may prove an ox.

LONGAVILLE.
Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks.
Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.

KATHARINE.
Then die a calf before your horns do grow.

LONGAVILLE.
One word in private with you ere I die.

KATHARINE.
Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.

[_They converse apart._]

BOYET.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
    As is the razor’s edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen;
    Above the sense of sense, so sensible
Seemeth their conference. Their conceits have wings
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.

ROSALINE.
Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.

BEROWNE.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!

KING.
Farewell, mad wenches. You have simple wits.

[_Exeunt King, Lords and Blackamoors._]

PRINCESS.
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovites.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?

BOYET.
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puffed out.

ROSALINE.
Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.

PRINCESS.
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
Or ever but in vizors show their faces?
This pert Berowne was out of countenance quite.

ROSALINE.
They were all in lamentable cases.
The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.

PRINCESS.
Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.

MARIA.
Dumaine was at my service, and his sword.
“_Non point_,” quoth I; my servant straight was mute.

KATHARINE.
Lord Longaville said I came o’er his heart;
And trow you what he called me?

PRINCESS.
Qualm, perhaps.

KATHARINE.
Yes, in good faith.

PRINCESS.
Go, sickness as thou art!

ROSALINE.
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.

PRINCESS.
And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.

KATHARINE.
And Longaville was for my service born.

MARIA.
Dumaine is mine as sure as bark on tree.

BOYET.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear.
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes, for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.

PRINCESS.
Will they return?

BOYET.
They will, they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows.
Therefore, change favours and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.

PRINCESS.
How “blow”? How “blow”? Speak to be understood.

BOYET.
Fair ladies masked are roses in their bud.
Dismasked, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.

PRINCESS.
Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do
If they return in their own shapes to woo?

ROSALINE.
Good madam, if by me you’ll be advised,
Let’s mock them still, as well known as disguised.
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penned,
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.

BOYET.
Ladies, withdraw. The gallants are at hand.

PRINCESS.
Whip to our tents, as roes run o’er the land.

[_Exeunt Princess, Rosaline, Katharine and Maria._]

Enter the King, Berowne, Longaville and Dumaine as themselves.

KING.
Fair sir, God save you. Where’s the Princess?

BOYET.
Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty
Command me any service to her thither?

KING.
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.

BOYET.
I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.

[_Exit._]

BEROWNE.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons peas
And utters it again when God doth please.
He is wit’s pedlar, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve.
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
He can carve too, and lisp. Why, this is he
That kissed his hand away in courtesy.
This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honourable terms. Nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and in ushering
Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet.
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smiles on everyone,
To show his teeth as white as whale’s bone;
And consciences that will not die in debt
Pay him the due of “honey-tongued Boyet”.

KING.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado’s page out of his part!

Enter the Princess, Rosaline, Maria, Katharine with Boyet.

BEROWNE.
See where it comes! Behaviour, what wert thou
Till this man showed thee, and what art thou now?

KING.
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day.

PRINCESS.
“Fair” in “all hail” is foul, as I conceive.

KING.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.

PRINCESS.
Then wish me better. I will give you leave.

KING.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court. Vouchsafe it then.

PRINCESS.
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow.
Nor God nor I delights in perjured men.

KING.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

PRINCESS.
You nickname virtue: “vice” you should have spoke;
For virtue’s office never breaks men’s troth.
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house’s guest,
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.

KING.
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

PRINCESS.
Not so, my lord. It is not so, I swear.
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game.
A mess of Russians left us but of late.

KING.
How, madam? Russians?

PRINCESS.
Ay, in truth, my lord.
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.

ROSALINE.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
My lady, to the manner of the days,
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit. Here they stayed an hour
And talked apace; and in that hour, my lord,
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.

BEROWNE.
This jest is dry to me. My gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise things foolish. When we greet,
With eyes’ best seeing, heaven’s fiery eye,
By light we lose light. Your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.

ROSALINE.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye—

BEROWNE.
I am a fool, and full of poverty.

ROSALINE.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.

BEROWNE.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess.

ROSALINE.
All the fool mine?

BEROWNE.
I cannot give you less.

ROSALINE.
Which of the visors was it that you wore?

BEROWNE.
Where, when, what visor? Why demand you this?

ROSALINE.
There, then, that visor; that superfluous case
That hid the worse and showed the better face.

KING.
We are descried. They’ll mock us now downright.

DUMAINE.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.

PRINCESS.
Amazed, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?

ROSALINE.
Help! Hold his brows! He’ll swoon. Why look you pale?
Seasick, I think, coming from Muscovy.

BEROWNE.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I, lady; dart thy skill at me.
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit,
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penned,
Nor to the motion of a school-boy’s tongue,
Nor never come in visor to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme like a blind harper’s song.
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical: these summer flies
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white glove—how white the hand, God knows!—
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes.
And, to begin: wench, so God help me, law,
My love to thee is sound, _sans_ crack or flaw.

ROSALINE.
_Sans_ “_sans_,” I pray you.

BEROWNE.
Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage. Bear with me, I am sick;
I’ll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Write “Lord have mercy on us” on those three.
They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
These lords are visited. You are not free,
For the Lord’s tokens on you do I see.

PRINCESS.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.

BEROWNE.
Our states are forfeit. Seek not to undo us.

ROSALINE.
It is not so. For how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?

BEROWNE.
Peace! for I will not have to do with you.

ROSALINE.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.

BEROWNE.
Speak for yourselves. My wit is at an end.

KING.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.

PRINCESS.
The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now, disguised?

KING.
Madam, I was.

PRINCESS.
And were you well advised?

KING.
I was, fair madam.

PRINCESS.
When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your lady’s ear?

KING.
That more than all the world I did respect her.

PRINCESS.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.

KING.
Upon mine honour, no.

PRINCESS.
Peace, peace, forbear!
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.

KING.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine.

PRINCESS.
I will; and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?

ROSALINE.
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.

PRINCESS.
God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
Most honourably doth uphold his word.

KING.
What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.

ROSALINE.
By heaven, you did! And to confirm it plain,
You gave me this. But take it, sir, again.

KING.
My faith and this the Princess I did give.
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.

PRINCESS.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?

BEROWNE.
Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick on’t. Here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she’s disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favours, and then we,
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this ’tis. [_To Boyet_.] And might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady’s foot by th’ squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out. Go, you are allowed;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? There’s an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.

BOYET.
Full merrily
Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.

BEROWNE.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.

Enter Costard.

Welcome, pure wit! Thou part’st a fair fray.

COSTARD.
O Lord, sir, they would know
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.

BEROWNE.
What, are there but three?

COSTARD.
No, sir; but it is vara fine,
For every one pursents three.

BEROWNE.
And three times thrice is nine.

COSTARD.
Not so, sir, under correction, sir, I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we know what we know.
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir—

BEROWNE.
Is not nine?

COSTARD.
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.

BEROWNE.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.

COSTARD.
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by reckoning, sir.

BEROWNE.
How much is it?

COSTARD.
O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir, will show
whereuntil it doth amount. For mine own part, I am, as they say, but to
parfect one man in one poor man—Pompion the Great, sir.

BEROWNE.
Art thou one of the Worthies?

COSTARD.
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great. For mine own
part, I know not the degree of the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.

BEROWNE.
Go bid them prepare.

COSTARD.
We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take some care.

[_Exit Costard._]

KING.
Berowne, they will shame us. Let them not approach.

BEROWNE.
We are shame-proof, my lord, and ’tis some policy
To have one show worse than the King’s and his company.

KING.
I say they shall not come.

PRINCESS.
Nay, my good lord, let me o’errule you now.
That sport best pleases that doth least know how,
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Die in the zeal of that which it presents;
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.

BEROWNE.
A right description of our sport, my lord.

Enter Armado, the Braggart.

ARMADO.
Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet breath as will
utter a brace of words.

[_Armado and King talk apart._]

PRINCESS.
Doth this man serve God?

BEROWNE.
Why ask you?

PRINCESS.
He speaks not like a man of God his making.

ARMADO.
That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, I protest, the
schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too, too vain, too, too vain.
But we will put it, as they say, to _fortuna de la guerra_. I wish you
the peace of mind, most royal couplement!

[_Exit._]

KING.
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He presents Hector of
Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate, Alexander;
Armado’s page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus.
_And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
These four will change habits and present the other five._

BEROWNE.
There is five in the first show.

KING.
You are deceived. ’Tis not so.

BEROWNE.
The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, and the boy.
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.

KING.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

Enter Costard as Pompey.

COSTARD.
_I Pompey am_—

BEROWNE.
You lie, you are not he.

COSTARD.
_I Pompey am_—

BOYET.
With leopard’s head on knee.

BEROWNE.
Well said, old mocker. I must needs be friends with thee.

COSTARD.
_I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big._

DUMAINE.
The “Great”.

COSTARD.
It is “Great”, sir; _Pompey surnamed the Great,
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to sweat.
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France._
If your ladyship would say, “Thanks, Pompey”, I had done.

PRINCESS.
Great thanks, great Pompey.

COSTARD.
’Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect. I made a little fault
in “Great”.

BEROWNE.
My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.

Enter Nathaniel, the Curate, for Alexander.

NATHANIEL.
_When in the world I lived, I was the world’s commander;
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my conquering might.
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander._

BOYET.
Your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.

BEROWNE.
Your nose smells “no” in this, most tender-smelling knight.

PRINCESS.
The conqueror is dismayed. Proceed, good Alexander.

NATHANIEL.
_When in the world I lived, I was the world’s commander_—

BOYET.
Most true; ’tis right. You were so, Alisander.

BEROWNE.
Pompey the Great—

COSTARD.
Your servant, and Costard.

BEROWNE.
Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.

COSTARD.
[_To Sir Nathaniel_.] O sir, you have overthrown Alisander the
Conqueror. You will be scraped out of the painted cloth for this. Your
lion, that holds his pole-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given
to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror, and afeard to speak?
Run away for shame, Alisander. [_Nathaniel retires_.] There, an’t shall
please you, a foolish mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon
dashed. He is a marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good
bowler; but for Alisander, alas you see how ’tis—a little o’erparted.
But there are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other
sort.

PRINCESS.
Stand aside, good Pompey.

Enter Holofernes, the Pedant, as Judas, and Moth, the Boy, as Hercules.

HOLOFERNES.
_Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club killed Cerberus, that three-headed_ canus,
_And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his_ manus.
Quoniam _he seemeth in minority_,
Ergo _I come with this apology._
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.

[_Moth retires._]

_Judas I am._—

DUMAINE.
A Judas!

HOLOFERNES.
Not Iscariot, sir.
_Judas I am, ycleped Maccabaeus._

DUMAINE.
Judas Maccabaeus clipped is plain Judas.

BEROWNE.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?

HOLOFERNES.
_Judas I am_—

DUMAINE.
The more shame for you, Judas.

HOLOFERNES.
What mean you, sir?

BOYET.
To make Judas hang himself.

HOLOFERNES.
Begin, sir; you are my elder.

BEROWNE.
Well followed. Judas was hanged on an elder.

HOLOFERNES.
I will not be put out of countenance.

BEROWNE.
Because thou hast no face.

HOLOFERNES.
What is this?

BOYET.
A cittern-head.

DUMAINE.
The head of a bodkin.

BEROWNE.
A death’s face in a ring.

LONGAVILLE.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.

BOYET.
The pommel of Caesar’s falchion.

DUMAINE.
The carved-bone face on a flask.

BEROWNE.
Saint George’s half-cheek in a brooch.

DUMAINE.
Ay, and in a brooch of lead.

BEROWNE.
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
And now forward, for we have put thee in countenance.

HOLOFERNES.
You have put me out of countenance.

BEROWNE.
False. We have given thee faces.

HOLOFERNES.
But you have outfaced them all.

BEROWNE.
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.

BOYET.
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude. Nay, why dost thou stay?

DUMAINE.
For the latter end of his name.

BEROWNE.
For the ass to the Jude? Give it him. Jud-as, away!

HOLOFERNES.
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.

BOYET.
A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark; he may stumble.

[_Exit Holofernes._]

PRINCESS.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!

Enter Armado, the Braggart, as Hector.

BEROWNE.
Hide thy head, Achilles. Here comes Hector in arms.

DUMAINE.
Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.

KING.
Hector was but a Trojan in respect of this.

BOYET.
But is this Hector?

DUMAINE.
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.

LONGAVILLE.
His leg is too big for Hector’s.

DUMAINE.
More calf, certain.

BOYET.
No, he is best endued in the small.

BEROWNE.
This cannot be Hector.

DUMAINE.
He’s a god or a painter, for he makes faces.

ARMADO.
_The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift_—

DUMAINE.
A gilt nutmeg.

BEROWNE.
A lemon.

LONGAVILLE.
Stuck with cloves.

DUMAINE.
No, cloven.

ARMADO.
Peace!
_The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed that certain he would fight, yea,
    From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
I am that flower_—

DUMAINE.
That mint.

LONGAVILLE.
That columbine.

ARMADO.
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.

LONGAVILLE.
I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.

DUMAINE.
Ay, and Hector’s a greyhound.

ARMADO.
The sweet war-man is dead and rotten. Sweet chucks, beat not the bones
of the buried. When he breathed, he was a man. But I will forward with
my device. [_To the Princess_.] Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense
of hearing.

PRINCESS.
Speak, brave Hector; we are much delighted.

ARMADO.
I do adore thy sweet Grace’s slipper.

BOYET.
Loves her by the foot.

DUMAINE.
He may not by the yard.

ARMADO.
_This Hector far surmounted Hannibal.
The party is gone_—

COSTARD.
Fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two months on her way.

ARMADO.
What meanest thou?

COSTARD.
Faith, unless you play the honest Trojan, the poor wench is cast away.
She’s quick; the child brags in her belly already. ’Tis yours.

ARMADO.
Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? Thou shalt die.

COSTARD.
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is quick by him, and
hanged for Pompey that is dead by him.

DUMAINE.
Most rare Pompey!

BOYET.
Renowned Pompey!

BEROWNE.
Greater than  “Great”! Great, great, great Pompey! Pompey the Huge!

DUMAINE.
Hector trembles.

BEROWNE.
Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! Stir them on, stir them on!

DUMAINE.
Hector will challenge him.

BEROWNE.
Ay, if he have no more man’s blood in his belly than will sup a flea.

ARMADO.
By the north pole, I do challenge thee.

COSTARD.
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man. I’ll slash, I’ll do
it by the sword. I bepray you, let me borrow my arms again.

DUMAINE.
Room for the incensed Worthies!

COSTARD.
I’ll do it in my shirt.

DUMAINE.
Most resolute Pompey!

MOTH.
Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you not see Pompey is
uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose your reputation.

ARMADO.
Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me. I will not combat in my shirt.

DUMAINE.
You may not deny it. Pompey hath made the challenge.

ARMADO.
Sweet bloods, I both may and will.

BEROWNE.
What reason have you for ’t?

ARMADO.
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt. I go woolward for penance.

BOYET.
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen; since when,
I’ll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of Jaquenetta’s, and that
he wears next his heart for a favour.

Enter a Messenger, Monsieur Marcadé.

MARCADÉ.
God save you, madam.

PRINCESS.
Welcome, Marcadé,
But that thou interruptest our merriment.

MARCADÉ.
I am sorry, madam, for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. The King your father—

PRINCESS.
Dead, for my life!

MARCADÉ.
Even so. My tale is told.

BEROWNE.
Worthies away! The scene begins to cloud.

ARMADO.
For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have seen the day of wrong
through the little hole of discretion, and I will right myself like a
soldier.

[_Exeunt Worthies._]

KING.
How fares your Majesty?

PRINCESS.
Boyet, prepare. I will away tonight.

KING.
Madam, not so. I do beseech you stay.

PRINCESS.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath; your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtained.

KING.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet, since love’s argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow jostle it
From what it purposed; since to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.

PRINCESS.
I understand you not. My griefs are double.

BEROWNE.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
And by these badges understand the King.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths. Your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end of our intents;
And what in us hath seemed ridiculous—
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formed by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance;
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both—fair ladies, you.
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.

PRINCESS.
We have received your letters, full of love;
Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
And in our maiden council rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time.
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.

DUMAINE.
Our letters, madam, showed much more than jest.

LONGAVILLE.
So did our looks.

ROSALINE.
We did not quote them so.

KING.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.

PRINCESS.
A time, methinks, too short
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this:
If for my love—as there is no such cause—
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world,
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds,
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial, and last love;
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
I will be thine. And, till that instance, shut
My woeful self up in a mournful house,
Raining the tears of lamentation
For the remembrance of my father’s death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the other’s heart.

KING.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
    To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
    Hence hermit, then. My heart is in thy breast.

[_They converse apart_]

DUMAINE.
And what to me, my love? But what to me?
A wife?

KATHARINE.
A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With threefold love I wish you all these three.

DUMAINE.
O, shall I say, “I thank you, gentle wife”?

KATHARINE.
No so, my lord. A twelvemonth and a day
I’ll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say.
Come when the King doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, I’ll give you some.

DUMAINE.
I’ll serve thee true and faithfully till then.

KATHARINE.
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.

[_They converse apart_]

LONGAVILLE.
What says Maria?

MARIA.
At the twelvemonth’s end
I’ll change my black gown for a faithful friend.

LONGAVILLE.
I’ll stay with patience, but the time is long.

MARIA.
The liker you; few taller are so young.

[_They converse apart_]

BEROWNE.
Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me.
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there.
Impose some service on me for thy love.

ROSALINE.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you; and the world’s large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavour of your wit
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.

BEROWNE.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

ROSALINE.
Why, that’s the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
A jest’s prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it. Then, if sickly ears,
Deafed with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.

BEROWNE.
A twelvemonth? Well, befall what will befall,
I’ll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.

PRINCESS.
[_To the King_.] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take my leave.

KING.
No, madam, we will bring you on your way.

BEROWNE.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play.
Jack hath not Jill. These ladies’ courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.

KING.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,
And then ’twill end.

BEROWNE.
That’s too long for a play.

Enter Armado, the Braggart.

ARMADO.
Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me—

PRINCESS.
Was not that Hector?

DUMAINE.
The worthy knight of Troy.

ARMADO.
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a votary; I have
vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her sweet love three year.
But, most esteemed Greatness, will you hear the dialogue that the two
learned men have compiled in praise of the owl and the cuckoo? It
should have followed in the end of our show.

KING.
Call them forth quickly; we will do so.

ARMADO.
Holla! Approach.

Enter all.

This side is _Hiems_, Winter; this _Ver_, the Spring; the one
maintained by the owl, th’ other by the cuckoo. _Ver_, begin.

The Song

SPRING.
When daisies pied and violets blue
    And lady-smocks all silver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
    Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then on every tree
Mocks married men; for thus sings he:
         “Cuckoo!
Cuckoo, cuckoo!” O, word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
    And merry larks are ploughmen’s clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks and daws,
    And maidens bleach their summer smocks,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
         “Cuckoo!
Cuckoo, cuckoo!” O, word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.

WINTER.
When icicles hang by the wall,
    And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
And Tom bears logs into the hall,
    And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nipped, and ways be foul,
  Then nightly sings the staring owl:
“Tu-whit, Tu-whoo!” A merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

When all aloud the wind doth blow,
    And coughing drowns the parson’s saw,
And birds sit brooding in the snow,
    And Marian’s nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl:
“Tu-whit, Tu-whoo!” A merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

ARMADO.
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
You that way, we this way.

[_Exeunt._]




THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. An open Place.
Scene II. A Camp near Forres.
Scene III. A heath.
Scene IV. Forres. A Room in the Palace.
Scene V. Inverness. A Room in Macbeth’s Castle.
Scene VI. The same. Before the Castle.
Scene VII. The same. A Lobby in the Castle.

ACT II
Scene I. Inverness. Court within the Castle.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. The same.
Scene IV. The same. Without the Castle.

ACT III
Scene I. Forres. A Room in the Palace.
Scene II. The same. Another Room in the Palace.
Scene III. The same. A Park or Lawn, with a gate leading to the Palace.
Scene IV. The same. A Room of state in the Palace.
Scene V. The heath.
Scene VI. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

ACT IV
Scene I. A dark Cave. In the middle, a Cauldron Boiling.
Scene II. Fife. A Room in Macduff’s Castle.
Scene III. England. Before the King’s Palace.

ACT V
Scene I. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.
Scene II. The Country near Dunsinane.
Scene III. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.
Scene IV. Country near Dunsinane: a Wood in view.
Scene V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.
Scene VI. The same. A Plain before the Castle.
Scene VII. The same. Another part of the Plain.
Scene VIII. The same. Another part of the field.




Dramatis Personæ

DUNCAN, King of Scotland.
MALCOLM, his Son.
DONALBAIN, his Son.
MACBETH, General in the King’s Army.
BANQUO, General in the King’s Army.
MACDUFF, Nobleman of Scotland.
LENNOX, Nobleman of Scotland.
ROSS, Nobleman of Scotland.
MENTEITH, Nobleman of Scotland.
ANGUS, Nobleman of Scotland.
CAITHNESS, Nobleman of Scotland.
FLEANCE, Son to Banquo.
SIWARD, Earl of Northumberland, General of the English Forces.
YOUNG SIWARD, his Son.
SEYTON, an Officer attending on Macbeth.
BOY, Son to Macduff.
An English Doctor.
A Scottish Doctor.
A Soldier.
A Porter.
An Old Man.

LADY MACBETH.
LADY MACDUFF.
Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth.
HECATE, and three Witches.

Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murderers, Attendants and
Messengers.

The Ghost of Banquo and several other Apparitions.

SCENE: In the end of the Fourth Act, in England; through the rest of
the Play, in Scotland; and chiefly at Macbeth’s Castle.




ACT I

SCENE I. An open Place.


 Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?

SECOND WITCH.
When the hurlyburly’s done,
When the battle’s lost and won.

THIRD WITCH.
That will be ere the set of sun.

FIRST WITCH.
Where the place?

SECOND WITCH.
Upon the heath.

THIRD WITCH.
There to meet with Macbeth.

FIRST WITCH.
I come, Graymalkin!

SECOND WITCH.
Paddock calls.

THIRD WITCH.
Anon.

ALL.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
Hover through the fog and filthy air.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Camp near Forres.

 Alarum within. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, with
 Attendants, meeting a bleeding Captain.

DUNCAN.
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.

MALCOLM.
This is the sergeant
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
’Gainst my captivity.—Hail, brave friend!
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.

SOLDIER.
Doubtful it stood;
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Show’d like a rebel’s whore. But all’s too weak;
For brave Macbeth (well he deserves that name),
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish’d steel,
Which smok’d with bloody execution,
Like Valour’s minion, carv’d out his passage,
Till he fac’d the slave;
Which ne’er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseam’d him from the nave to the chops,
And fix’d his head upon our battlements.

DUNCAN.
O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!

SOLDIER.
As whence the sun ’gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring, whence comfort seem’d to come
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valour arm’d,
Compell’d these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbish’d arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.

DUNCAN.
Dismay’d not this
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

SOLDIER.
Yes;
As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharg’d with double cracks;
So they
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
Or memorize another Golgotha,
I cannot tell—
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.

DUNCAN.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honour both.—Go, get him surgeons.

 [_Exit Captain, attended._]

 Enter Ross and Angus.

Who comes here?

MALCOLM.
The worthy Thane of Ross.

LENNOX.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
That seems to speak things strange.

ROSS.
God save the King!

DUNCAN.
Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?

ROSS.
From Fife, great King,
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapp’d in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm ’gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,
The victory fell on us.

DUNCAN.
Great happiness!

ROSS.
That now
Sweno, the Norways’ king, craves composition;
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursed at Saint Colme’s Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

DUNCAN.
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go pronounce his present death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.

ROSS.
I’ll see it done.

DUNCAN.
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A heath.

 Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
Where hast thou been, sister?

SECOND WITCH.
Killing swine.

THIRD WITCH.
Sister, where thou?

FIRST WITCH.
A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap,
And mounch’d, and mounch’d, and mounch’d. “Give me,” quoth I.
“Aroint thee, witch!” the rump-fed ronyon cries.
Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ th’ _Tiger:_
But in a sieve I’ll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.

SECOND WITCH.
I’ll give thee a wind.

FIRST WITCH.
Th’art kind.

THIRD WITCH.
And I another.

FIRST WITCH.
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow,
All the quarters that they know
I’ the shipman’s card.
I will drain him dry as hay:
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his pent-house lid;
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev’n-nights nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
Look what I have.

SECOND WITCH.
Show me, show me.

FIRST WITCH.
Here I have a pilot’s thumb,
Wrack’d as homeward he did come.

 [_Drum within._]

THIRD WITCH.
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.

ALL.
The Weird Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about:
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace!—the charm’s wound up.

 Enter Macbeth and Banquo.

MACBETH.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

BANQUO.
How far is’t call’d to Forres?—What are these,
So wither’d, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like the inhabitants o’ th’ earth,
And yet are on’t?—Live you? or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand me,
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.

MACBETH.
Speak, if you can;—what are you?

FIRST WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!

SECOND WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!

THIRD WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! that shalt be king hereafter!

BANQUO.
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?—I’ th’ name of truth,
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time,
And say which grain will grow, and which will not,
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favours nor your hate.

FIRST WITCH.
Hail!

SECOND WITCH.
Hail!

THIRD WITCH.
Hail!

FIRST WITCH.
Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.

SECOND WITCH.
Not so happy, yet much happier.

THIRD WITCH.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

FIRST WITCH.
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

MACBETH.
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
By Sinel’s death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives,
A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence? or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting?—Speak, I charge you.

 [_Witches vanish._]

BANQUO.
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanish’d?

MACBETH.
Into the air; and what seem’d corporal,
Melted as breath into the wind.
Would they had stay’d!

BANQUO.
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?

MACBETH.
Your children shall be kings.

BANQUO.
You shall be king.

MACBETH.
And Thane of Cawdor too; went it not so?

BANQUO.
To the selfsame tune and words. Who’s here?

 Enter Ross and Angus.

ROSS.
The King hath happily receiv’d, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels’ fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his: silenc’d with that,
In viewing o’er the rest o’ th’ selfsame day,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post; and everyone did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom’s great defence,
And pour’d them down before him.

ANGUS.
We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks;
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.

ROSS.
And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.

BANQUO.
What, can the devil speak true?

MACBETH.
The Thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
In borrow’d robes?

ANGUS.
Who was the Thane lives yet,
But under heavy judgement bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combin’d
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labour’d in his country’s wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confess’d and prov’d,
Have overthrown him.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor:
The greatest is behind. [_To Ross and Angus._] Thanks for your pains.
[_To Banquo._] Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promis’d no less to them?

BANQUO.
That, trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange:
And oftentimes to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
Win us with honest trifles, to betray’s
In deepest consequence.—
Cousins, a word, I pray you.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Two truths are told,
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.—
[_Aside._] This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill; cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success,
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor:
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair,
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smother’d in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.

BANQUO.
Look, how our partner’s rapt.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me
Without my stir.

BANQUO.
New honours come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
But with the aid of use.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

BANQUO.
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.

MACBETH.
Give me your favour. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are register’d where every day I turn
The leaf to read them.—Let us toward the King.—
Think upon what hath chanc’d; and at more time,
The interim having weigh’d it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.

BANQUO.
Very gladly.

MACBETH.
Till then, enough.—Come, friends.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

 Flourish. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox and Attendants.

DUNCAN.
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet return’d?

MALCOLM.
My liege,
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report,
That very frankly he confess’d his treasons,
Implor’d your Highness’ pardon, and set forth
A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
Became him like the leaving it; he died
As one that had been studied in his death,
To throw away the dearest thing he ow’d
As ’twere a careless trifle.

DUNCAN.
There’s no art
To find the mind’s construction in the face:
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.

 Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross and Angus.

O worthiest cousin!
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserv’d;
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.

MACBETH.
The service and the loyalty I owe,
In doing it, pays itself. Your Highness’ part
Is to receive our duties: and our duties
Are to your throne and state, children and servants;
Which do but what they should, by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honour.

DUNCAN.
Welcome hither:
I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
To make thee full of growing.—Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserv’d, nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me infold thee
And hold thee to my heart.

BANQUO.
There if I grow,
The harvest is your own.

DUNCAN.
My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.—Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know,
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm; whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland: which honour must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.—From hence to Inverness,
And bind us further to you.

MACBETH.
The rest is labour, which is not us’d for you:
I’ll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach;
So, humbly take my leave.

DUNCAN.
My worthy Cawdor!

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] The Prince of Cumberland!—That is a step
On which I must fall down, or else o’erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires!
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be,
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

 [_Exit._]

DUNCAN.
True, worthy Banquo! He is full so valiant;
And in his commendations I am fed.
It is a banquet to me. Let’s after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
It is a peerless kinsman.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Inverness. A Room in Macbeth’s Castle.

 Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.

LADY MACBETH.
“They met me in the day of success; and I have learned by the
perfect’st report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I
burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air,
into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came
missives from the King, who all-hailed me, ‘Thane of Cawdor’; by which
title, before, these Weird Sisters saluted me, and referred me to the
coming on of time, with ‘Hail, king that shalt be!’ This have I thought
good to deliver thee (my dearest partner of greatness) that thou
might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what
greatness is promis’d thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.”

Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be
What thou art promis’d. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o’ th’ milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great;
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly,
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou’dst have, great Glamis,
That which cries, “Thus thou must do,” if thou have it;
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
And chastise with the valour of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crown’d withal.

 Enter a Messenger.

What is your tidings?

MESSENGER.
The King comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Thou’rt mad to say it.
Is not thy master with him? who, were’t so,
Would have inform’d for preparation.

MESSENGER.
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.

LADY MACBETH.
Give him tending.
He brings great news.

 [_Exit Messenger._]

The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,
Stop up th’ access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th’ effect and it! Come to my woman’s breasts,
And take my milk for gall, your murd’ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature’s mischief! Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry, “Hold, hold!”

 Enter Macbeth.

Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor!
Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.

MACBETH.
My dearest love,
Duncan comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
And when goes hence?

MACBETH.
Tomorrow, as he purposes.

LADY MACBETH.
O, never
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
But be the serpent under’t. He that’s coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night’s great business into my dispatch;
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

MACBETH.
We will speak further.

LADY MACBETH.
Only look up clear;
To alter favour ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The same. Before the Castle.

 Hautboys. Servants of Macbeth attending.

 Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus
 and Attendants.

DUNCAN.
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.

BANQUO.
This guest of summer,
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breath
Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have observ’d
The air is delicate.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

DUNCAN.
See, see, our honour’d hostess!—
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God ’ild us for your pains,
And thank us for your trouble.

LADY MACBETH.
All our service,
In every point twice done, and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honours deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house: for those of old,
And the late dignities heap’d up to them,
We rest your hermits.

DUNCAN.
Where’s the Thane of Cawdor?
We cours’d him at the heels, and had a purpose
To be his purveyor: but he rides well;
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Your servants ever
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
To make their audit at your Highness’ pleasure,
Still to return your own.

DUNCAN.
Give me your hand;
Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The same. A Lobby in the Castle.

 Hautboys and torches. Enter, and pass over, a Sewer and divers
 Servants with dishes and service. Then enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well
It were done quickly. If th’ assassination
Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
With his surcease success; that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all—here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgement here; that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which being taught, return
To plague th’ inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th’ ingredience of our poison’d chalice
To our own lips. He’s here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubin, hors’d
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind.—I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself
And falls on th’ other—

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

How now! what news?

LADY MACBETH.
He has almost supp’d. Why have you left the chamber?

MACBETH.
Hath he ask’d for me?

LADY MACBETH.
Know you not he has?

MACBETH.
We will proceed no further in this business:
He hath honour’d me of late; and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.

LADY MACBETH.
Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dress’d yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valour
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life,
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would,”
Like the poor cat i’ th’ adage?

MACBETH.
Pr’ythee, peace!
I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more is none.

LADY MACBETH.
What beast was’t, then,
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And, to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me:
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have pluck’d my nipple from his boneless gums
And dash’d the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.

MACBETH.
If we should fail?

LADY MACBETH.
We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking-place,
And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
(Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep
Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th’ unguarded Duncan? what not put upon
His spongy officers; who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?

MACBETH.
Bring forth men-children only;
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be receiv’d,
When we have mark’d with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber, and us’d their very daggers,
That they have done’t?

LADY MACBETH.
Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar
Upon his death?

MACBETH.
I am settled, and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT II

SCENE I. Inverness. Court within the Castle.

 Enter Banquo and Fleance with a torch before him.

BANQUO.
How goes the night, boy?

FLEANCE.
The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.

BANQUO.
And she goes down at twelve.

FLEANCE.
I take’t, ’tis later, sir.

BANQUO.
Hold, take my sword.—There’s husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose!

 Enter Macbeth and a Servant with a torch.

Give me my sword.—Who’s there?

MACBETH.
A friend.

BANQUO.
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King’s abed:
He hath been in unusual pleasure and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.

MACBETH.
Being unprepar’d,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.

BANQUO.
All’s well.
I dreamt last night of the three Weird Sisters:
To you they have show’d some truth.

MACBETH.
I think not of them:
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that business,
If you would grant the time.

BANQUO.
At your kind’st leisure.

MACBETH.
If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,
It shall make honour for you.

BANQUO.
So I lose none
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchis’d, and allegiance clear,
I shall be counsell’d.

MACBETH.
Good repose the while!

BANQUO.
Thanks, sir: the like to you.

 [_Exeunt Banquo and Fleance._]

MACBETH.
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee:—
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
As this which now I draw.
Thou marshall’st me the way that I was going;
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o’ the other senses,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
And on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before.—There’s no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes.—Now o’er the one half-world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtain’d sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate’s off’rings; and wither’d murder,
Alarum’d by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his design
Moves like a ghost.—Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it.—Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

 [_A bell rings._]

I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold:
What hath quench’d them hath given me fire.—Hark!—Peace!
It was the owl that shriek’d, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern’st good night. He is about it.
The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg’d their possets,
That death and nature do contend about them,
Whether they live or die.

MACBETH.
[_Within._] Who’s there?—what, ho!

LADY MACBETH.
Alack! I am afraid they have awak’d,
And ’tis not done. Th’ attempt and not the deed
Confounds us.—Hark!—I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss ’em.—Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done’t.—My husband!

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
I have done the deed.—Didst thou not hear a noise?

LADY MACBETH.
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
Did not you speak?

MACBETH.
When?

LADY MACBETH.
Now.

MACBETH.
As I descended?

LADY MACBETH.
Ay.

MACBETH.
Hark!—Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?

LADY MACBETH.
Donalbain.

MACBETH.
This is a sorry sight.

 [_Looking on his hands._]

LADY MACBETH.
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

MACBETH.
There’s one did laugh in’s sleep, and one cried, “Murder!”
That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them.
But they did say their prayers, and address’d them
Again to sleep.

LADY MACBETH.
There are two lodg’d together.

MACBETH.
One cried, “God bless us!” and, “Amen,” the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands.
List’ning their fear, I could not say “Amen,”
When they did say, “God bless us.”

LADY MACBETH.
Consider it not so deeply.

MACBETH.
But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”?
I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”
Stuck in my throat.

LADY MACBETH.
These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.

MACBETH.
Methought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep,”—the innocent sleep;
Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.

LADY MACBETH.
What do you mean?

MACBETH.
Still it cried, “Sleep no more!” to all the house:
“Glamis hath murder’d sleep, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more!”

LADY MACBETH.
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.—
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there: go carry them, and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.

MACBETH.
I’ll go no more:
I am afraid to think what I have done;
Look on’t again I dare not.

LADY MACBETH.
Infirm of purpose!
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. ’Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
For it must seem their guilt.

 [_Exit. Knocking within._]

MACBETH.
Whence is that knocking?
How is’t with me, when every noise appals me?
What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white. [_Knocking within._] I hear knocking
At the south entry:—retire we to our chamber.
A little water clears us of this deed:
How easy is it then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.—[_Knocking within._] Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.

MACBETH.
To know my deed, ’twere best not know myself. [_Knocking within._]
Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same.

 Enter a Porter. Knocking within.

PORTER.
Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell gate, he should
have old turning the key. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock, knock. Who’s
there, i’ th’ name of Belzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged himself on
the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you;
here you’ll sweat for’t. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock! Who’s there, i’
th’ other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator, that could swear
in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough
for God’s sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in,
equivocator. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there? Faith,
here’s an English tailor come hither, for stealing out of a French
hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose. [_Knocking._]
Knock, knock. Never at quiet! What are you?—But this place is too cold
for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in
some of all professions, that go the primrose way to th’ everlasting
bonfire. [_Knocking._] Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.

 [_Opens the gate._]

 Enter Macduff and Lennox.

MACDUFF.
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
That you do lie so late?

PORTER.
Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and drink, sir, is
a great provoker of three things.

MACDUFF.
What three things does drink especially provoke?

PORTER.
Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes
and unprovokes; it provokes the desire, but it takes away the
performance. Therefore much drink may be said to be an equivocator with
lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes
him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to, and
not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him
the lie, leaves him.

MACDUFF.
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

PORTER.
That it did, sir, i’ the very throat on me; but I requited him for his
lie; and (I think) being too strong for him, though he took up my legs
sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.

MACDUFF.
Is thy master stirring?

 Enter Macbeth.

Our knocking has awak’d him; here he comes.

LENNOX.
Good morrow, noble sir!

MACBETH.
Good morrow, both!

MACDUFF.
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?

MACBETH.
Not yet.

MACDUFF.
He did command me to call timely on him.
I have almost slipp’d the hour.

MACBETH.
I’ll bring you to him.

MACDUFF.
I know this is a joyful trouble to you;
But yet ’tis one.

MACBETH.
The labour we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.

MACDUFF.
I’ll make so bold to call.
For ’tis my limited service.

 [_Exit Macduff._]

LENNOX.
Goes the King hence today?

MACBETH.
He does. He did appoint so.

LENNOX.
The night has been unruly: where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of death,
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confus’d events,
New hatch’d to the woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamour’d the live-long night. Some say the earth
Was feverous, and did shake.

MACBETH.
’Twas a rough night.

LENNOX.
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.

 Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
O horror, horror, horror!
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!

MACBETH, LENNOX.
What’s the matter?

MACDUFF.
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord’s anointed temple, and stole thence
The life o’ th’ building.

MACBETH.
What is’t you say? the life?

LENNOX.
Mean you his majesty?

MACDUFF.
Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See, and then speak yourselves.

 [_Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox._]

Awake, awake!—
Ring the alarum bell.—Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit,
And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
The great doom’s image. Malcolm! Banquo!
As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror!

 [_Alarum-bell rings._]

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
What’s the business,
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!

MACDUFF.
O gentle lady,
’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
The repetition, in a woman’s ear,
Would murder as it fell.

 Enter Banquo.

O Banquo, Banquo!
Our royal master’s murder’d!

LADY MACBETH.
Woe, alas!
What, in our house?

BANQUO.
Too cruel anywhere.—
Dear Duff, I pr’ythee, contradict thyself,
And say it is not so.

 Enter Macbeth and Lennox with Ross.

MACBETH.
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had liv’d a blessed time; for, from this instant
There’s nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys: renown and grace is dead;
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.

 Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.

DONALBAIN.
What is amiss?

MACBETH.
You are, and do not know’t:
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopp’d; the very source of it is stopp’d.

MACDUFF.
Your royal father’s murder’d.

MALCOLM.
O, by whom?

LENNOX.
Those of his chamber, as it seem’d, had done’t:
Their hands and faces were all badg’d with blood;
So were their daggers, which, unwip’d, we found
Upon their pillows. They star’d, and were distracted;
No man’s life was to be trusted with them.

MACBETH.
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.

MACDUFF.
Wherefore did you so?

MACBETH.
Who can be wise, amaz’d, temperate, and furious,
Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:
Th’ expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin lac’d with his golden blood;
And his gash’d stabs look’d like a breach in nature
For ruin’s wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,
Steep’d in the colours of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breech’d with gore. Who could refrain,
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make’s love known?

LADY MACBETH.
Help me hence, ho!

MACDUFF.
Look to the lady.

MALCOLM.
Why do we hold our tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?

DONALBAIN.
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush, and seize us?
Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brew’d.

MALCOLM.
Nor our strong sorrow
Upon the foot of motion.

BANQUO.
Look to the lady:—

 [_Lady Macbeth is carried out._]

And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet,
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us:
In the great hand of God I stand; and thence
Against the undivulg’d pretence I fight
Of treasonous malice.

MACDUFF.
And so do I.

ALL.
So all.

MACBETH.
Let’s briefly put on manly readiness,
And meet i’ th’ hall together.

ALL.
Well contented.

 [_Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain._]

MALCOLM.
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them:
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I’ll to England.

DONALBAIN.
To Ireland, I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There’s daggers in men’s smiles: the near in blood,
The nearer bloody.

MALCOLM.
This murderous shaft that’s shot
Hath not yet lighted; and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft
Which steals itself, when there’s no mercy left.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. Without the Castle.

 Enter Ross and an Old Man.

OLD MAN.
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
Hath trifled former knowings.

ROSS.
Ha, good father,
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man’s act,
Threatens his bloody stage: by the clock ’tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp.
Is’t night’s predominance, or the day’s shame,
That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
When living light should kiss it?

OLD MAN.
’Tis unnatural,
Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last,
A falcon, towering in her pride of place,
Was by a mousing owl hawk’d at and kill’d.

ROSS.
And Duncan’s horses (a thing most strange and certain)
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turn’d wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending ’gainst obedience, as they would make
War with mankind.

OLD MAN.
’Tis said they eat each other.

ROSS.
They did so; to the amazement of mine eyes,
That look’d upon’t.
Here comes the good Macduff.

 Enter Macduff.

How goes the world, sir, now?

MACDUFF.
Why, see you not?

ROSS.
Is’t known who did this more than bloody deed?

MACDUFF.
Those that Macbeth hath slain.

ROSS.
Alas, the day!
What good could they pretend?

MACDUFF.
They were suborn’d.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King’s two sons,
Are stol’n away and fled; which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.

ROSS.
’Gainst nature still:
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own life’s means!—Then ’tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

MACDUFF.
He is already nam’d; and gone to Scone
To be invested.

ROSS.
Where is Duncan’s body?

MACDUFF.
Carried to Colmekill,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
And guardian of their bones.

ROSS.
Will you to Scone?

MACDUFF.
No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.

ROSS.
Well, I will thither.

MACDUFF.
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu!
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!

ROSS.
Farewell, father.

OLD MAN.
God’s benison go with you; and with those
That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT III

SCENE I. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Banquo.

BANQUO.
Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the Weird Women promis’d; and, I fear,
Thou play’dst most foully for’t; yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity;
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
(As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush; no more.

 Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Macbeth as Queen; Lennox,
 Ross, Lords, and Attendants.

MACBETH.
Here’s our chief guest.

LADY MACBETH.
If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feast,
And all-thing unbecoming.

MACBETH.
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I’ll request your presence.

BANQUO.
Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
For ever knit.

MACBETH.
Ride you this afternoon?

BANQUO.
Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH.
We should have else desir’d your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this day’s council; but we’ll take tomorrow.
Is’t far you ride?

BANQUO.
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
’Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night,
For a dark hour or twain.

MACBETH.
Fail not our feast.

BANQUO.
My lord, I will not.

MACBETH.
We hear our bloody cousins are bestow’d
In England and in Ireland; not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?

BANQUO.
Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon’s.

MACBETH.
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot;
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.—

 [_Exit Banquo._]

Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night; to make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till supper time alone: while then, God be with you.

 [_Exeunt Lady Macbeth, Lords, &c._]

Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?

SERVANT.
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.

MACBETH.
Bring them before us.

 [_Exit Servant._]

To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be fear’d: ’tis much he dares;
And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear: and under him
My genius is rebuk’d; as, it is said,
Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me,
And bade them speak to him; then, prophet-like,
They hail’d him father to a line of kings:
Upon my head they plac’d a fruitless crown,
And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
Thence to be wrench’d with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If’t be so,
For Banquo’s issue have I fil’d my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murder’d;
Put rancours in the vessel of my peace
Only for them; and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man,
To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!
Rather than so, come, fate, into the list,
And champion me to th’ utterance!—Who’s there?—

 Enter Servant with two Murderers.

Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

FIRST MURDERER.
It was, so please your Highness.

MACBETH.
Well then, now
Have you consider’d of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self? This I made good to you
In our last conference, pass’d in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how cross’d, the instruments,
Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
To half a soul and to a notion craz’d
Say, “Thus did Banquo.”

FIRST MURDERER.
You made it known to us.

MACBETH.
I did so; and went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature,
That you can let this go? Are you so gospell’d,
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bow’d you to the grave,
And beggar’d yours forever?

FIRST MURDERER.
We are men, my liege.

MACBETH.
Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men;
As hounds, and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs: the valu’d file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him clos’d; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike: and so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say’t;
And I will put that business in your bosoms,
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.

SECOND MURDERER.
I am one, my liege,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incens’d that I am reckless what
I do to spite the world.

FIRST MURDERER.
And I another,
So weary with disasters, tugg’d with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on’t.

MACBETH.
Both of you
Know Banquo was your enemy.

BOTH MURDERERS.
True, my lord.

MACBETH.
So is he mine; and in such bloody distance,
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near’st of life; and though I could
With barefac’d power sweep him from my sight,
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down: and thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.

SECOND MURDERER.
We shall, my lord,
Perform what you command us.

FIRST MURDERER.
Though our lives—

MACBETH.
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most,
I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time,
The moment on’t; for’t must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)
Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
I’ll come to you anon.

BOTH MURDERERS.
We are resolv’d, my lord.

MACBETH.
I’ll call upon you straight: abide within.

 [_Exeunt Murderers._]

It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same. Another Room in the Palace.

 Enter Lady Macbeth and a Servant.

LADY MACBETH.
Is Banquo gone from court?

SERVANT.
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Say to the King, I would attend his leisure
For a few words.

SERVANT.
Madam, I will.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACBETH.
Naught’s had, all’s spent,
Where our desire is got without content:
’Tis safer to be that which we destroy,
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

 Enter Macbeth.

How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard: what’s done is done.

MACBETH.
We have scorch’d the snake, not kill’d it.
She’ll close, and be herself; whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint,
Both the worlds suffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;
After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well;
Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.

LADY MACBETH.
Come on,
Gently my lord, sleek o’er your rugged looks;
Be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.

MACBETH.
So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you.
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;
Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
Unsafe the while, that we
Must lave our honours in these flattering streams,
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.

LADY MACBETH.
You must leave this.

MACBETH.
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
Thou know’st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.

LADY MACBETH.
But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.

MACBETH.
There’s comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloister’d flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons
The shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hums,
Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done
A deed of dreadful note.

LADY MACBETH.
What’s to be done?

MACBETH.
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale!—Light thickens; and the crow
Makes wing to th’ rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do rouse.
Thou marvell’st at my words: but hold thee still;
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So, pr’ythee, go with me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A Park or Lawn, with a gate leading to the Palace.

 Enter three Murderers.

FIRST MURDERER.
But who did bid thee join with us?

THIRD MURDERER.
Macbeth.

SECOND MURDERER.
He needs not our mistrust; since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.

FIRST MURDERER.
Then stand with us.
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn; and near approaches
The subject of our watch.

THIRD MURDERER.
Hark! I hear horses.

BANQUO.
[_Within._] Give us a light there, ho!

SECOND MURDERER.
Then ’tis he; the rest
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i’ th’ court.

FIRST MURDERER.
His horses go about.

THIRD MURDERER.
Almost a mile; but he does usually,
So all men do, from hence to the palace gate
Make it their walk.

 Enter Banquo and Fleance with a torch.

SECOND MURDERER.
A light, a light!

THIRD MURDERER.
’Tis he.

FIRST MURDERER.
Stand to’t.

BANQUO.
It will be rain tonight.

FIRST MURDERER.
Let it come down.

 [_Assaults Banquo._]

BANQUO.
O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
Thou mayst revenge—O slave!

 [_Dies. Fleance escapes._]

THIRD MURDERER.
Who did strike out the light?

FIRST MURDERER.
Was’t not the way?

THIRD MURDERER.
There’s but one down: the son is fled.

SECOND MURDERER.
We have lost best half of our affair.

FIRST MURDERER.
Well, let’s away, and say how much is done.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. A Room of state in the Palace.

 A banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, Ross, Lennox, Lords
 and Attendants.

MACBETH.
You know your own degrees, sit down. At first
And last the hearty welcome.

LORDS.
Thanks to your Majesty.

MACBETH.
Ourself will mingle with society,
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state; but, in best time,
We will require her welcome.

LADY MACBETH.
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends;
For my heart speaks they are welcome.

 Enter first Murderer to the door.

MACBETH.
See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks.
Both sides are even: here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst.

Be large in mirth; anon we’ll drink a measure
The table round. There’s blood upon thy face.

MURDERER.
’Tis Banquo’s then.

MACBETH.
’Tis better thee without than he within.
Is he dispatch’d?

MURDERER.
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.

MACBETH.
Thou art the best o’ th’ cut-throats;
Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance:
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.

MURDERER.
Most royal sir,
Fleance is ’scap’d.

MACBETH.
Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect;
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air:
But now I am cabin’d, cribb’d, confin’d, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo’s safe?

MURDERER.
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
The least a death to nature.

MACBETH.
Thanks for that.
There the grown serpent lies; the worm that’s fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th’ present.—Get thee gone; tomorrow
We’ll hear, ourselves, again.

 [_Exit Murderer._]

LADY MACBETH.
My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold
That is not often vouch’d, while ’tis a-making,
’Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.

 The Ghost of Banquo rises, and sits in Macbeth’s place.

MACBETH.
Sweet remembrancer!—
Now, good digestion wait on appetite,
And health on both!

LENNOX.
May’t please your Highness sit.

MACBETH.
Here had we now our country’s honour roof’d,
Were the grac’d person of our Banquo present;
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance!

ROSS.
His absence, sir,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please’t your Highness
To grace us with your royal company?

MACBETH.
The table’s full.

LENNOX.
Here is a place reserv’d, sir.

MACBETH.
Where?

LENNOX.
Here, my good lord. What is’t that moves your Highness?

MACBETH.
Which of you have done this?

LORDS.
What, my good lord?

MACBETH.
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.

ROSS.
Gentlemen, rise; his Highness is not well.

LADY MACBETH.
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus,
And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat;
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him,
You shall offend him, and extend his passion.
Feed, and regard him not.—Are you a man?

MACBETH.
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appal the devil.

LADY MACBETH.
O proper stuff!
This is the very painting of your fear:
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said,
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws, and starts
(Impostors to true fear), would well become
A woman’s story at a winter’s fire,
Authoris’d by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all’s done,
You look but on a stool.

MACBETH.
Pr’ythee, see there!
Behold! look! lo! how say you?
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.—
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.

 [_Ghost disappears._]

LADY MACBETH.
What, quite unmann’d in folly?

MACBETH.
If I stand here, I saw him.

LADY MACBETH.
Fie, for shame!

MACBETH.
Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time,
Ere humane statute purg’d the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been perform’d
Too terrible for the ear: the time has been,
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again,
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.

LADY MACBETH.
My worthy lord,
Your noble friends do lack you.

MACBETH.
I do forget.—
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;
Then I’ll sit down.—Give me some wine, fill full.—
I drink to the general joy o’ th’ whole table,
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss:
Would he were here.

 Ghost rises again.

To all, and him, we thirst,
And all to all.

LORDS.
Our duties, and the pledge.

MACBETH.
Avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee!
Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with!

LADY MACBETH.
Think of this, good peers,
But as a thing of custom: ’tis no other,
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

MACBETH.
What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The arm’d rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble: or be alive again,
And dare me to the desert with thy sword;
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock’ry, hence!

 [_Ghost disappears._]

Why, so;—being gone,
I am a man again.—Pray you, sit still.

LADY MACBETH.
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting
With most admir’d disorder.

MACBETH.
Can such things be,
And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe,
When now I think you can behold such sights,
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
When mine are blanch’d with fear.

ROSS.
What sights, my lord?

LADY MACBETH.
I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
Question enrages him. At once, good night:—
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.

LENNOX.
Good night; and better health
Attend his Majesty!

LADY MACBETH.
A kind good night to all!

 [_Exeunt all Lords and Attendants._]

MACBETH.
It will have blood, they say, blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to speak;
Augurs, and understood relations, have
By magot-pies, and choughs, and rooks, brought forth
The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?

LADY MACBETH.
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

MACBETH.
How say’st thou, that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?

LADY MACBETH.
Did you send to him, sir?

MACBETH.
I hear it by the way; but I will send.
There’s not a one of them but in his house
I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow
(And betimes I will) to the Weird Sisters:
More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way: I am in blood
Stepp’d in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er.
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scann’d.

LADY MACBETH.
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.

MACBETH.
Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The heath.

 Thunder. Enter the three Witches meeting Hecate.

FIRST WITCH.
Why, how now, Hecate? you look angerly.

HECATE.
Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death;
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never call’d to bear my part,
Or show the glory of our art?
And, which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful; who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now: get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i’ th’ morning: thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms, and everything beside.
I am for th’ air; this night I’ll spend
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap’rous drop profound;
I’ll catch it ere it come to ground:
And that, distill’d by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites,
As, by the strength of their illusion,
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes ’bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals’ chiefest enemy.

 [_Music and song within, “Come away, come away” &c._]

Hark! I am call’d; my little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.

 [_Exit._]

FIRST WITCH.
Come, let’s make haste; she’ll soon be back again.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Lennox and another Lord.

LENNOX.
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther: only, I say,
Thing’s have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth:—marry, he was dead:—
And the right valiant Banquo walk’d too late;
Whom, you may say, if’t please you, Fleance kill’d,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? damned fact!
How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight,
In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too;
For ’twould have anger’d any heart alive,
To hear the men deny’t. So that, I say,
He has borne all things well: and I do think,
That had he Duncan’s sons under his key
(As, and’t please heaven, he shall not) they should find
What ’twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
But, peace!—for from broad words, and ’cause he fail’d
His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear,
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?

LORD.
The son of Duncan,
From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
Lives in the English court and is receiv’d
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid
To wake Northumberland, and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights;
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honours,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.

LENNOX.
Sent he to Macduff?

LORD.
He did: and with an absolute “Sir, not I,”
The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
And hums, as who should say, “You’ll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer.”

LENNOX.
And that well might
Advise him to a caution, t’ hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England, and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accurs’d!

LORD.
I’ll send my prayers with him.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT IV

SCENE I. A dark Cave. In the middle, a Cauldron Boiling.

 Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew’d.

SECOND WITCH.
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whin’d.

THIRD WITCH.
Harpier cries:—’Tis time, ’tis time.

FIRST WITCH.
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poison’d entrails throw.—
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Swelter’d venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i’ th’ charmed pot!

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

SECOND WITCH.
Fillet of a fenny snake,
In the cauldron boil and bake;
Eye of newt, and toe of frog,
Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,
Adder’s fork, and blind-worm’s sting,
Lizard’s leg, and howlet’s wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

THIRD WITCH.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch’s mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravin’d salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digg’d i’ th’ dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat, and slips of yew
Sliver’d in the moon’s eclipse,
Nose of Turk, and Tartar’s lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-deliver’d by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab:
Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron,
For th’ ingredients of our cauldron.

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

SECOND WITCH.
Cool it with a baboon’s blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.

 Enter Hecate.

HECATE.
O, well done! I commend your pains,
And everyone shall share i’ th’ gains.
And now about the cauldron sing,
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.

 [_Music and a song: “Black Spirits,” &c._]

 [_Exit Hecate._]

SECOND WITCH.
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks!

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!
What is’t you do?

ALL.
A deed without a name.

MACBETH.
I conjure you, by that which you profess,
(Howe’er you come to know it) answer me:
Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
Against the churches; though the yesty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up;
Though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down;
Though castles topple on their warders’ heads;
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure
Of nature’s germens tumble all together,
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.

FIRST WITCH.
Speak.

SECOND WITCH.
Demand.

THIRD WITCH.
We’ll answer.

FIRST WITCH.
Say, if thou’dst rather hear it from our mouths,
Or from our masters?

MACBETH.
Call ’em, let me see ’em.

FIRST WITCH.
Pour in sow’s blood, that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten
From the murderer’s gibbet throw
Into the flame.

ALL.
Come, high or low;
Thyself and office deftly show!

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of an armed Head rises._]

MACBETH.
Tell me, thou unknown power,—

FIRST WITCH.
He knows thy thought:
Hear his speech, but say thou naught.

APPARITION.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff;
Beware the Thane of Fife.—Dismiss me.—Enough.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
Thou hast harp’d my fear aright.—But one word more.

FIRST WITCH.
He will not be commanded. Here’s another,
More potent than the first.

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of a bloody Child rises._]

APPARITION.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!

MACBETH.
Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.

APPARITION.
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
But yet I’ll make assurance double sure,
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live;
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of a Child crowned, with a tree in his hand,
 rises._]

What is this,
That rises like the issue of a king,
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?

ALL.
Listen, but speak not to’t.

APPARITION.
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:
Macbeth shall never vanquish’d be, until
Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
Shall come against him.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
That will never be:
Who can impress the forest; bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious head, rise never till the wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-plac’d Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom.—Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
Can tell so much, shall Banquo’s issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?

ALL.
Seek to know no more.

MACBETH.
I will be satisfied: deny me this,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?

 [_Hautboys._]

FIRST WITCH.
Show!

SECOND WITCH.
Show!

THIRD WITCH.
Show!

ALL.
Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
Come like shadows, so depart!

 [_A show of eight kings appear, and pass over in order, the last with
 a glass in his hand; Banquo following._]

MACBETH.
Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs:—and thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former.—Filthy hags!
Why do you show me this?—A fourth!—Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom?
Another yet!—A seventh!—I’ll see no more:—
And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
Which shows me many more; and some I see
That twofold balls and treble sceptres carry.
Horrible sight!—Now I see ’tis true;
For the blood-bolter’d Banquo smiles upon me,
And points at them for his.—What! is this so?

FIRST WITCH.
Ay, sir, all this is so:—but why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?—
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
And show the best of our delights.
I’ll charm the air to give a sound,
While you perform your antic round;
That this great king may kindly say,
Our duties did his welcome pay.

 [_Music. The Witches dance, and vanish._]

MACBETH.
Where are they? Gone?—Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursed in the calendar!—
Come in, without there!

 Enter Lennox.

LENNOX.
What’s your Grace’s will?

MACBETH.
Saw you the Weird Sisters?

LENNOX.
No, my lord.

MACBETH.
Came they not by you?

LENNOX.
No, indeed, my lord.

MACBETH.
Infected be the air whereon they ride;
And damn’d all those that trust them!—I did hear
The galloping of horse: who was’t came by?

LENNOX.
’Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England.

MACBETH.
Fled to England!

LENNOX.
Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH.
Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits:
The flighty purpose never is o’ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:
The castle of Macduff I will surprise;
Seize upon Fife; give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool:
But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?
Come, bring me where they are.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Fife. A Room in Macduff’s Castle.

 Enter Lady Macduff her Son and Ross.

LADY MACDUFF.
What had he done, to make him fly the land?

ROSS.
You must have patience, madam.

LADY MACDUFF.
He had none:
His flight was madness: when our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.

ROSS.
You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

LADY MACDUFF.
Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion, and his titles, in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not:
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love;
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.

ROSS.
My dearest coz,
I pray you, school yourself: but, for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o’ th’ season. I dare not speak much further:
But cruel are the times, when we are traitors,
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumour
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move—I take my leave of you:
Shall not be long but I’ll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
To what they were before.—My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you!

LADY MACDUFF.
Father’d he is, and yet he’s fatherless.

ROSS.
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:
I take my leave at once.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACDUFF.
Sirrah, your father’s dead.
And what will you do now? How will you live?

SON.
As birds do, mother.

LADY MACDUFF.
What, with worms and flies?

SON.
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.

LADY MACDUFF.
Poor bird! thou’dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pit-fall nor the gin.

SON.
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.

LADY MACDUFF.
Yes, he is dead: how wilt thou do for a father?

SON.
Nay, how will you do for a husband?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

SON.
Then you’ll buy ’em to sell again.

LADY MACDUFF.
Thou speak’st with all thy wit;
And yet, i’ faith, with wit enough for thee.

SON.
Was my father a traitor, mother?

LADY MACDUFF.
Ay, that he was.

SON.
What is a traitor?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, one that swears and lies.

SON.
And be all traitors that do so?

LADY MACDUFF.
Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.

SON.
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?

LADY MACDUFF.
Every one.

SON.
Who must hang them?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, the honest men.

SON.
Then the liars and swearers are fools: for there are liars and swearers
enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.

LADY MACDUFF.
Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do for a father?

SON.
If he were dead, you’ld weep for him: if you would not, it were a good
sign that I should quickly have a new father.

LADY MACDUFF.
Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honour I am perfect.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:
If you will take a homely man’s advice,
Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.
To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
I dare abide no longer.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACDUFF.
Whither should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable; to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly:  why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defence,
To say I have done no harm? What are these faces?

 Enter Murderers.

FIRST MURDERER.
Where is your husband?

LADY MACDUFF.
I hope, in no place so unsanctified
Where such as thou mayst find him.

FIRST MURDERER.
He’s a traitor.

SON.
Thou liest, thou shag-ear’d villain!

FIRST MURDERER.
What, you egg!

 [_Stabbing him._]

Young fry of treachery!

SON.
He has kill’d me, mother:
Run away, I pray you!

 [_Dies. Exit Lady Macduff, crying “Murder!” and pursued by the
 Murderers._]

SCENE III. England. Before the King’s Palace.

 Enter Malcolm and Macduff.

MALCOLM.
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.

MACDUFF.
Let us rather
Hold fast the mortal sword, and, like good men,
Bestride our down-fall’n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry; new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yell’d out
Like syllable of dolour.

MALCOLM.
What I believe, I’ll wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest: you have loved him well;
He hath not touch’d you yet. I am young; but something
You may deserve of him through me; and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
To appease an angry god.

MACDUFF.
I am not treacherous.

MALCOLM.
But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell:
Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
Yet grace must still look so.

MACDUFF.
I have lost my hopes.

MALCOLM.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking?—I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.

MACDUFF.
Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee! wear thou thy wrongs;
The title is affeer’d.—Fare thee well, lord:
I would not be the villain that thou think’st
For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp
And the rich East to boot.

MALCOLM.
Be not offended:
I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think, withal,
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here, from gracious England, have I offer
Of goodly thousands: but, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head,
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.

MACDUFF.
What should he be?

MALCOLM.
It is myself I mean; in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be open’d, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow; and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compar’d
With my confineless harms.

MACDUFF.
Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn’d
In evils to top Macbeth.

MALCOLM.
I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name: but there’s no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids, could not fill up
The cistern of my lust; and my desire
All continent impediments would o’erbear,
That did oppose my will: better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.

MACDUFF.
Boundless intemperance
In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne,
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours: you may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
And yet seem cold—the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
That vulture in you, to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclin’d.

MALCOLM.
With this there grows
In my most ill-compos’d affection such
A staunchless avarice, that, were I king,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands;
Desire his jewels, and this other’s house:
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more; that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.

MACDUFF.
This avarice
Sticks deeper; grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust; and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear;
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will,
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weigh’d.

MALCOLM.
But I have none: the king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp’rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no relish of them; but abound
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.

MACDUFF.
O Scotland, Scotland!

MALCOLM.
If such a one be fit to govern, speak:
I am as I have spoken.

MACDUFF.
Fit to govern?
No, not to live.—O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter’d,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accus’d,
And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft’ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself
Have banish’d me from Scotland.—O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!

MALCOLM.
Macduff, this noble passion,
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconcil’d my thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From over-credulous haste: but God above
Deal between thee and me! for even now
I put myself to thy direction, and
Unspeak mine own detraction; here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman; never was forsworn;
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own;
At no time broke my faith; would not betray
The devil to his fellow; and delight
No less in truth than life: my first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly,
Is thine and my poor country’s to command:
Whither, indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?

MACDUFF.
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
’Tis hard to reconcile.

 Enter a Doctor.

MALCOLM.
Well; more anon.—Comes the King forth, I pray you?

DOCTOR.
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure: their malady convinces
The great assay of art; but at his touch,
Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
They presently amend.

MALCOLM.
I thank you, doctor.

 [_Exit Doctor._]

MACDUFF.
What’s the disease he means?

MALCOLM.
’Tis call’d the evil:
A most miraculous work in this good king;
Which often, since my here-remain in England,
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
Himself best knows, but strangely-visited people,
All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures;
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers: and ’tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy;
And sundry blessings hang about his throne,
That speak him full of grace.

 Enter Ross.

MACDUFF.
See, who comes here?

MALCOLM.
My countryman; but yet I know him not.

MACDUFF.
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.

MALCOLM.
I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
The means that makes us strangers!

ROSS.
Sir, amen.

MACDUFF.
Stands Scotland where it did?

ROSS.
Alas, poor country,
Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
Be call’d our mother, but our grave, where nothing,
But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks, that rent the air,
Are made, not mark’d; where violent sorrow seems
A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell
Is there scarce ask’d for who; and good men’s lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.

MACDUFF.
O, relation
Too nice, and yet too true!

MALCOLM.
What’s the newest grief?

ROSS.
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker;
Each minute teems a new one.

MACDUFF.
How does my wife?

ROSS.
Why, well.

MACDUFF.
And all my children?

ROSS.
Well too.

MACDUFF.
The tyrant has not batter’d at their peace?

ROSS.
No; they were well at peace when I did leave ’em.

MACDUFF.
Be not a niggard of your speech: how goes’t?

ROSS.
When I came hither to transport the tidings,
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witness’d the rather,
For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight,
To doff their dire distresses.

MALCOLM.
Be’t their comfort
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.

ROSS.
Would I could answer
This comfort with the like! But I have words
That would be howl’d out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.

MACDUFF.
What concern they?
The general cause? or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?

ROSS.
No mind that’s honest
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.

MACDUFF.
If it be mine,
Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.

ROSS.
Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.

MACDUFF.
Humh! I guess at it.

ROSS.
Your castle is surpris’d; your wife and babes
Savagely slaughter’d. To relate the manner
Were, on the quarry of these murder’d deer,
To add the death of you.

MALCOLM.
Merciful heaven!—
What, man! ne’er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o’er-fraught heart, and bids it break.

MACDUFF.
My children too?

ROSS.
Wife, children, servants, all
That could be found.

MACDUFF.
And I must be from thence!
My wife kill’d too?

ROSS.
I have said.

MALCOLM.
Be comforted:
Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge,
To cure this deadly grief.

MACDUFF.
He has no children.—All my pretty ones?
Did you say all?—O hell-kite!—All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?

MALCOLM.
Dispute it like a man.

MACDUFF.
I shall do so;
But I must also feel it as a man:
I cannot but remember such things were,
That were most precious to me.—Did heaven look on,
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls: heaven rest them now!

MALCOLM.
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.

MACDUFF.
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes,
And braggart with my tongue!—But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission; front to front,
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
Within my sword’s length set him; if he ’scape,
Heaven forgive him too!

MALCOLM.
This tune goes manly.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may;
The night is long that never finds the day.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT V

SCENE I. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.

 Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman.

DOCTOR.
I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your
report. When was it she last walked?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Since his Majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her
bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper,
fold it, write upon’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to
bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.

DOCTOR.
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of
sleep, and do the effects of watching. In this slumbery agitation,
besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time,
have you heard her say?

GENTLEWOMAN.
That, sir, which I will not report after her.

DOCTOR.
You may to me; and ’tis most meet you should.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Neither to you nor anyone; having no witness to confirm my speech.

 Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.

Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast
asleep. Observe her; stand close.

DOCTOR.
How came she by that light?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually; ’tis her
command.

DOCTOR.
You see, her eyes are open.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Ay, but their sense are shut.

DOCTOR.
What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands.

GENTLEWOMAN.
It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands. I
have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.

LADY MACBETH.
Yet here’s a spot.

DOCTOR.
Hark, she speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my
remembrance the more strongly.

LADY MACBETH.
Out, damned spot! out, I say! One; two. Why, then ’tis time to do’t.
Hell is murky! Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? Yet who
would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?

DOCTOR.
Do you mark that?

LADY MACBETH.
The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?—What, will these hands
ne’er be clean? No more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that: you mar all
with this starting.

DOCTOR.
Go to, go to. You have known what you should not.

GENTLEWOMAN.
She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that: heaven knows what
she has known.

LADY MACBETH.
Here’s the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will
not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!

DOCTOR.
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.

GENTLEWOMAN.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole
body.

DOCTOR.
Well, well, well.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Pray God it be, sir.

DOCTOR.
This disease is beyond my practice: yet I have known those which have
walked in their sleep, who have died holily in their beds.

LADY MACBETH.
Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale. I tell you
yet again, Banquo’s buried; he cannot come out on’s grave.

DOCTOR.
Even so?

LADY MACBETH.
To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come,
give me your hand. What’s done cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to
bed.

 [_Exit._]

DOCTOR.
Will she go now to bed?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Directly.

DOCTOR.
Foul whisp’rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.—
God, God, forgive us all! Look after her;
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:
My mind she has mated, and amaz’d my sight.
I think, but dare not speak.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Good night, good doctor.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Country near Dunsinane.

 Enter, with drum and colours Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox and
 Soldiers.

MENTEITH.
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.

ANGUS.
Near Birnam wood
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.

CAITHNESS.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?

LENNOX.
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry: there is Siward’s son
And many unrough youths, that even now
Protest their first of manhood.

MENTEITH.
What does the tyrant?

CAITHNESS.
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he’s mad; others, that lesser hate him,
Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,
He cannot buckle his distemper’d cause
Within the belt of rule.

ANGUS.
Now does he feel
His secret murders sticking on his hands;
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love: now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.

MENTEITH.
Who, then, shall blame
His pester’d senses to recoil and start,
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?

CAITHNESS.
Well, march we on,
To give obedience where ’tis truly ow’d:
Meet we the med’cine of the sickly weal;
And with him pour we, in our country’s purge,
Each drop of us.

LENNOX.
Or so much as it needs
To dew the sovereign flower, and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.

 [_Exeunt, marching._]

SCENE III. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.

 Enter Macbeth, Doctor and Attendants.

MACBETH.
Bring me no more reports; let them fly all:
Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm?
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounc’d me thus:
“Fear not, Macbeth; no man that’s born of woman
Shall e’er have power upon thee.”—Then fly, false thanes,
And mingle with the English epicures:
The mind I sway by, and the heart I bear,
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

 Enter a Servant.

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-fac’d loon!
Where gott’st thou that goose look?

SERVANT.
There is ten thousand—

MACBETH.
Geese, villain?

SERVANT.
Soldiers, sir.

MACBETH.
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-liver’d boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?

SERVANT.
The English force, so please you.

MACBETH.
Take thy face hence.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Seyton!—I am sick at heart,
When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
I have liv’d long enough: my way of life
Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf;
And that which should accompany old age,
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have; but, in their stead,
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,
Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.
Seyton!—

 Enter Seyton.

SEYTON.
What’s your gracious pleasure?

MACBETH.
What news more?

SEYTON.
All is confirm’d, my lord, which was reported.

MACBETH.
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack’d.
Give me my armour.

SEYTON.
’Tis not needed yet.

MACBETH.
I’ll put it on.
Send out more horses, skirr the country round;
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour.—
How does your patient, doctor?

DOCTOR.
Not so sick, my lord,
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies,
That keep her from her rest.

MACBETH.
Cure her of that:
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseas’d,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuff’d bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?

DOCTOR.
Therein the patient
Must minister to himself.

MACBETH.
Throw physic to the dogs, I’ll none of it.
Come, put mine armour on; give me my staff:
Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.—
Come, sir, despatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo,
That should applaud again.—Pull’t off, I say.—
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug,
Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of them?

DOCTOR.
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.

MACBETH.
Bring it after me.—
I will not be afraid of death and bane,
Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.

 [_Exeunt all except Doctor._]

DOCTOR.
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Country near Dunsinane: a Wood in view.

 Enter, with drum and colours Malcolm, old Siward and his Son, Macduff,
 Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox, Ross and Soldiers, marching.

MALCOLM.
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.

MENTEITH.
We doubt it nothing.

SIWARD.
What wood is this before us?

MENTEITH.
The wood of Birnam.

MALCOLM.
Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
And bear’t before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host, and make discovery
Err in report of us.

SOLDIERS.
It shall be done.

SIWARD.
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
Our setting down before’t.

MALCOLM.
’Tis his main hope;
For where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrained things,
Whose hearts are absent too.

MACDUFF.
Let our just censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.

SIWARD.
The time approaches,
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have, and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which advance the war.

 [_Exeunt, marching._]

SCENE V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.

 Enter with drum and colours, Macbeth, Seyton and Soldiers.

MACBETH.
Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
The cry is still, “They come!” Our castle’s strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forc’d with those that should be ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.

 [_A cry of women within._]

What is that noise?

SEYTON.
It is the cry of women, my good lord.

 [_Exit._]

MACBETH.
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been, my senses would have cool’d
To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in’t. I have supp’d full with horrors;
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.

 Enter Seyton.

Wherefore was that cry?

SEYTON.
The Queen, my lord, is dead.

MACBETH.
She should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow; a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

 Enter a Messenger.

Thou com’st to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.

MESSENGER.
Gracious my lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do’t.

MACBETH.
Well, say, sir.

MESSENGER.
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
I look’d toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
The wood began to move.

MACBETH.
Liar, and slave!

MESSENGER.
Let me endure your wrath, if’t be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming;
I say, a moving grove.

MACBETH.
If thou speak’st false,
Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.—
I pull in resolution; and begin
To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. “Fear not, till Birnam wood
Do come to Dunsinane;” and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.—Arm, arm, and out!—
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
I ’gin to be aweary of the sun,
And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now undone.—
Ring the alarum bell!—Blow, wind! come, wrack!
At least we’ll die with harness on our back.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The same. A Plain before the Castle.

 Enter, with drum and colours, Malcolm, old Siward, Macduff and their
 Army, with boughs.

MALCOLM.
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down,
And show like those you are.—You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon’s what else remains to do,
According to our order.

SIWARD.
Fare you well.—
Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight,
Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.

MACDUFF.
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The same. Another part of the Plain.

 Alarums. Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like I must fight the course.—What’s he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.

 Enter young Siward.

YOUNG SIWARD.
What is thy name?

MACBETH.
Thou’lt be afraid to hear it.

YOUNG SIWARD.
No; though thou call’st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.

MACBETH.
My name’s Macbeth.

YOUNG SIWARD.
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.

MACBETH.
No, nor more fearful.

YOUNG SIWARD.
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant. With my sword
I’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.

 [_They fight, and young Siward is slain._]

MACBETH.
Thou wast born of woman.
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandish’d by man that’s of a woman born.

 [_Exit._]

 Alarums. Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
That way the noise is.—Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou be’st slain and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still.
I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword, with an unbatter’d edge,
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune!
And more I beg not.

 [_Exit. Alarums._]

 Enter Malcolm and old Siward.

SIWARD.
This way, my lord;—the castle’s gently render’d:
The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight;
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.

MALCOLM.
We have met with foes
That strike beside us.

SIWARD.
Enter, sir, the castle.

 [_Exeunt. Alarums._]

SCENE VIII. The same. Another part of the field.

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
Why should I play the Roman fool, and die
On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.

 Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
Turn, hell-hound, turn!

MACBETH.
Of all men else I have avoided thee:
But get thee back; my soul is too much charg’d
With blood of thine already.

MACDUFF.
I have no words;
My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out!

 [_They fight._]

MACBETH.
Thou losest labour:
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed:
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.

MACDUFF.
Despair thy charm;
And let the angel whom thou still hast serv’d
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother’s womb
Untimely ripp’d.

MACBETH.
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cow’d my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believ’d,
That palter with us in a double sense;
That keep the word of promise to our ear,
And break it to our hope!—I’ll not fight with thee.

MACDUFF.
Then yield thee, coward,
And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time.
We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
“Here may you see the tyrant.”

MACBETH.
I will not yield,
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet,
And to be baited with the rabble’s curse.
Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,
And thou oppos’d, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
I throw my warlike shield: lay on, Macduff;
And damn’d be him that first cries, “Hold, enough!”

 [_Exeunt fighting. Alarums._]

 Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours, Malcolm, old Siward,
 Ross, Thanes and Soldiers.

MALCOLM.
I would the friends we miss were safe arriv’d.

SIWARD.
Some must go off; and yet, by these I see,
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

MALCOLM.
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

ROSS.
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt:
He only liv’d but till he was a man;
The which no sooner had his prowess confirm’d
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.

SIWARD.
Then he is dead?

ROSS.
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measur’d by his worth, for then
It hath no end.

SIWARD.
Had he his hurts before?

ROSS.
Ay, on the front.

SIWARD.
Why then, God’s soldier be he!
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
And so his knell is knoll’d.

MALCOLM.
He’s worth more sorrow,
And that I’ll spend for him.

SIWARD.
He’s worth no more.
They say he parted well and paid his score:
And so, God be with him!—Here comes newer comfort.

 Enter Macduff with Macbeth’s head.

MACDUFF.
Hail, King, for so thou art. Behold, where stands
Th’ usurper’s cursed head: the time is free.
I see thee compass’d with thy kingdom’s pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds;
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine,—
Hail, King of Scotland!

ALL.
Hail, King of Scotland!

 [_Flourish._]

MALCOLM.
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves,
And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honour nam’d. What’s more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,—
As calling home our exil’d friends abroad,
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny;
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher, and his fiend-like queen,
Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands
Took off her life;—this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once, and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crown’d at Scone.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]





MEASURE FOR MEASURE




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. An apartment in the Duke’s palace
 Scene II. A street
 Scene III. A monastery
 Scene IV. A nunnery

 ACT II
 Scene I. A hall in Angelo’s house
 Scene II. Another room in the same
 Scene III. A room in a prison
 Scene IV. A room in Angelo’s house

 ACT III
 Scene I. A room in the prison
 Scene II. The street before the prisons

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A room in Mariana’s house
 Scene II. A room in the prison
 Scene III. Another room in the same
 Scene IV. A room in Angelo’s house
 Scene V. Fields without the town
 Scene VI. Street near the city gate

 ACT V
 Scene I. A public place near the city gate




Dramatis Personæ

Vincentio, DUKE of Vienna
ESCALUS, an ancient Lord
PROVOST
ELBOW, a simple constable
ABHORSON, an executioner
A JUSTICE
VARRIUS, a Gentleman, Servant to the Duke

ANGELO, Deputy to the Duke
MARIANA, betrothed to Angelo
BOY, singer
SERVANT, to Angelo
MESSENGER, from Angelo

ISABELLA, Sister to Claudio
FRANCISCA, a nun

CLAUDIO, a young Gentleman
JULIET, betrothed to Claudio
LUCIO, a fantastic
Two GENTLEMEN

FRIAR THOMAS
FRIAR PETER

Mistress Overdone, a BAWD
POMPEY, Servant to Mistress Overdone
FROTH, a foolish gentleman
BARNARDINE, a dissolute prisoner

Lords, Officers, Servants, Citizens and Attendants

SCENE: Vienna




ACT I

SCENE I. An apartment in the Duke’s palace.


Enter Duke, Escalus, Lords and Attendants.

DUKE.
Escalus.

ESCALUS.
My lord.

DUKE.
Of government the properties to unfold
Would seem in me t’ affect speech and discourse,
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you. Then no more remains
But that, to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city’s institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you’re as pregnant in
As art and practice hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp.—Call hither,
I say, bid come before us, Angelo.

[_Exit an Attendant._]

What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply;
Lent him our terror, drest him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power. What think you of it?

ESCALUS.
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.

Enter Angelo.

DUKE.
Look where he comes.

ANGELO.
Always obedient to your Grace’s will,
I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE.
Angelo,
There is a kind of character in thy life
That to th’ observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touched
But to fine issues; nor nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise.
Hold, therefore, Angelo.
In our remove be thou at full ourself.
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.

ANGELO.
Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamped upon it.

DUKE.
No more evasion.
We have with a leavened and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestioned
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us; and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well.
To th’ hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.

ANGELO.
Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE.
My haste may not admit it;
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
With any scruple. Your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand;
I’ll privily away. I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes.
Though it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and _Aves_ vehement;
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO.
The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS.
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness.

DUKE.
I thank you. Fare you well.

[_Exit._]

ESCALUS.
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place.
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO.
’Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

ESCALUS.
I’ll wait upon your honour.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A street.

Enter Lucio and two other Gentlemen.

LUCIO.
If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition with the
King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the King.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Hungary’s!

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Amen.

LUCIO.
Thou conclud’st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to sea with the
ten commandments, but scraped one out of the table.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
“Thou shalt not steal”?

LUCIO.
Ay, that he razed.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Why, ’twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from
their functions! They put forth to steal. There’s not a soldier of us
all that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well
that prays for peace.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO.
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was said.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No? A dozen times at least.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
What? In metre?

LUCIO.
In any proportion or in any language.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO.
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy; as, for
example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO.
I grant, as there may between the lists and the velvet. Thou art the
list.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
And thou the velvet. Thou art good velvet; thou’rt a three-piled piece,
I warrant thee. I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be
piled, as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly
now?

LUCIO.
I think thou dost, and indeed, with most painful feeling of thy speech.
I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but,
whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

Enter Mistress Overdone, a Bawd.

LUCIO.
Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many
diseases under her roof as come to—

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
To what, I pray?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Judge.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
To three thousand dolours a year.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, and more.

LUCIO.
A French crown more.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou art full of error; I
am sound.

LUCIO.
Nay, not, as one would say, healthy, but so sound as things that are
hollow. Thy bones are hollow. Impiety has made a feast of thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
How now, which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

BAWD.
Well, well! There’s one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth
five thousand of you all.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Who’s that, I pray thee?

BAWD.
Marry, sir, that’s Claudio, Signior Claudio.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Claudio to prison? ’Tis not so.

BAWD.
Nay, but I know ’tis so. I saw him arrested, saw him carried away; and,
which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO.
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art thou sure of
this?

BAWD.
I am too sure of it. And it is for getting Madam Julietta with child.

LUCIO.
Believe me, this may be. He promised to meet me two hours since, and he
was ever precise in promise-keeping.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such
a purpose.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO.
Away! Let’s go learn the truth of it.

[_Exeunt Lucio and Gentlemen._]

BAWD.
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows,
and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.

Enter Pompey.

How now? What’s the news with you?

POMPEY.
Yonder man is carried to prison.

BAWD.
Well, what has he done?

POMPEY.
A woman.

BAWD.
But what’s his offence?

POMPEY.
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

BAWD.
What? Is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY.
No, but there’s a woman with maid by him. You have not heard of the
proclamation, have you?

BAWD.
What proclamation, man?

POMPEY.
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

BAWD.
And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY.
They shall stand for seed. They had gone down too, but that a wise
burgher put in for them.

BAWD.
But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?

POMPEY.
To the ground, mistress.

BAWD.
Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth! What shall become of
me?

POMPEY.
Come, fear not you. Good counsellors lack no clients. Though you change
your place, you need not change your trade. I’ll be your tapster still.
Courage, there will be pity taken on you. You that have worn your eyes
almost out in the service, you will be considered.

Enter Provost, Claudio, Juliet and Officers.

BAWD.
What’s to do here, Thomas Tapster? Let’s withdraw.

POMPEY.
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Provost to prison. And there’s
Madam Juliet.

[_Exeunt Bawd and Pompey._]

CLAUDIO.
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

PROVOST.
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO.
Thus can the demi-god Authority
Make us pay down for our offence by weight.
The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still ’tis just.

Enter Lucio and two Gentlemen.

LUCIO.
Why, how now, Claudio? Whence comes this restraint?

CLAUDIO.
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty.
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
A thirsty evil; and when we drink, we die.

LUCIO.
If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of
my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery
of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What’s thy offence,
Claudio?

CLAUDIO.
What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO.
What, is’t murder?

CLAUDIO.
No.

LUCIO.
Lechery?

CLAUDIO.
Call it so.

PROVOST.
Away, sir; you must go.

CLAUDIO.
One word, good friend.—Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO.
A hundred, if they’ll do you any good. Is lechery so looked after?

CLAUDIO.
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Julietta’s bed.
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order. This we came not to
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO.
With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO.
Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the Duke—
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his eminence that fills it up,
I stagger in—but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscoured armour, hung by th’ wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round,
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me. ’Tis surely for a name.

LUCIO.
I warrant it is. And thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a
milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the Duke, and
appeal to him.

CLAUDIO.
I have done so, but he’s not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
I have great hope in that. For in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect
Such as moves men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

LUCIO.
I pray she may, as well for the encouragement of the like, which else
would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life,
who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of
tick-tack. I’ll to her.

CLAUDIO.
I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO.
Within two hours.

CLAUDIO.
Come, officer, away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A monastery.

Enter Duke and Friar Thomas.

DUKE.
No, holy father, throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbour hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.

FRIAR THOMAS.
May your Grace speak of it?

DUKE.
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed,
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, a witless bravery keeps.
I have delivered to Lord Angelo,
A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travelled to Poland;
For so I have strewed it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this?

FRIAR THOMAS.
Gladly, my lord.

DUKE.
We have strict statutes and most biting laws,
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this fourteen years we have let slip,
Even like an o’ergrown lion in a cave
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threat’ning twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children’s sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
Becomes more mocked than feared: so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty plucks justice by the nose,
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.

FRIAR THOMAS.
It rested in your Grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased;
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE.
I do fear, too dreadful.
Sith ’twas my fault to give the people scope,
’Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore, indeed, my father,
I have on Angelo imposed the office;
Who may in th’ ambush of my name strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as ’twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people. Therefore, I prithee,
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true friar. Moe reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone. Hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A nunnery.

Enter Isabella and Francisca, a Nun.

ISABELLA.
And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCISCA.
Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA.
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO.
[_Within_.] Ho! Peace be in this place!

ISABELLA.
Who’s that which calls?

FRANCISCA.
It is a man’s voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress;
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face;
Or if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again. I pray you answer him.

[_Exit Francisca._]

ISABELLA.
Peace and prosperity! Who is’t that calls?

Enter Lucio.

LUCIO.
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place, and the fair sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA.
Why “her unhappy brother”? let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella, and his sister.

LUCIO.
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
Not to be weary with you, he’s in prison.

ISABELLA.
Woe me! For what?

LUCIO.
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA.
Sir, make me not your story.

LUCIO.
’Tis true.
I would not, though ’tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
Tongue far from heart, play with all virgins so.
I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talked with in sincerity,
As with a saint.

ISABELLA.
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO.
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, ’tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced;
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA.
Someone with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO.
Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA.
Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO.
She it is.

ISABELLA.
O, let him marry her!

LUCIO.
This is the point.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense;
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
He, to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law
As mice by lions, hath picked out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother’s life
Falls into forfeit. He arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigour of the statute
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo. And that’s my pith of business
’Twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA.
Doth he so
Seek his life?

LUCIO.
Has censured him already;
And, as I hear, the Provost hath a warrant
For’s execution.

ISABELLA.
Alas, what poor ability’s in me
To do him good?

LUCIO.
Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA.
My power? Alas, I doubt.

LUCIO.
Our doubts are traitors,
And make us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA.
I’ll see what I can do.

LUCIO.
But speedily.

ISABELLA.
I will about it straight;
No longer staying but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.
Commend me to my brother. Soon at night
I’ll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO.
I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA.
Good sir, adieu.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A hall in Angelo’s house.


Enter Angelo, Escalus, Servants, and a Justice.

ANGELO.
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape till custom make it
Their perch, and not their terror.

ESCALUS.
Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman,
Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attained th’ effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Erred in this point which now you censure him,
And pulled the law upon you.

ANGELO.
’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny
The jury passing on the prisoner’s life
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What’s open made to justice,
That justice seizes. What knows the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? ’Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take ’t,
Because we see it; but what we do not see,
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I that censure him do so offend,
Let mine own judgement pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

Enter Provost.

ESCALUS.
Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO.
Where is the Provost?

PROVOST.
Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO.
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine tomorrow morning.
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,
For that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage.

[_Exit Provost._]

ESCALUS.
Well, heaven forgive him; and forgive us all.
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.
Some run from brakes of vice, and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.

Enter Elbow and Officers with Froth and Pompey.

ELBOW.
Come, bring them away. If these be good people in a commonweal that do
nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law. Bring
them away.

ANGELO.
How now, sir, what’s your name? And what’s the matter?

ELBOW.
If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke’s constable, and my name
is Elbow. I do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring in here before your
good honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO.
Benefactors? Well, what benefactors are they? Are they not malefactors?

ELBOW.
If it please your honour, I know not well what they are, but precise
villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all profanation in
the world that good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS.
This comes off well. Here’s a wise officer.

ANGELO.
Go to. What quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why dost thou not
speak, Elbow?

POMPEY.
He cannot, sir. He’s out at elbow.

ANGELO.
What are you, sir?

ELBOW.
He, sir? A tapster, sir; parcel bawd; one that serves a bad woman;
whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs; and
now she professes a hot-house, which, I think is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS.
How know you that?

ELBOW.
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour—

ESCALUS.
How? Thy wife?

ELBOW.
Ay, sir, whom I thank heaven is an honest woman—

ESCALUS.
Dost thou detest her therefore?

ELBOW.
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house,
if it be not a bawd’s house, it is pity of her life, for it is a
naughty house.

ESCALUS.
How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW.
Marry, sir, by my wife, who, if she had been a woman cardinally given,
might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness
there.

ESCALUS.
By the woman’s means?

ELBOW.
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone’s means; but as she spit in his face, so
she defied him.

POMPEY.
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW.
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man, prove it.

ESCALUS.
[_To Angelo_.] Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY.
Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour’s
reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which
at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit dish, a dish of
some threepence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not china
dishes, but very good dishes—

ESCALUS.
Go to, go to. No matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY.
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the right. But to the
point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for prunes; and having but
two in the dish, as I said, Master Froth here, this very man, having
eaten the rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could not give you
threepence again—

FROTH.
No, indeed.

POMPEY.
Very well. You being then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of
the foresaid prunes—

FROTH.
Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY.
Why, very well. I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a
one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they
kept very good diet, as I told you—

FROTH.
All this is true.

POMPEY.
Why, very well then—

ESCALUS.
Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose. What was done to Elbow’s
wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to
her.

POMPEY.
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS.
No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY.
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour’s leave. And I beseech
you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of fourscore pound a year;
whose father died at Hallowmas—was’t not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?

FROTH.
All-hallond Eve.

POMPEY.
Why, very well. I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a
lower chair, sir—’twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where, indeed, you have
a delight to sit, have you not?

FROTH.
I have so, because it is an open room, and good for winter.

POMPEY.
Why, very well then. I hope here be truths.

ANGELO.
This will last out a night in Russia
When nights are longest there. I’ll take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you’ll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS.
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.

[_Exit Angelo._]

Now, sir, come on. What was done to Elbow’s wife, once more?

POMPEY.
Once, sir? There was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW.
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY.
I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS.
Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY.
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman’s face. Good Master Froth,
look upon his honour; ’tis for a good purpose.—Doth your honour mark
his face?

ESCALUS.
Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY.
Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS.
Well, I do so.

POMPEY.
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS.
Why, no.

POMPEY.
I’ll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him.
Good, then, if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master
Froth do the constable’s wife any harm? I would know that of your
honour.

ESCALUS.
He’s in the right. Constable. What say you to it?

ELBOW.
First, an it like you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a
respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY.
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us
all.

ELBOW.
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! The time is yet to come
that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY.
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS.
Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity? Is this true?

ELBOW.
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I respected with
her before I was married to her? If ever I was respected with her, or
she with me, let not your worship think me the poor Duke’s officer.
Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or I’ll have mine action of battery
on thee.

ESCALUS.
If he took you a box o’ th’ ear, you might have your action of slander
too.

ELBOW.
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is’t your worship’s
pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS.
Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst
discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou
know’st what they are.

ELBOW.
Marry, I thank your worship for it.—Thou seest, thou wicked varlet,
now, what’s come upon thee. Thou art to continue now, thou varlet, thou
art to continue.

ESCALUS.
[_To Froth_.] Where were you born, friend?

FROTH.
Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS.
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH.
Yes, an’t please you, sir.

ESCALUS.
So. [_To Pompey_.] What trade are you of, sir?

POMPEY.
A tapster, a poor widow’s tapster.

ESCALUS.
Your mistress’ name?

POMPEY.
Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS.
Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY.
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS.
Nine?—Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I would not have
you acquainted with tapsters; they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.

FROTH.
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never come into any room in
a taphouse but I am drawn in.

ESCALUS.
Well, no more of it, Master Froth. Farewell.

[_Exit Froth._]

Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What’s your name, Master
tapster?

POMPEY.
Pompey.

ESCALUS.
What else?

POMPEY.
Bum, sir.

ESCALUS.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that, in the
beastliest sense, you are Pompey the great. Pompey, you are partly a
bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not?
Come, tell me true, it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY.
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS.
How would you live, Pompey? By being a bawd? What do you think of the
trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY.
If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS.
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in
Vienna.

POMPEY.
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?

ESCALUS.
No, Pompey.

POMPEY.
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to’t then. If your worship
will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the
bawds.

ESCALUS.
There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell you. It is but heading and
hanging.

POMPEY.
If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year
together, you’ll be glad to give out a commission for more heads. If
this law hold in Vienna ten year, I’ll rent the fairest house in it
after threepence a bay. If you live to see this come to pass, say
Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS.
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I
advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint
whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do. If I do, Pompey, I shall
beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you. In plain
dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipped. So for this time, Pompey,
fare you well.

POMPEY.
I thank your worship for your good counsel. [_Aside_.] But I shall
follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade;
The valiant heart’s not whipped out of his trade.

[_Exit._]

ESCALUS.
Come hither to me, Master Elbow. Come hither, Master Constable. How
long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW.
Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS.
I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had continued in it
sometime. You say seven years together?

ELBOW.
And a half, sir.

ESCALUS.
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you wrong to put you so
oft upon’t. Are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW.
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters. As they are chosen, they
are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go
through with all.

ESCALUS.
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most
sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW.
To your worship’s house, sir?

ESCALUS.
To my house. Fare you well.

[_Exit Elbow._]

What’s o’clock, think you?

JUSTICE.
Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS.
I pray you home to dinner with me.

JUSTICE.
I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio,
But there’s no remedy.

JUSTICE.
Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS.
It is but needful.
Mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
But yet, Poor Claudio! There’s no remedy.
Come, sir.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another room in the same.

Enter Provost and a Servant.

SERVANT.
He’s hearing of a cause. He will come straight.
I’ll tell him of you.

PROVOST.
Pray you do.

[_Exit Servant._]

I’ll know
His pleasure, may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream;
All sects, all ages, smack of this vice, and he
To die for ’t!

Enter Angelo.

ANGELO.
Now, what’s the matter, Provost?

PROVOST.
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO.
Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?

PROVOST.
Lest I might be too rash.
Under your good correction, I have seen
When, after execution, judgement hath
Repented o’er his doom.

ANGELO.
Go to; let that be mine.
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.

PROVOST.
I crave your honour’s pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She’s very near her hour.

ANGELO.
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place; and that with speed.

Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
Here is the sister of the man condemned
Desires access to you.

ANGELO.
Hath he a sister?

PROVOST.
Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.

ANGELO.
Well, let her be admitted.

[_Exit Servant._]

See you the fornicatress be removed;
Let her have needful but not lavish means;
There shall be order for it.

Enter Lucio and Isabella.

PROVOST.
[_Offering to retire_.] Save your honour!

ANGELO.
Stay a little while. [_To Isabella_.] You are welcome. What’s your
will?

ISABELLA.
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO.
Well, what’s your suit?

ISABELLA.
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war ’twixt will and will not.

ANGELO.
Well, the matter?

ISABELLA.
I have a brother is condemned to die;
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

PROVOST.
Heaven give thee moving graces.

ANGELO.
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault’s condemned ere it be done.
Mine were the very cipher of a function
To find the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA.
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!

[_Going._]

LUCIO.
[_To Isabella_.] Give’t not o’er so. To him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
You are too cold. If you should need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
To him, I say.

ISABELLA.
Must he needs die?

ANGELO.
Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA.
Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO.
I will not do’t.

ISABELLA.
But can you if you would?

ANGELO.
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA.
But might you do’t, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touched with that remorse
As mine is to him?

ANGELO.
He’s sentenced, ’tis too late.

LUCIO.
[_To Isabella_.] You are too cold.

ISABELLA.
Too late? Why, no. I that do speak a word
May call it back again. Well, believe this:
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal’s truncheon, nor the judge’s robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he like you
Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO.
Pray you be gone.

ISABELLA.
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what ’twere to be a judge
And what a prisoner.

LUCIO.
[_Aside_.] Ay, touch him; there’s the vein.

ANGELO.
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA.
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once,
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be
If He, which is the top of judgement, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.

ANGELO.
Be you content, fair maid.
It is the law, not I, condemns your brother.
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him. He must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA.
Tomorrow? O, that’s sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He’s not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you.
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There’s many have committed it.

LUCIO.
Ay, well said.

ANGELO.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
Those many had not dared to do that evil
If the first that did th’ edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now ’tis awake,
Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils,
Either now, or by remissness new conceived,
And so in progress to be hatched and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, where they live, to end.

ISABELLA.
Yet show some pity.

ANGELO.
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismissed offence would after gall,
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies tomorrow; be content.

ISABELLA.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he that suffers. O, it is excellent
To have a giant’s strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.

LUCIO.
That’s well said.

ISABELLA.
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne’er be quiet,
For every pelting petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder.
Nothing but thunder. Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As makes the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO.
O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;
He’s coming. I perceive ’t.

PROVOST.
Pray heaven she win him.

ISABELLA.
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
Great men may jest with saints; ’tis wit in them,
But in the less, foul profanation.

LUCIO.
Thou’rt i’ th’ right, girl; more o’ that.

ISABELLA.
That in the captain’s but a choleric word
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO.
Art advised o’ that? More on’t.

ANGELO.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA.
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
That skins the vice o’ th’ top. Go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That’s like my brother’s fault. If it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother’s life.

ANGELO.
She speaks, and ’tis such sense
That my sense breeds with it. [_Going_.]
Fare you well.

ISABELLA.
Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO.
I will bethink me. Come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA.
Hark how I’ll bribe you. Good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO.
How? Bribe me?

ISABELLA.
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO.
You had marred all else.

ISABELLA.
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones, whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them, but with true prayers,
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sunrise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

ANGELO.
Well; come to me tomorrow.

LUCIO.
[_Aside to Isabella_.] Go to, ’tis well; away.

ISABELLA.
Heaven keep your honour safe.

ANGELO.
[_Aside_.] Amen.
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers cross.

ISABELLA.
At what hour tomorrow
Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO.
At any time ’fore noon.

ISABELLA.
Save your honour.

[_Exeunt Isabella, Lucio and Provost._]

ANGELO.
From thee, even from thy virtue!
What’s this? What’s this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most, ha?
Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman’s lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live.
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again
And feast upon her eyes? What is’t I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet
With all her double vigour, art, and nature,
Once stir my temper, but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Ever till now
When men were fond, I smiled and wondered how.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in a prison.

Enter Duke disguised as a Friar, and Provost.

DUKE.
Hail to you, Provost, so I think you are.

PROVOST.
I am the Provost. What’s your will, good friar?

DUKE.
Bound by my charity and my blessed order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them, and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

PROVOST.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.

Enter Juliet.

Look, here comes one, a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report. She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced: a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.

DUKE.
When must he die?

PROVOST.
As I do think, tomorrow.
[_To Juliet_.] I have provided for you; stay a while
And you shall be conducted.

DUKE.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET.
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE.
I’ll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound
Or hollowly put on.

JULIET.
I’ll gladly learn.

DUKE.
Love you the man that wronged you?

JULIET.
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.

DUKE.
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?

JULIET.
Mutually.

DUKE.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.

DUKE.
’Tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear—

JULIET.
I do repent me as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

DUKE.
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you! _Benedicite!_

[_Exit._]

JULIET.
Must die tomorrow? O, injurious love
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!

PROVOST.
’Tis pity of him.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Angelo’s house.

Enter Angelo.

ANGELO.
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel. Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state whereon I studied
Is, like a good thing being often read,
Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein—let no man hear me—I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
Let’s write good angel on the devil’s horn.
’Tis not the devil’s crest.

[_Knock within._]

How now, who’s there?

Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO.
Teach her the way.

[_Exit Servant._]

O heavens,
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons,
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive. And even so
The general subject to a well-wished king
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.

Enter Isabella.

How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA.
I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO.
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what ’tis. Your brother cannot live.

ISABELLA.
Even so. Heaven keep your honour.

ANGELO.
Yet may he live a while. And, it may be,
As long as you or I. Yet he must die.

ISABELLA.
Under your sentence?

ANGELO.
Yea.

ISABELLA.
When, I beseech you? That in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO.
Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven’s image
In stamps that are forbid. ’Tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.

ISABELLA.
’Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO.
Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother’s life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stained?

ISABELLA.
Sir, believe this:
I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO.
I talk not of your soul. Our compelled sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.

ISABELLA.
How say you?

ANGELO.
Nay, I’ll not warrant that, for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother’s life.
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother’s life?

ISABELLA.
Please you to do’t,
I’ll take it as a peril to my soul;
It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO.
Pleased you to do’t at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it. You granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I’ll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO.
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine. Either you are ignorant,
Or seem so, crafty; and that’s not good.

ISABELLA.
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself, as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, displayed. But mark me;
To be received plain, I’ll speak more gross.
Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA.
So.

ANGELO.
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA.
True.

ANGELO.
Admit no other way to save his life—
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-binding law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer,
What would you do?

ISABELLA.
As much for my poor brother as myself.
That is, were I under the terms of death,
Th’ impression of keen whips I’d wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I’d yield
My body up to shame.

ANGELO.
Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA.
And ’twere the cheaper way.
Better it were a brother died at once
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.

ANGELO.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slandered so?

ISABELLA.
Ignominy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses. Lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO.
You seemed of late to make the law a tyrant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA.
O, pardon me, my lord. It oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean.
I something do excuse the thing I hate
For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO.
We are all frail.

ISABELLA.
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary but only he
Owe and succeed by weakness.

ANGELO.
Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA.
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women?—Help, heaven! Men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO.
I think it well.
And from this testimony of your own sex,
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman. If you be more, you’re none.
If you be one, as you are well expressed
By all external warrants, show it now
By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA.
I have no tongue but one. Gentle my lord,
Let me intreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO.
Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA.
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for ’t.

ANGELO.
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA.
I know your virtue hath a license in’t,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.

ANGELO.
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA.
Ha! Little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for’t.
Sign me a present pardon for my brother
Or with an outstretched throat I’ll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

ANGELO.
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoiled name, th’ austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i’ th’ state
Will so your accusation overweigh
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein.
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
That banish what they sue for. Redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To ling’ring sufferance. Answer me tomorrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
I’ll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false o’erweighs your true.

[_Exit._]

ISABELLA.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue
Either of condemnation or approof,
Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to th’ appetite,
To follow as it draws! I’ll to my brother.
Though he hath fall’n by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he’d yield them up
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorred pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die.
More than our brother is our chastity.
I’ll tell him yet of Angelo’s request,
And fit his mind to death, for his soul’s rest.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A room in the prison.


Enter Duke, Claudio and Provost.

DUKE.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO.
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope.
I have hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE.
Be absolute for death. Either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences
That dost this habitation where thou keep’st
Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art death’s fool;
For him thou labour’st by thy flight to shun,
And yet runn’st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all th’ accommodations that thou bear’st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou’rt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provok’st, yet grossly fear’st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou striv’st to get,
And what thou hast, forget’st. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou’rt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear’st thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But as it were an after-dinner’s sleep
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty
To make thy riches pleasant. What’s yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO.
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life. Let it come on.

ISABELLA.
[_Within_.] What ho! Peace here; grace and good company!

PROVOST.
Who’s there? Come in. The wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE.
Dear sir, ere long I’ll visit you again.

CLAUDIO.
Most holy sir, I thank you.

Enter Isabella.

ISABELLA.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.

PROVOST.
And very welcome. Look, signior, here’s your sister.

DUKE.
Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST.
As many as you please.

DUKE.
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

[_Exeunt Duke and Provost._]

CLAUDIO.
Now, sister, what’s the comfort?

ISABELLA.
Why,
As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
Tomorrow you set on.

CLAUDIO.
Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA.
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO.
But is there any?

ISABELLA.
Yes, brother, you may live.
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you’ll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO.
Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA.
Ay, just; perpetual durance; a restraint,
Though all the world’s vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO.
But in what nature?

ISABELLA.
In such a one as, you consenting to’t,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO.
Let me know the point.

ISABELLA.
O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Dar’st thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle that we tread upon
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO.
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride
And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA.
There spake my brother! There my father’s grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die.
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i’ th’ head, and follies doth enew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil.
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO.
The precise Angelo?

ISABELLA.
O, ’tis the cunning livery of hell
The damned’st body to invest and cover
In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
If I would yield him my virginity
Thou mightst be freed?

CLAUDIO.
O heavens, it cannot be.

ISABELLA.
Yes, he would give it thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This night’s the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest tomorrow.

CLAUDIO.
Thou shalt not do’t.

ISABELLA.
O, were it but my life,
I’d throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO.
Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO.
Yes. Has he affections in him
That thus can make him bite the law by th’ nose
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.

ISABELLA.
Which is the least?

CLAUDIO.
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA.
What says my brother?

CLAUDIO.
Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA.
And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO.
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprisoned in the viewless winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling—’tis too horrible.
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA.
Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO.
Sweet sister, let me live.
What sin you do to save a brother’s life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA.
O, you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is’t not a kind of incest to take life
From thine own sister’s shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother played my father fair,
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne’er issued from his blood. Take my defiance,
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
I’ll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO.
Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA.
O fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd.
’Tis best that thou diest quickly.

[_Going._]

CLAUDIO.
O, hear me, Isabella.

Enter Duke as a Friar.

DUKE.
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA.
What is your will?

DUKE.
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some
speech with you. The satisfaction I would require is likewise your own
benefit.

ISABELLA.
I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be stolen out of other
affairs, but I will attend you a while.

DUKE.
[_To Claudio aside_.] Son, I have overheard what hath passed between
you and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only
he hath made an assay of her virtue, to practise his judgement with the
disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her, hath
made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive. I am
confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true; therefore prepare
yourself to death. Do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are
fallible. Tomorrow you must die; go to your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO.
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life that I will
sue to be rid of it.

DUKE.
Hold you there. Farewell.

[_Exit Claudio._]

Enter Provost.

Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST.
What’s your will, father?

DUKE.
That, now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while with the
maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my
company.

PROVOST.
In good time.

[_Exit Provost._]

DUKE.
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good. The goodness that
is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace, being the
soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. The
assault that Angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my
understanding; and, but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I
should wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this substitute,
and to save your brother?

ISABELLA.
I am now going to resolve him. I had rather my brother die by the law
than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good
Duke deceived in Angelo! If ever he return, and I can speak to him, I
will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.

DUKE.
That shall not be much amiss. Yet, as the matter now stands, he will
avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your
ear on my advisings, to the love I have in doing good, a remedy
presents itself. I do make myself believe that you may most
uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit; redeem your
brother from the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person;
and much please the absent Duke, if peradventure he shall ever return
to have hearing of this business.

ISABELLA.
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do anything that
appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not heard speak of
Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great soldier who miscarried at
sea?

ISABELLA.
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE.
She should this Angelo have married, was affianced to her oath, and the
nuptial appointed. Between which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea, having in that
perished vessel the dowry of his sister. But mark how heavily this
befell to the poor gentlewoman. There she lost a noble and renowned
brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him,
the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry; with both,
her combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA.
Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE.
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort,
swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries of dishonour;
in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for
his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but
relents not.

ISABELLA.
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world!
What corruption in this life, that it will let this man live! But how
out of this can she avail?

DUKE.
It is a rupture that you may easily heal, and the cure of it not only
saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA.
Show me how, good father.

DUKE.
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first
affection. His unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have
quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it
more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his requiring with a
plausible obedience; agree with his demands to the point. Only refer
yourself to this advantage: first, that your stay with him may not be
long; that the time may have all shadow and silence in it; and the
place answer to convenience. This being granted in course, and now
follows all. We shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your
appointment, go in your place. If the encounter acknowledge itself
hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is
your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged,
and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What think you of it?

ISABELLA.
The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a
most prosperous perfection.

DUKE.
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to Angelo; if for
this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction.
I will presently to Saint Luke’s; there at the moated grange resides
this dejected Mariana. At that place call upon me; and dispatch with
Angelo, that it may be quickly.

ISABELLA.
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

[_Exit Isabella._]

SCENE II. The street before the prison.

Enter Elbow, Pompey and Officers.

ELBOW.
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell
men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and
white bastard.

DUKE.
O heavens, what stuff is here?

POMPEY.
’Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest was put
down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him
warm; and furred with fox on lambskins too, to signify that craft,
being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW.
Come your way, sir.—Bless you, good father friar.

DUKE.
And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made you, sir?

ELBOW.
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him to be a
thief too, sir; for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock,
which we have sent to the deputy.

DUKE.
Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd;
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What ’tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice. Say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir. But yet, sir, I would prove—

DUKE.
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer.
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW.
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning. The deputy
cannot abide a whoremaster. If he be a whoremonger and comes before
him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE.
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
Free from our faults, as faults from seeming, free!

ELBOW.
His neck will come to your waist—a cord, sir.

Enter Lucio.

POMPEY.
I spy comfort, I cry bail! Here’s a gentleman, and a friend of mine.

LUCIO.
How now, noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art thou led in
triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion’s images, newly made woman,
to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it
clutched? What reply, ha? What say’st thou to this tune, matter, and
method? Is’t not drowned i’ th’ last rain, ha? What say’st thou, trot?
Is the world as it was, man? Which is the way? Is it sad and few words?
Or how? The trick of it?

DUKE.
Still thus, and thus; still worse!

LUCIO.
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still, ha?

POMPEY.
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the
tub.

LUCIO.
Why, ’tis good. It is the right of it. It must be so. Ever your fresh
whore and your powdered bawd; an unshunned consequence; it must be so.
Art going to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY.
Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO.
Why, ’tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell. Go, say I sent thee thither. For
debt, Pompey? Or how?

ELBOW.
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO.
Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why,
’tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity, too. Bawd born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison, Pompey. You will turn
good husband now, Pompey; you will keep the house.

POMPEY.
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.

LUCIO.
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will pray,
Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not patiently, why,
your mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey.—Bless you, friar.

DUKE.
And you.

LUCIO.
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW.
Come your ways, sir, come.

POMPEY.
You will not bail me then, sir?

LUCIO.
Then, Pompey, nor now.—What news abroad, friar? What news?

ELBOW.
Come your ways, sir, come.

LUCIO.
Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

[_Exeunt Elbow, Pompey and Officers._]

What news, friar, of the Duke?

DUKE.
I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO.
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is in Rome.
But where is he, think you?

DUKE.
I know not where, but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state and usurp
the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his
absence. He puts transgression to’t.

DUKE.
He does well in’t.

LUCIO.
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him. Something too
crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE.
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO.
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied;
but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and
drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation. Is it true, think you?

DUKE.
How should he be made, then?

LUCIO.
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two
stockfishes. But it is certain that when he makes water, his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true. And he is a motion ungenerative;
that’s infallible.

DUKE.
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO.
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a
codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that is absent
have done this? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand. He had
some feeling of the sport; he knew the service, and that instructed him
to mercy.

DUKE.
I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was not
inclined that way.

LUCIO.
O, sir, you are deceived.

DUKE.
’Tis not possible.

LUCIO.
Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use was to put a
ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in him. He would be
drunk too, that let me inform you.

DUKE.
You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO.
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and I believe I
know the cause of his withdrawing.

DUKE.
What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO.
No, pardon. ’Tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips.
But this I can let you understand: the greater file of the subject held
the Duke to be wise.

DUKE.
Wise? Why, no question but he was.

LUCIO.
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE.
Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking. The very stream of his
life, and the business he hath helmed, must upon a warranted need give
him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a
statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you speak unskilfully. Or, if your
knowledge be more, it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO.
Sir, I know him, and I love him.

DUKE.
Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.

LUCIO.
Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE.
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But, if
ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to
make your answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke, you have
courage to maintain it. I am bound to call upon you, and I pray you
your name?

LUCIO.
Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.

DUKE.
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.

LUCIO.
I fear you not.

DUKE.
O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me too
unhurtful an opposite. But indeed, I can do you little harm. You’ll
forswear this again.

LUCIO.
I’ll be hanged first! Thou art deceived in me, friar. But no more of
this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die tomorrow or no?

DUKE.
Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO.
Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke we talk of
were returned again. This ungenitured agent will unpeople the province
with continency. Sparrows must not build in his house-eaves because
they are lecherous. The Duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered.
He would never bring them to light. Would he were returned! Marry, this
Claudio is condemned for untrussing. Farewell, good friar, I prithee
pray for me. The Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He’s now past it; yet, and, I say to thee, he would mouth with
a beggar though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
Farewell.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure ’scape. Back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

Enter Escalus, Provost and Officers with Mistress Overdone, a Bawd.

ESCALUS.
Go, away with her to prison.

BAWD.
Good my lord, be good to me. Your honour is accounted a merciful man,
good my lord.

ESCALUS.
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind? This
would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.

PROVOST.
A bawd of eleven years’ continuance, may it please your honour.

BAWD.
My lord, this is one Lucio’s information against me. Mistress Kate
Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke’s time; he promised her
marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old come Philip and Jacob.
I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me.

ESCALUS.
That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be called before us.
Away with her to prison. Go to, no more words.

[_Exeunt Officers with Bawd._]

Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered; Claudio must die
tomorrow. Let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable
preparation. If my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with
him.

PROVOST.
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for th’
entertainment of death.

ESCALUS.
Good even, good father.

DUKE.
Bliss and goodness on you!

ESCALUS.
Of whence are you?

DUKE.
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time. I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his Holiness.

ESCALUS.
What news abroad i’ th’ world?

DUKE.
None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request, and as it
is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is virtuous to
be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to
make societies secure; but security enough to make fellowships
accursed. Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This news
is old enough, yet it is every day’s news. I pray you, sir, of what
disposition was the Duke?

ESCALUS.
One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know
himself.

DUKE.
What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS.
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at anything which
professed to make him rejoice. A gentleman of all temperance. But leave
we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, and let
me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared. I am made to
understand that you have lent him visitation.

DUKE.
He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but
most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice. Yet had
he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving
promises of life, which I, by my good leisure, have discredited to him,
and now he is resolved to die.

ESCALUS.
You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt
of your calling. I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the
extremest shore of my modesty, but my brother justice have I found so
severe that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.

DUKE.
If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it shall
become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced
himself.

ESCALUS.
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE.
Peace be with you.

[_Exeunt Escalus and Provost._]

He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe,
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offences weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking!
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice, and let his grow!
O, what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness, made in crimes,
Make practice on the times,
To draw with idle spiders’ strings
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Craft against vice I must apply.
With Angelo tonight shall lie
His old betrothed but despised.
So disguise shall, by th’ disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
And perform an old contracting.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. A room in Mariana’s house.


Enter Mariana and a Boy singing.

                SONG
_  Take, O take those lips away,
      That so sweetly were forsworn,
  And those eyes, the break of day,
      Lights that do mislead the morn.
  But my kisses bring again,
                Bring again;
  Seals of love, but sealed in vain,
                Sealed in vain._

Enter Duke as a Friar.

MARIANA.
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often stilled my brawling discontent.

[_Exit Boy._]

I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical.
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE.
’Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
I pray you tell me, hath anybody inquired for me here today? Much upon
this time have I promised here to meet.

MARIANA.
You have not been inquired after. I have sat here all day.

Enter Isabella.

DUKE.
I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I shall crave
your forbearance a little. Maybe I will call upon you anon for some
advantage to yourself.

MARIANA.
I am always bound to you.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
Very well met, and welcome.
What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA.
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate
That makes his opening with this bigger key.
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads;
There have I made my promise, upon the
Heavy middle of the night to call on him.

DUKE.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA.
I have ta’en a due and wary note upon’t;
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o’er.

DUKE.
Are there no other tokens
Between you ’greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA.
No, none, but only a repair i’ th’ dark,
And that I have possessed him my most stay
Can be but brief, for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
I come about my brother.

DUKE.
’Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this.—What ho, within! Come forth.

Enter Mariana.

I pray you be acquainted with this maid;
She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA.
I do desire the like.

DUKE.
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA.
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

DUKE.
Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure; but make haste.
The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA.
Will’t please you walk aside?

[_Exeunt Mariana and Isabella._]

DUKE.
O place and greatness, millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee; volumes of report
Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream
And rack thee in their fancies.

Enter Mariana and Isabella.

Welcome; how agreed?

ISABELLA.
She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.

DUKE.
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA.
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
“Remember now my brother.”

MARIANA.
Fear me not.

DUKE.
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract.
To bring you thus together ’tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
Our corn’s to reap, for yet our tithe’s to sow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in the prison.

Enter Provost and Pompey.

PROVOST.
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man’s head?

POMPEY.
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a married man, he’s
his wife’s head, and I can never cut off a woman’s head.

PROVOST.
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer.
Tomorrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our
prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper; if you
will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your gyves;
if not, you shall have your full time of imprisonment, and your
deliverance with an unpitied whipping; for you have been a notorious
bawd.

POMPEY.
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind, but yet I will be
content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to receive some
instruction from my fellow-partner.

PROVOST.
What ho, Abhorson! Where’s Abhorson, there?

Enter Abhorson.

ABHORSON.
Do you call, sir?

PROVOST.
Sirrah, here’s a fellow will help you tomorrow in your execution. If
you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide
here with you; if not, use him for the present, and dismiss him. He
cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON.
A bawd, sir? Fie upon him, he will discredit our mystery.

PROVOST.
Go to, sir; you weigh equally. A feather will turn the scale.

[_Exit._]

POMPEY.
Pray, sir, by your good favour—for surely, sir, a good favour you have,
but that you have a hanging look—do you call, sir, your occupation a
mystery?

ABHORSON.
Ay, sir, a mystery.

POMPEY.
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir,
being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation
a mystery. But what mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be
hanged, I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON.
Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY.
Proof.

ABHORSON.
Every true man’s apparel fits your thief. If it be too little for your
thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it be too big for your
thief, your thief thinks it little enough. So every true man’s apparel
fits your thief.

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Are you agreed?

POMPEY.
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more penitent
trade than your bawd. He doth oftener ask forgiveness.

PROVOST.
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe tomorrow four o’clock.

ABHORSON.
Come on, bawd. I will instruct thee in my trade. Follow.

POMPEY.
I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion to use me
for your own turn, you shall find me yare. For truly, sir, for your
kindness I owe you a good turn.

PROVOST.
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.

[_Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey._]

Th’ one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.

Enter Claudio.

Look, here’s the warrant, Claudio, for thy death.
’Tis now dead midnight, and by eight tomorrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where’s Barnardine?

CLAUDIO.
As fast locked up in sleep as guiltless labour
When it lies starkly in the traveller’s bones.
He will not wake.

PROVOST.
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself. [_Knocking within_.] But hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!

[_Exit Claudio. Knock within._]

By and by!—
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio.

Enter Duke.

Welcome, father.

DUKE.
The best and wholesom’st spirits of the night
Envelop you, good Provost! Who called here of late?

PROVOST.
None, since the curfew rung.

DUKE.
Not Isabel?

PROVOST.
No.

DUKE.
They will then, ere’t be long.

PROVOST.
What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE.
There’s some in hope.

PROVOST.
It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE.
Not so, not so. His life is paralleled
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice.
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others. Were he mealed with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
But this being so, he’s just.

[_Knocking within. Provost goes to the door._]

Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost. Seldom when
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.

[_Knocking within_.]

How now? What noise? That spirit’s possessed with haste
That wounds th’ unsisting postern with these strokes.

Provost returns.

PROVOST.
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in. He is called up.

DUKE.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die tomorrow?

PROVOST.
None, sir, none.

DUKE.
As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.

PROVOST.
Happily
You something know, yet I believe there comes
No countermand. No such example have we.
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Professed the contrary.

Enter a Messenger.

This is his Lordship’s man.

DUKE.
And here comes Claudio’s pardon.

MESSENGER.
My lord hath sent you this note, and by me this further charge: that
you swerve not from the smallest article of it, neither in time,
matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for, as I take it, it is
almost day.

PROVOST.
I shall obey him.

[_Exit Messenger._]

DUKE.
[_Aside_.] This is his pardon, purchased by such sin
For which the pardoner himself is in.
Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
When it is borne in high authority.
When vice makes mercy, mercy’s so extended
That for the fault’s love is th’ offender friended.
Now, sir, what news?

PROVOST.
I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office,
awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he
hath not used it before.

DUKE.
Pray you, let’s hear.

PROVOST.
[_Reads_.] _Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be
executed by four of the clock, and in the afternoon, Barnardine. For my
better satisfaction, let me have Claudio’s head sent me by five. Let
this be duly performed, with a thought that more depends on it than we
must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer
it at your peril._
What say you to this, sir?

DUKE.
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in th’ afternoon?

PROVOST.
A Bohemian born, but here nursed up and bred; one that is a prisoner
nine years old.

DUKE.
How came it that the absent Duke had not either delivered him to his
liberty, or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

PROVOST.
His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and indeed, his fact till
now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE.
It is now apparent?

PROVOST.
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE.
Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to be touched?

PROVOST.
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep;
careless, reckless, and fearless of what’s past, present, or to come;
insensible of mortality and desperately mortal.

DUKE.
He wants advice.

PROVOST.
He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the prison; give
him leave to escape hence, he would not. Drunk many times a day, if not
many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry
him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it. It hath not
moved him at all.

DUKE.
More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost, honesty and
constancy; if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me. But in
the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself in hazard. Claudio, whom
here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than
Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
manifested effect, I crave but four days’ respite, for the which you
are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.

PROVOST.
Pray, sir, in what?

DUKE.
In the delaying death.

PROVOST.
Alack, how may I do it? Having the hour limited, and an express
command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I
may make my case as Claudio’s, to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE.
By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions may be your
guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed, and his head borne
to Angelo.

PROVOST.
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE.
O, death’s a great disguiser, and you may add to it. Shave the head and
tie the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared
before his death. You know the course is common. If anything fall to
you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom I
profess, I will plead against it with my life.

PROVOST.
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.

DUKE.
Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the Deputy?

PROVOST.
To him and to his substitutes.

DUKE.
You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch the justice
of your dealing?

PROVOST.
But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE.
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you fearful, that
neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can with ease attempt you,
I will go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look
you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the Duke. You know the
character, I doubt not, and the signet is not strange to you.

PROVOST.
I know them both.

DUKE.
The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall anon
over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within these two
days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he
this very day receives letters of strange tenour, perchance of the
Duke’s death, perchance entering into some monastery; but, by chance,
nothing of what is writ. Look, th’ unfolding star calls up the
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be.
All difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call your
executioner, and off with Barnardine’s head. I will give him a present
shrift, and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed; but this
shall absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another room in the same.

Enter Pompey.

POMPEY.
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession. One
would think it were Mistress Overdone’s own house, for here be many of
her old customers. First, here’s young Master Rash; he’s in for a
commodity of brown paper and old ginger, nine score and seventeen
pounds; of which he made five marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was
not much in request, for the old women were all dead. Then is there
here one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer, for
some four suits of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
beggar. Then have we here young Dizie, and young Master Deep-vow, and
Master Copperspur, and Master Starve-lackey, the rapier and dagger man,
and young Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master Forthright
the tilter, and brave Master Shoe-tie the great traveller, and wild
Half-can that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more, all great doers in
our trade, and are now “for the Lord’s sake.”

Enter Abhorson.

ABHORSON.
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

POMPEY.
Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hanged, Master Barnardine.

ABHORSON.
What ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE.
[_Within_.] A pox o’ your throats! Who makes that noise there? What are
you?

POMPEY.
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir, to rise and
be put to death.

BARNARDINE.
[_Within_.] Away, you rogue, away; I am sleepy.

ABHORSON.
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY.
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep
afterwards.

ABHORSON.
Go in to him, and fetch him out.

POMPEY.
He is coming, sir, he is coming. I hear his straw rustle.

Enter Barnardine.

ABHORSON.
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY.
Very ready, sir.

BARNARDINE.
How now, Abhorson? What’s the news with you?

ABHORSON.
Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers; for, look
you, the warrant’s come.

BARNARDINE.
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not fitted for’t.

POMPEY.
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night and is hanged betimes
in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next day.

Enter Duke.

ABHORSON.
Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father. Do we jest now, think
you?

DUKE.
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart,
I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with you.

BARNARDINE.
Friar, not I. I have been drinking hard all night, and I will have more
time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets. I
will not consent to die this day, that’s certain.

DUKE.
O, sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE.
I swear I will not die today for any man’s persuasion.

DUKE.
But hear you—

BARNARDINE.
Not a word. If you have anything to say to me, come to my ward, for
thence will not I today.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

[_Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey._]

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE.
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.

PROVOST.
Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio’s years; his beard and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined,
And satisfy the Deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE.
O, ’tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo. See this be done,
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

PROVOST.
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?

DUKE.
Let this be done:
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To yonder generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

PROVOST.
I am your free dependant.

DUKE.
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.

[_Exit Provost._]

Now will I write letters to Angelo,
The Provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home;
And that by great injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly. Him I’ll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount,
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and well-balanced form.
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Here is the head; I’ll carry it myself.

DUKE.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.

PROVOST.
I’ll make all speed.

[_Exit._]

ISABELLA.
[_Within_.] Peace, ho, be here!

DUKE.
The tongue of Isabel. She’s come to know
If yet her brother’s pardon be come hither.
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair
When it is least expected.

Enter Isabella.

ISABELLA.
Ho, by your leave!

DUKE.
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA.
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the Deputy sent my brother’s pardon?

DUKE.
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world.
His head is off, and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA.
Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE.
It is no other.
Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.

ISABELLA.
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE.
You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA.
Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!

DUKE.
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot.
Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home tomorrow;—nay, dry your eyes.
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honour.

ISABELLA.
I am directed by you.

DUKE.
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
’Tis that he sent me of the Duke’s return.
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana’s house tonight. Her cause and yours
I’ll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
If I pervert your course.—Who’s here?

Enter Lucio.

LUCIO.
Good even. Friar, where is the Provost?

DUKE.
Not within, sir.

LUCIO.
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red.
Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran. I
dare not for my head fill my belly. One fruitful meal would set me
to’t. But they say the Duke will be here tomorrow. By my troth, Isabel,
I loved thy brother. If the old fantastical duke of dark corners had
been at home, he had lived.

[_Exit Isabella._]

DUKE.
Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports; but the
best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO.
Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do. He’s a better woodman
than thou tak’st him for.

DUKE.
Well, you’ll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO.
Nay, tarry, I’ll go along with thee. I can tell thee pretty tales of
the Duke.

DUKE.
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true; if not
true, none were enough.

LUCIO.
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE.
Did you such a thing?

LUCIO.
Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it. They would else have
married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE.
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO.
By my troth, I’ll go with thee to the lane’s end. If bawdy talk offend
you, we’ll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I
shall stick.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Angelo’s house.

Enter Angelo and Escalus.

ESCALUS.
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO.
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much like to
madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted. And why meet him at the
gates and redeliver our authorities there?

ESCALUS.
I guess not.

ANGELO.
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if
any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in
the street?

ESCALUS.
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of complaints, and to
deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to
stand against us.

ANGELO.
Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed.
Betimes i’ th’ morn I’ll call you at your house.
Give notice to such men of sort and suit
As are to meet him.

ESCALUS.
I shall, sir. Fare you well.

[_Exit._]

ANGELO.
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowered maid;
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,
For my authority bears so credent bulk
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Might in the times to come have ta’en revenge
By so receiving a dishonoured life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived.
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. Fields without the town.

Enter Duke, in his own habit, and Friar Peter.

DUKE.
These letters at fit time deliver me.
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius’ house,
And tell him where I stay. Give the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate.
But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR PETER.
It shall be speeded well.

[_Exit Friar Peter._]

Enter Varrius.

DUKE.
I thank thee, Varrius, thou hast made good haste.
Come, we will walk. There’s other of our friends
Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Street near the city gate.

Enter Isabella and Mariana.

ISABELLA.
To speak so indirectly I am loath;
I would say the truth, but to accuse him so
That is your part; yet I am advised to do it,
He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA.
Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA.
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange, for ’tis a physic
That’s bitter to sweet end.

MARIANA.
I would Friar Peter—

Enter Friar Peter.

ISABELLA.
O, peace, the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER.
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded.
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is entering. Therefore hence, away.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A public place near the city gate.


Enter at several doors Duke, Varrius, Lords; Angelo, Escalus, Lucio,
Provost, Officers and Citizens.

DUKE.
My very worthy cousin, fairly met.
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

ANGELO and ESCALUS.
Happy return be to your royal grace!

DUKE.
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your justice that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO.
You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE.
O, your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves with characters of brass
A forted residence ’gainst the tooth of time
And rasure of oblivion. Give me your hand
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favours that keep within.—Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand.
And good supporters are you.

Enter Friar Peter and Isabella.

FRIAR PETER.
Now is your time. Speak loud, and kneel before him.

ISABELLA.
Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard
Upon a wronged—I would fain have said, a maid.
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint,
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE.
Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice.
Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA.
O worthy Duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil.
Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!

ANGELO.
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm.
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
Cut off by course of justice.

ISABELLA.
By course of justice!

ANGELO.
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA.
Most strange, but yet most truly will I speak.
That Angelo’s forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo’s a murderer, is’t not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
Is it not strange and strange?

DUKE.
Nay, it is ten times strange.

ISABELLA.
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange.
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To th’ end of reckoning.

DUKE.
Away with her. Poor soul,
She speaks this in th’ infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA.
O Prince, I conjure thee, as thou believ’st
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not with that opinion
That I am touched with madness. Make not impossible
That which but seems unlike. ’Tis not impossible
But one, the wicked’st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal Prince,
If he be less, he’s nothing; but he’s more,
Had I more name for badness.

DUKE.
By mine honesty,
If she be mad, as I believe no other,
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e’er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA.
O gracious Duke,
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality; but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

DUKE.
Many that are not mad
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA.
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemned upon the act of fornication
To lose his head; condemned by Angelo.
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger.

LUCIO.
That’s I, an’t like your Grace.
I came to her from Claudio and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother’s pardon.

ISABELLA.
That’s he, indeed.

DUKE.
You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO.
No, my good lord,
Nor wished to hold my peace.

DUKE.
I wish you now, then;
Pray you take note of it; and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

LUCIO.
I warrant your honour.

DUKE.
The warrant’s for yourself. Take heed to it.

ISABELLA.
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.

LUCIO.
Right.

DUKE.
It may be right, but you are i’ the wrong
To speak before your time.—Proceed.

ISABELLA.
I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy.

DUKE.
That’s somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA.
Pardon it;
The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE.
Mended again. The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA.
In brief, to set the needless process by:
How I persuaded, how I prayed and kneeled,
How he refelled me, and how I replied—
For this was of much length—the vile conclusion
I now begin with grief and shame to utter.
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother’s head.

DUKE.
This is most likely!

ISABELLA.
O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE.
By heaven, fond wretch, thou know’st not what thou speak’st,
Or else thou art suborned against his honour
In hateful practice. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
He would have weighed thy brother by himself,
And not have cut him off. Someone hath set you on.
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou cam’st here to complain.

ISABELLA.
And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
In countenance! Heaven shield your Grace from woe,
As I, thus wronged, hence unbelieved go.

DUKE.
I know you’d fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA.
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

[_Exeunt Officer with Isabella._]

DUKE.
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO.
My lord, I know him. ’Tis a meddling friar.
I do not like the man. Had he been lay, my lord,
For certain words he spake against your Grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE.
Words against me? This’s a good friar, belike.
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

LUCIO.
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
I saw them at the prison. A saucy friar,
A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER.
Blessed be your royal Grace!
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.

DUKE.
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER.
I know him for a man divine and holy,
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he’s reported by this gentleman;
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.

LUCIO.
My lord, most villainously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER.
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended ’gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear
Whensoever he’s convented. First, for this woman,
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it.

DUKE.
Good friar, let’s hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats.—Come, cousin Angelo,
In this I’ll be impartial. Be you judge
Of your own cause.

Enter Mariana, veiled.

Is this the witness, friar?
First let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA.
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

DUKE.
What, are you married?

MARIANA.
No, my lord.

DUKE.
Are you a maid?

MARIANA.
No, my lord.

DUKE.
A widow, then?

MARIANA.
Neither, my lord.

DUKE.
Why, you are nothing then, neither maid, widow, nor wife?

LUCIO.
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid, widow,
nor wife.

DUKE.
Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause to prattle for himself.

LUCIO.
Well, my lord.

MARIANA.
My lord, I do confess I ne’er was married,
And I confess besides, I am no maid.
I have known my husband; yet my husband
Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO.
He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.

DUKE.
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too.

LUCIO.
Well, my lord.

DUKE.
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA.
Now I come to’t, my lord.
She that accuses him of fornication
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him, my lord, with such a time
When I’ll depose I had him in mine arms
With all th’ effect of love.

ANGELO.
Charges she more than me?

MARIANA.
Not that I know.

DUKE.
No? You say your husband.

MARIANA.
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne’er knew my body,
But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabel’s.

ANGELO.
This is a strange abuse. Let’s see thy face.

MARIANA.
My husband bids me; now I will unmask. [_Unveiling_.]
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou swor’st was worth the looking on.
This is the hand which, with a vowed contract,
Was fast belocked in thine. This is the body
That took away the match from Isabel
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person.

DUKE.
Know you this woman?

LUCIO.
Carnally, she says.

DUKE.
Sirrah, no more.

LUCIO.
Enough, my lord.

ANGELO.
My lord, I must confess I know this woman;
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition; but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity. Since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA.
Noble Prince,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man’s wife as strongly
As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone, in’s garden-house,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument!

ANGELO.
I did but smile till now.
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice.
My patience here is touched. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
To find this practice out.

DUKE.
Ay, with my heart;
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that’s gone, think’st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit,
That’s sealed in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence ’tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on;
Let him be sent for.

FRIAR PETER.
Would he were here, my lord; for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint.
Your Provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.

DUKE.
Go, do it instantly.

[_Exit Provost._]

And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best
In any chastisement. I for a while
Will leave you; but stir not you till you have
Well determined upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS.
My lord, we’ll do it throughly.

[_Exit Duke._]

Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be a
dishonest person?

LUCIO.
_Cucullus non facit monachum_, honest in nothing but in his clothes,
and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the Duke.

ESCALUS.
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, and enforce them
against him. We shall find this friar a notable fellow.

LUCIO.
As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS.
Call that same Isabel here once again. I would speak with her.

[_Exit an Attendant._]

Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you shall see how I’ll
handle her.

LUCIO.
Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS.
Say you?

LUCIO.
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would sooner
confess; perchance, publicly, she’ll be ashamed.

Enter at several doors Duke as a friar, Provost and Isabella with
Officers.

ESCALUS.
I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO.
That’s the way; for women are light at midnight.

ESCALUS.
[_To Isabella_.] Come on, mistress, here’s a gentlewoman denies all
that you have said.

LUCIO.
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the Provost.

ESCALUS.
In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon you.

LUCIO.
Mum.

ESCALUS.
Come, sir, did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo? They have
confessed you did.

DUKE.
’Tis false.

ESCALUS.
How! Know you where you are?

DUKE.
Respect to your great place; and let the devil
Be sometime honoured for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? ’Tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS.
The Duke’s in us; and we will hear you speak.
Look you speak justly.

DUKE.
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The Duke’s unjust
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain’s mouth
Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO.
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS.
Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
Is’t not enough thou hast suborned these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? And then to glance from him
To th’ Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence! To th’ rack with him! We’ll touse you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What! Unjust?

DUKE.
Be not so hot. The Duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own. His subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o’errun the stew. Laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber’s shop,
As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS.
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!

ANGELO.
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO.
’Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman Baldpate.
Do you know me?

DUKE.
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at the
prison, in the absence of the Duke.

LUCIO.
O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?

DUKE.
Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO.
Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and a coward,
as you then reported him to be?

DUKE.
You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my report. You
indeed spoke so of him, and much more, much worse.

LUCIO.
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for thy
speeches?

DUKE.
I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.

ANGELO.
Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses!

ESCALUS.
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with him to prison!
Where is the provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts enough upon
him. Let him speak no more. Away with those giglets too, and with the
other confederate companion!

[_The Provost lays hands on the Duke._]

DUKE.
Stay, sir, stay a while.

ANGELO.
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO.
Come, sir, come, sir, come, sir. Foh, sir! Why, you bald-pated lying
rascal! You must be hooded, must you? Show your knave’s visage, with a
pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour! Will’t
not off?

[_Pulls off the friar’s hood and discovers the Duke._]

DUKE.
Thou art the first knave that e’er mad’st a duke.
First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.
[_To Lucio_.] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
Must have a word anon.—Lay hold on him.

LUCIO.
This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE.
[_To Escalus_.] What you have spoke I pardon. Sit you down.
We’ll borrow place of him. [_To Angelo_.] Sir, by your leave.
Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
Rely upon it till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.

ANGELO.
O my dread lord,
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your Grace, like power divine,
Hath looked upon my passes. Then, good Prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession.
Immediate sentence then, and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE.
Come hither, Mariana.
Say, wast thou e’er contracted to this woman?

ANGELO.
I was, my lord.

DUKE.
Go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
Return him here again.—Go with him, Provost.

[_Exeunt Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter and Provost._]

ESCALUS.
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE.
Come hither, Isabel.
Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorneyed at your service.

ISABELLA.
O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employed and pained
Your unknown sovereignty.

DUKE.
You are pardoned, Isabel.
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother’s death, I know, sits at your heart,
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose. But peace be with him.
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA.
I do, my lord.

Enter Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter and Provost.

DUKE.
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged
Your well-defended honour, you must pardon
For Mariana’s sake. But as he adjudged your brother,
Being criminal in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent, for your brother’s life,
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
“An Angelo for Claudio, death for death.”
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
Then, Angelo, thy fault’s thus manifested,
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stooped to death, and with like haste.
Away with him.

MARIANA.
O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

DUKE.
It is your husband mocked you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit. Else imputation,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life,
And choke your good to come. For his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you with all
To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA.
O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE.
Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA.
[_Kneeling_.] Gentle my liege—

DUKE.
You do but lose your labour.
Away with him to death. [_To Lucio_.] Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA.
O my good lord.—Sweet Isabel, take my part;
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I’ll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE.
Against all sense you do importune her.
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother’s ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA.
Isabel,
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
Hold up your hands, say nothing. I’ll speak all.
They say best men are moulded out of faults,
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad. So may my husband.
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE.
He dies for Claudio’s death.

ISABELLA.
[_Kneeling_.] Most bounteous sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemned
As if my brother lived. I partly think
A due sincerity governed his deeds
Till he did look on me. Since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died.
For Angelo,
His act did not o’ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects;
Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA.
Merely, my lord.

DUKE.
Your suit’s unprofitable. Stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

PROVOST.
It was commanded so.

DUKE.
Had you a special warrant for the deed?

PROVOST.
No, my good lord, it was by private message.

DUKE.
For which I do discharge you of your office.
Give up your keys.

PROVOST.
Pardon me, noble lord.
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
Yet did repent me after more advice.
For testimony whereof, one in the prison
That should by private order else have died,
I have reserved alive.

DUKE.
What’s he?

PROVOST.
His name is Barnardine.

DUKE.
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.

[_Exit Provost._]

ESCALUS.
I am sorry one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgement afterward.

ANGELO.
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
’Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

Enter Provost with Barnardine, Claudio (muffled) and Juliet.

DUKE.
Which is that Barnardine?

PROVOST.
This, my lord.

DUKE.
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squar’st thy life according. Thou’rt condemned;
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
I leave him to your hand.—What muffled fellow’s that?

PROVOST.
This is another prisoner that I saved,
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
As like almost to Claudio as himself.

[_Unmuffles Claudio._]

DUKE.
[_To Isabella_.] If he be like your brother, for his sake
Is he pardoned; and for your lovely sake,
Give me your hand and say you will be mine.
He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
By this Lord Angelo perceives he’s safe;
Methinks I see a quick’ning in his eye.
Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife, her worth worth yours.
I find an apt remission in myself.
And yet here’s one in place I cannot pardon.
[_To Lucio_.] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
One all of luxury, an ass, a madman.
Wherein have I so deserved of you
That you extol me thus?

LUCIO.
Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick. If you will hang
me for it, you may, but I had rather it would please you I might be
whipped.

DUKE.
Whipped first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow,
As I have heard him swear himself there’s one
Whom he begot with child—let her appear,
And he shall marry her. The nuptial finished,
Let him be whipped and hanged.

LUCIO.
I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your highness said
even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not recompense me in
making me a cuckold.

DUKE.
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits.—Take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO.
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.

DUKE.
Slandering a prince deserves it.

[_Exeunt Officers with Lucio._]

She, Claudio, that you wronged, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo.
I have confessed her, and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness;
There’s more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy;
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio’s.
Th’ offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good;
Whereto if you’ll a willing ear incline,
What’s mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So, bring us to our palace, where we’ll show
What’s yet behind that’s meet you all should know.

[_Exeunt._]




THE MERCHANT OF VENICE




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Venice. A street.
Scene II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene III. Venice. A public place.


ACT II
Scene I. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene II. Venice. A street.
Scene III. The same. A room in Shylock’s house.
Scene IV. The same. A street.
Scene V. The same. Before Shylock’s house.
Scene VI. The same.
Scene VII. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene VIII. Venice. A street.
Scene IX. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.


ACT III
Scene I. Venice. A street.
Scene II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene III. Venice. A street.
Scene IV. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene V. The same. A garden.


ACT IV
Scene I. Venice. A court of justice.
Scene II. The same. A street.


ACT V
Scene I. Belmont. The avenue to Portia’s house.



Dramatis Personæ

THE DUKE OF VENICE
THE PRINCE OF MOROCCO, suitor to Portia
THE PRINCE OF ARRAGON, suitor to Portia
ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
BASSANIO, his friend, suitor to Portia
GRATIANO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
SOLANIO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
SALARINO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
LORENZO, in love with Jessica
SHYLOCK, a rich Jew
TUBAL, a Jew, his friend
LAUNCELET GOBBO, a clown, servant to Shylock
OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelet
LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
BALTHAZAR, servant to Portia
STEPHANO, servant to Portia
SALERIO, a messenger from Venice

PORTIA, a rich heiress
NERISSA, her waiting-woman
JESSICA, daughter to Shylock

Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice, a Gaoler,
Servants and other Attendants

SCENE: Partly at Venice, and partly at Belmont, the seat of Portia on
the Continent


ACT I

SCENE I. Venice. A street.

 Enter Antonio, Salarino and Solanio.

ANTONIO.
In sooth I know not why I am so sad,
It wearies me, you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff ’tis made of, whereof it is born,
I am to learn.
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know myself.

SALARINO.
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies, with portly sail
Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or as it were the pageants of the sea,
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.

SOLANIO.
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Peering in maps for ports, and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

SALARINO.
My wind cooling my broth
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew dock’d in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edifice of stone
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle vessel’s side,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And, in a word, but even now worth this,
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanc’d would make me sad?
But tell not me, I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

ANTONIO.
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year.
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

SALARINO.
Why then you are in love.

ANTONIO.
Fie, fie!

SALARINO.
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and ’twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
Nature hath fram’d strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper.
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they’ll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

 Enter Bassanio, Lorenzo and Gratiano.

SOLANIO.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare ye well.
We leave you now with better company.

SALARINO.
I would have stay’d till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

ANTONIO.
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace th’ occasion to depart.

SALARINO.
Good morrow, my good lords.

BASSANIO.
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when?
You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?

SALARINO.
We’ll make our leisures to attend on yours.

 [_Exeunt Salarino and Solanio._]

LORENZO.
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you, but at dinner-time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

BASSANIO.
I will not fail you.

GRATIANO.
You look not well, Signior Antonio,
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvellously chang’d.

ANTONIO.
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage, where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

GRATIANO.
Let me play the fool,
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio,
(I love thee, and ’tis my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dress’d in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say, “I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark.”
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing; when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
I’ll tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
Come, good Lorenzo. Fare ye well a while.
I’ll end my exhortation after dinner.

LORENZO.
Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

GRATIANO.
Well, keep me company but two years moe,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.

ANTONIO.
Fare you well. I’ll grow a talker for this gear.

GRATIANO.
Thanks, i’ faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neat’s tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.

 [_Exeunt Gratiano and Lorenzo._]

ANTONIO.
Is that anything now?

BASSANIO.
Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all
Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of
chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them
they are not worth the search.

ANTONIO.
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you today promis’d to tell me of?

BASSANIO.
’Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg’d
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
Hath left me gag’d. To you, Antonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

ANTONIO.
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
Within the eye of honour, be assur’d
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlock’d to your occasions.

BASSANIO.
In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
The self-same way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and, like a wilful youth,
That which I owe is lost. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim, or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

ANTONIO.
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Than if you had made waste of all I have.
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it. Therefore, speak.

BASSANIO.
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalu’d
To Cato’s daughter, Brutus’ Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos’ strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate.

ANTONIO.
Thou know’st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Neither have I money nor commodity
To raise a present sum, therefore go forth
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be rack’d even to the uttermost,
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I,
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust or for my sake.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Portia with her waiting-woman Nerissa.

PORTIA.
By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.

NERISSA.
You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance
as your good fortunes are. And yet, for aught I see, they are as sick
that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. It is no
mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. Superfluity come
sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.

PORTIA.
Good sentences, and well pronounc’d.

NERISSA.
They would be better if well followed.

PORTIA.
If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been
churches, and poor men’s cottages princes’ palaces. It is a good divine
that follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twenty what were
good to be done than to be one of the twenty to follow mine own
teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper
leaps o’er a cold decree; such a hare is madness the youth, to skip
o’er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not
in the fashion to choose me a husband. O me, the word “choose”! I may
neither choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike, so is the will of
a living daughter curb’d by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard,
Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

NERISSA.
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good
inspirations. Therefore the lott’ry that he hath devised in these three
chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning
chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who
you shall rightly love. But what warmth is there in your affection
towards any of these princely suitors that are already come?

PORTIA.
I pray thee over-name them, and as thou namest them, I will describe
them, and according to my description level at my affection.

NERISSA.
First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

PORTIA.
Ay, that’s a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse,
and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can
shoe him himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother play’d false with
a smith.

NERISSA.
Then is there the County Palatine.

PORTIA.
He doth nothing but frown, as who should say “And you will not have me,
choose.” He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the
weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly
sadness in his youth. I had rather be married to a death’s-head with a
bone in his mouth than to either of these. God defend me from these
two!

NERISSA.
How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?

PORTIA.
God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man. In truth, I know it
is a sin to be a mocker, but he! why, he hath a horse better than the
Neapolitan’s, a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine.
He is every man in no man. If a throstle sing, he falls straight
a-cap’ring. He will fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I
should marry twenty husbands. If he would despise me, I would forgive
him, for if he love me to madness, I shall never requite him.

NERISSA.
What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of England?

PORTIA.
You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he
hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the
court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English. He is a
proper man’s picture; but alas, who can converse with a dumb-show? How
oddly he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round
hose in France, his bonnet in Germany, and his behaviour everywhere.

NERISSA.
What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?

PORTIA.
That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the
ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when he was
able. I think the Frenchman became his surety, and seal’d under for
another.

NERISSA.
How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony’s nephew?

PORTIA.
Very vilely in the morning when he is sober, and most vilely in the
afternoon when he is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse than
a man, and when he is worst, he is little better than a beast. And the
worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.

NERISSA.
If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket, you should
refuse to perform your father’s will, if you should refuse to accept
him.

PORTIA.
Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep glass of
Rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and
that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do anything,
Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.

NERISSA.
You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. They have
acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to
their home, and to trouble you with no more suit, unless you may be won
by some other sort than your father’s imposition, depending on the
caskets.

PORTIA.
If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as Diana,
unless I be obtained by the manner of my father’s will. I am glad this
parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but
I dote on his very absence. And I pray God grant them a fair departure.

NERISSA.
Do you not remember, lady, in your father’s time, a Venetian, a scholar
and a soldier, that came hither in company of the Marquis of
Montferrat?

PORTIA.
Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think, so was he call’d.

NERISSA.
True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes look’d upon,
was the best deserving a fair lady.

PORTIA.
I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.

 Enter a Servingman.

How now! what news?

SERVINGMAN.
The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. And there
is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings
word the Prince his master will be here tonight.

PORTIA.
If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the
other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach. If he have the
condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he
should shrive me than wive me. Come, Nerissa. Sirrah, go before. Whiles
we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A public place.

 Enter Bassanio with Shylock the Jew.

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats, well.

BASSANIO.
Ay, sir, for three months.

SHYLOCK.
For three months, well.

BASSANIO.
For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.

SHYLOCK.
Antonio shall become bound, well.

BASSANIO.
May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer?

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.

BASSANIO.
Your answer to that.

SHYLOCK.
Antonio is a good man.

BASSANIO.
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?

SHYLOCK.
Ho, no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have
you understand me that he is sufficient. Yet his means are in
supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the
Indies. I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at
Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures he hath squandered
abroad. But ships are but boards, sailors but men; there be land-rats
and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves—I mean pirates—and then
there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is,
notwithstanding, sufficient. Three thousand ducats. I think I may take
his bond.

BASSANIO.
Be assured you may.

SHYLOCK.
I will be assured I may. And that I may be assured, I will bethink me.
May I speak with Antonio?

BASSANIO.
If it please you to dine with us.

SHYLOCK.
Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet, the
Nazarite, conjured the devil into. I will buy with you, sell with you,
talk with you, walk with you, and so following; but I will not eat with
you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is
he comes here?

 Enter Antonio.

BASSANIO.
This is Signior Antonio.

SHYLOCK.
[_Aside._] How like a fawning publican he looks!
I hate him for he is a Christian,
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!

BASSANIO.
Shylock, do you hear?

SHYLOCK.
I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. But soft! how many months
Do you desire? [_To Antonio._] Rest you fair, good signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

ANTONIO.
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I’ll break a custom. [_To Bassanio._] Is he yet possess’d
How much ye would?

SHYLOCK.
Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.

ANTONIO.
And for three months.

SHYLOCK.
I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond. And let me see, but hear you,
Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

ANTONIO.
I do never use it.

SHYLOCK.
When Jacob graz’d his uncle Laban’s sheep,—
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
The third possessor; ay, he was the third.

ANTONIO.
And what of him? Did he take interest?

SHYLOCK.
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Directly interest; mark what Jacob did.
When Laban and himself were compromis’d
That all the eanlings which were streak’d and pied
Should fall as Jacob’s hire, the ewes being rank
In end of autumn turned to the rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skilful shepherd pill’d me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
Fall parti-colour’d lambs, and those were Jacob’s.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

ANTONIO.
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob serv’d for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But sway’d and fashion’d by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?

SHYLOCK.
I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
But note me, signior.

ANTONIO.
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats, ’tis a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.

ANTONIO.
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?

SHYLOCK.
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For suff’rance is the badge of all our tribe.)
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then, you come to me, and you say
“Shylock, we would have moneys.” You say so:
You that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold, moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
“Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?” Or
Shall I bend low and, in a bondman’s key,
With bated breath and whisp’ring humbleness,
Say this:
“Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last;
You spurn’d me such a day; another time
You call’d me dog; and for these courtesies
I’ll lend you thus much moneys”?

ANTONIO.
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou mayst with better face
Exact the penalty.

SHYLOCK.
Why, look you how you storm!
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stain’d me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my moneys, and you’ll not hear me,
This is kind I offer.

BASSANIO.
This were kindness.

SHYLOCK.
This kindness will I show.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Express’d in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.

ANTONIO.
Content, in faith, I’ll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

BASSANIO.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me,
I’ll rather dwell in my necessity.

ANTONIO.
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it,
Within these two months, that’s a month before
This bond expires, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

SHYLOCK.
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others. Pray you, tell me this,
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man’s flesh, taken from a man,
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favour, I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu,
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.

ANTONIO.
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.

SHYLOCK.
Then meet me forthwith at the notary’s,
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
I’ll be with you.

ANTONIO.
Hie thee, gentle Jew.

 [_Exit Shylock._]

This Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.

BASSANIO.
I like not fair terms and a villain’s mind.

ANTONIO.
Come on; in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT II

SCENE I. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the Prince of Morocco, a tawny Moor all in
 white, and three or four followers accordingly, with Portia, Nerissa
 and their train.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnish’d sun,
To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
Where Phœbus’ fire scarce thaws the icicles,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Hath fear’d the valiant; by my love I swear
The best-regarded virgins of our clime
Have lov’d it too. I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.

PORTIA.
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden’s eyes;
Besides, the lott’ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
But if my father had not scanted me
And hedg’d me by his wit to yield myself
His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
As any comer I have look’d on yet
For my affection.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Even for that I thank you.
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
I would o’erstare the sternest eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.

PORTIA.
You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. Therefore be advis’d.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.

PORTIA.
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Good fortune then,
To make me blest or cursed’st among men!

 [_Cornets. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Venice. A street.

 Enter Launcelet Gobbo, the clown, alone.

LAUNCELET.
Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my master.
The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me “Gobbo,
Launcelet Gobbo, good Launcelet” or “good Gobbo,” or “good Launcelet
Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.” My conscience says
“No; take heed, honest Launcelet, take heed, honest Gobbo” or, as
aforesaid, “honest Launcelet Gobbo, do not run, scorn running with thy
heels.” Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. “Fia!” says the
fiend, “away!” says the fiend. “For the heavens, rouse up a brave
mind,” says the fiend, “and run.” Well, my conscience, hanging about
the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me “My honest friend
Launcelet, being an honest man’s son”—or rather an honest woman’s son,
for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a
kind of taste;—well, my conscience says “Launcelet, budge not.”
“Budge,” says the fiend. “Budge not,” says my conscience. “Conscience,”
say I, “you counsel well.” “Fiend,” say I, “you counsel well.” To be
ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the Jew my master, who, (God
bless the mark) is a kind of devil; and, to run away from the Jew, I
should be ruled by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is the devil
himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation, and, in my
conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to
counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly
counsel. I will run, fiend, my heels are at your commandment, I will
run.

 Enter Old Gobbo with a basket.

GOBBO.
Master young man, you, I pray you; which is the way to Master Jew’s?

LAUNCELET.
[_Aside._] O heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who being more
than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not. I will try confusions
with him.

GOBBO.
Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to Master Jew’s?

LAUNCELET.
Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning
of all on your left; marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jew’s house.

GOBBO.
Be God’s sonties, ’twill be a hard way to hit. Can you tell me whether
one Launcelet, that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?

LAUNCELET.
Talk you of young Master Launcelet? [_Aside._] Mark me now, now will I
raise the waters. Talk you of young Master Launcelet?

GOBBO.
No master, sir, but a poor man’s son, his father, though I say’t, is an
honest exceeding poor man, and, God be thanked, well to live.

LAUNCELET.
Well, let his father be what he will, we talk of young Master
Launcelet.

GOBBO.
Your worship’s friend, and Launcelet, sir.

LAUNCELET.
But I pray you, _ergo_, old man, _ergo_, I beseech you, talk you of
young Master Launcelet?

GOBBO.
Of Launcelet, an’t please your mastership.

LAUNCELET.
_Ergo_, Master Launcelet. Talk not of Master Launcelet, father, for the
young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies, and such odd
sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of learning, is indeed
deceased, or, as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.

GOBBO.
Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.

LAUNCELET.
[_Aside._] Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop?
Do you know me, father?

GOBBO.
Alack the day! I know you not, young gentleman, but I pray you tell me,
is my boy, God rest his soul, alive or dead?

LAUNCELET.
Do you not know me, father?

GOBBO.
Alack, sir, I am sand-blind, I know you not.

LAUNCELET.
Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me: it
is a wise father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell
you news of your son. Give me your blessing, truth will come to light,
murder cannot be hid long, a man’s son may, but in the end truth will
out.

GOBBO.
Pray you, sir, stand up, I am sure you are not Launcelet my boy.

LAUNCELET.
Pray you, let’s have no more fooling about it, but give me your
blessing. I am Launcelet, your boy that was, your son that is, your
child that shall be.

GOBBO.
I cannot think you are my son.

LAUNCELET.
I know not what I shall think of that; but I am Launcelet, the Jew’s
man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.

GOBBO.
Her name is Margery, indeed. I’ll be sworn if thou be Launcelet, thou
art mine own flesh and blood. Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard
hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my
fill-horse has on his tail.

LAUNCELET.
It should seem, then, that Dobbin’s tail grows backward. I am sure he
had more hair on his tail than I have on my face when I last saw him.

GOBBO.
Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou and thy master agree? I have
brought him a present. How ’gree you now?

LAUNCELET.
Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run
away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground. My master’s a
very Jew. Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am famished in his
service. You may tell every finger I have with my ribs. Father, I am
glad you are come, give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who
indeed gives rare new liveries. If I serve not him, I will run as far
as God has any ground. O rare fortune, here comes the man! To him,
father; for I am a Jew, if I serve the Jew any longer.

 Enter Bassanio with Leonardo and a follower or two.

BASSANIO.
You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the
farthest by five of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the
liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.

 [_Exit a Servant._]

LAUNCELET.
To him, father.

GOBBO.
God bless your worship!

BASSANIO.
Gramercy, wouldst thou aught with me?

GOBBO.
Here’s my son, sir, a poor boy.

LAUNCELET.
Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew’s man, that would, sir, as my
father shall specify.

GOBBO.
He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve.

LAUNCELET.
Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire,
as my father shall specify.

GOBBO.
His master and he (saving your worship’s reverence) are scarce
cater-cousins.

LAUNCELET.
To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done me wrong, doth
cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man, shall frutify unto
you.

GOBBO.
I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and
my suit is—

LAUNCELET.
In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall
know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet
poor man, my father.

BASSANIO.
One speak for both. What would you?

LAUNCELET.
Serve you, sir.

GOBBO.
That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

BASSANIO.
I know thee well; thou hast obtain’d thy suit.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferr’d thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jew’s service to become
The follower of so poor a gentleman.

LAUNCELET.
The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you,
sir: you have “the grace of God”, sir, and he hath “enough”.

BASSANIO.
Thou speak’st it well. Go, father, with thy son.
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
My lodging out. [_To a Servant._] Give him a livery
More guarded than his fellows’; see it done.

LAUNCELET.
Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have ne’er a tongue in my
head! [_Looking on his palm._] Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer
table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune;
go to, here’s a simple line of life. Here’s a small trifle of wives,
alas, fifteen wives is nothing; eleven widows and nine maids is a
simple coming-in for one man. And then to scape drowning thrice, and to
be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed; here are simple
’scapes. Well, if Fortune be a woman, she’s a good wench for this gear.
Father, come; I’ll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.

 [_Exeunt Launcelet and Old Gobbo._]

BASSANIO.
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
These things being bought and orderly bestow’d,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
My best esteem’d acquaintance; hie thee, go.

LEONARDO.
My best endeavours shall be done herein.

 Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
Where’s your master?

LEONARDO.
Yonder, sir, he walks.

 [_Exit._]

GRATIANO.
Signior Bassanio!

BASSANIO.
Gratiano!

GRATIANO.
I have suit to you.

BASSANIO.
You have obtain’d it.

GRATIANO.
You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.

BASSANIO.
Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
But where thou art not known, why there they show
Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behaviour
I be misconst’red in the place I go to,
And lose my hopes.

GRATIANO.
Signior Bassanio, hear me.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say “amen”;
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his grandam, never trust me more.

BASSANIO.
Well, we shall see your bearing.

GRATIANO.
Nay, but I bar tonight, you shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.

BASSANIO.
No, that were pity.
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well,
I have some business.

GRATIANO.
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper-time.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A room in Shylock’s house.

 Enter Jessica and Launcelet.

JESSICA.
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And, Launcelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new master’s guest.
Give him this letter, do it secretly.
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.

LAUNCELET.
Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew!
If a Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.
But, adieu! These foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit.
Adieu!

JESSICA.
Farewell, good Launcelet.

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father’s child!
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The same. A street.

 Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino and Solanio.

LORENZO.
Nay, we will slink away in supper-time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.

GRATIANO.
We have not made good preparation.

SALARINO.
We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers.

SOLANIO.
’Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly order’d,
And better in my mind not undertook.

LORENZO.
’Tis now but four o’clock, we have two hours
To furnish us.

 Enter Launcelet with a letter.

Friend Launcelet, what’s the news?

LAUNCELET.
And it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.

LORENZO.
I know the hand, in faith ’tis a fair hand,
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.

GRATIANO.
Love news, in faith.

LAUNCELET.
By your leave, sir.

LORENZO.
Whither goest thou?

LAUNCELET.
Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to sup tonight with my new
master the Christian.

LORENZO.
Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica
I will not fail her, speak it privately.
Go, gentlemen,

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
I am provided of a torch-bearer.

SALARINO.
Ay, marry, I’ll be gone about it straight.

SOLANIO.
And so will I.

LORENZO.
Meet me and Gratiano
At Gratiano’s lodging some hour hence.

SALARINO.
’Tis good we do so.

 [_Exeunt Salarino and Solanio._]

GRATIANO.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?

LORENZO.
I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
How I shall take her from her father’s house,
What gold and jewels she is furnish’d with,
What page’s suit she hath in readiness.
If e’er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter’s sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest;
Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same. Before Shylock’s house.

 Enter Shylock the Jew and Launcelet his man that was the clown.

SHYLOCK.
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.—
What, Jessica!—Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me;—What, Jessica!—
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.
Why, Jessica, I say!

LAUNCELET.
Why, Jessica!

SHYLOCK.
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

LAUNCELET.
Your worship was wont to tell me I could do nothing without bidding.

 Enter Jessica.

JESSICA.
Call you? What is your will?

SHYLOCK.
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica.
There are my keys. But wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatter me.
But yet I’ll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house. I am right loath to go;
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money-bags tonight.

LAUNCELET.
I beseech you, sir, go. My young master doth expect your reproach.

SHYLOCK.
So do I his.

LAUNCELET.
And they have conspired together. I will not say you shall see a
masque, but if you do, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell
a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o’clock i’ th’ morning, falling
out that year on Ash-Wednesday was four year in th’ afternoon.

SHYLOCK.
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-neck’d fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnish’d faces,
But stop my house’s ears, I mean my casements.
Let not the sound of shallow fopp’ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob’s staff I swear
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight.
But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah.
Say I will come.

LAUNCELET.
I will go before, sir.
Mistress, look out at window for all this.
    There will come a Christian by
    Will be worth a Jewess’ eye.

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

SHYLOCK.
What says that fool of Hagar’s offspring, ha?

JESSICA.
His words were “Farewell, mistress,” nothing else.

SHYLOCK.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More than the wild-cat. Drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in.
Perhaps I will return immediately:
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you,
“Fast bind, fast find.”
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.

 [_Exit._]

JESSICA.
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost,
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VI. The same.

 Enter the masquers, Gratiano and Salarino.

GRATIANO.
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.

SALARINO.
His hour is almost past.

GRATIANO.
And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

SALARINO.
O ten times faster Venus’ pigeons fly
To seal love’s bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited!

GRATIANO.
That ever holds: who riseth from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untread again
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoy’d.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind!
How like the prodigal doth she return
With over-weather’d ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggar’d by the strumpet wind!

 Enter Lorenzo.

SALARINO.
Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.

LORENZO.
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
Not I but my affairs have made you wait.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
I’ll watch as long for you then. Approach.
Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who’s within?

 Enter Jessica above, in boy’s clothes.

JESSICA.
Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
Albeit I’ll swear that I do know your tongue.

LORENZO.
Lorenzo, and thy love.

JESSICA.
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? And now who knows
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

LORENZO.
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

JESSICA.
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
I am glad ’tis night, you do not look on me,
For I am much asham’d of my exchange.
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

LORENZO.
Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.

JESSICA.
What! must I hold a candle to my shames?
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
Why, ’tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscur’d.

LORENZO.
So are you, sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,
For the close night doth play the runaway,
And we are stay’d for at Bassanio’s feast.

JESSICA.
I will make fast the doors, and gild myself
With some moe ducats, and be with you straight.

 [_Exit above._]

GRATIANO.
Now, by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.

LORENZO.
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath prov’d herself.
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

 Enter Jessica.

What, art thou come? On, gentlemen, away!
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.

 [_Exit with Jessica and Salarino._]

 Enter Antonio.

ANTONIO.
Who’s there?

GRATIANO.
Signior Antonio!

ANTONIO.
Fie, fie, Gratiano! where are all the rest?
’Tis nine o’clock, our friends all stay for you.
No masque tonight, the wind is come about;
Bassanio presently will go aboard.
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

GRATIANO.
I am glad on’t. I desire no more delight
Than to be under sail and gone tonight.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter Portia with the Prince of Morocco and both
 their trains.

PORTIA.
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
Now make your choice.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
The first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

PORTIA.
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
I will survey the inscriptions back again.
What says this leaden casket?
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
Must give, for what? For lead? Hazard for lead!
This casket threatens; men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages:
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross,
I’ll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
If thou be’st rated by thy estimation
Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the lady.
And yet to be afeard of my deserving
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
As much as I deserve! Why, that’s the lady:
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding;
But more than these, in love I do deserve.
What if I stray’d no farther, but chose here?
Let’s see once more this saying grav’d in gold:
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
Why, that’s the lady, all the world desires her.
From the four corners of the earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint.
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
For princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As o’er a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is’t like that lead contains her? ’Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. It were too gross
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Or shall I think in silver she’s immur’d
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an angel
Stamped in gold; but that’s insculp’d upon;
But here an angel in a golden bed
Lies all within. Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

PORTIA.
There, take it, prince, and if my form lie there,
Then I am yours.

 [_He unlocks the golden casket._]

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
O hell! what have we here?
A carrion Death, within whose empty eye
There is a written scroll. I’ll read the writing.

     _All that glisters is not gold,
     Often have you heard that told.
     Many a man his life hath sold
     But my outside to behold.
     Gilded tombs do worms infold.
     Had you been as wise as bold,
     Young in limbs, in judgment old,
     Your answer had not been inscroll’d,
     Fare you well, your suit is cold._

   Cold indeed and labour lost,
   Then farewell heat, and welcome frost.
Portia, adieu! I have too griev’d a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.

 [_Exit with his train. Flourish of cornets._]

PORTIA.
A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Venice. A street.

 Enter Salarino and Solanio.

SALARINO.
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

SOLANIO.
The villain Jew with outcries rais’d the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio’s ship.

SALARINO.
He came too late, the ship was under sail;
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

SOLANIO.
I never heard a passion so confus’d,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
“My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice! the law! my ducats and my daughter!
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stol’n from me by my daughter!
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stol’n by my daughter! Justice! find the girl,
She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.”

SALARINO.
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

SOLANIO.
Let good Antonio look he keep his day
Or he shall pay for this.

SALARINO.
Marry, well rememb’red.
I reason’d with a Frenchman yesterday,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught.
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
And wish’d in silence that it were not his.

SOLANIO.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear,
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

SALARINO.
A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part,
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered “Do not so,
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time,
And for the Jew’s bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love:
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there.”
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio’s hand, and so they parted.

SOLANIO.
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

SALARINO.
Do we so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Nerissa and a Servitor.

NERISSA.
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta’en his oath,
And comes to his election presently.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the Prince of Arragon, his train, and
 Portia.

PORTIA.
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince,
If you choose that wherein I am contain’d,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz’d.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

ARRAGON.
I am enjoin’d by oath to observe three things:
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket ’twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly,
If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you and be gone.

PORTIA.
To these injunctions everyone doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

ARRAGON.
And so have I address’d me. Fortune now
To my heart’s hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
What many men desire! that “many” may be meant
By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to th’ interior, but like the martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and road of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not jump with common spirits
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house,
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
And well said too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune, and be honourable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
O that estates, degrees, and offices
Were not deriv’d corruptly, and that clear honour
Were purchas’d by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honour? And how much honour
Pick’d from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new varnish’d? Well, but to my choice.
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

 [_He opens the silver casket._]

PORTIA.
Too long a pause for that which you find there.

ARRAGON.
What’s here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings!
“Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.”
Did I deserve no more than a fool’s head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?

PORTIA.
To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed natures.

ARRAGON.
What is here?

     _The fire seven times tried this;
     Seven times tried that judgment is
     That did never choose amiss.
     Some there be that shadows kiss;
     Such have but a shadow’s bliss.
     There be fools alive, I wis,
     Silver’d o’er, and so was this.
     Take what wife you will to bed,
     I will ever be your head:
     So be gone; you are sped._

Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool’s head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu! I’ll keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroth.

 [_Exit Arragon with his train._]

PORTIA.
Thus hath the candle sing’d the moth.
O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

NERISSA.
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

PORTIA.
Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Where is my lady?

PORTIA.
Here. What would my lord?

MESSENGER.
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th’ approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath)
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

PORTIA.
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend’st such high-day wit in praising him.
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid’s post that comes so mannerly.

NERISSA.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT III

SCENE I. Venice. A street.

 Enter Solanio and Salarino.

SOLANIO.
Now, what news on the Rialto?

SALARINO.
Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath a ship of rich
lading wrack’d on the narrow seas; the Goodwins, I think they call the
place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many a
tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip Report be an honest
woman of her word.

SOLANIO.
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or
made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband.
But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain
highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the honest Antonio,—O that I
had a title good enough to keep his name company!—

SALARINO.
Come, the full stop.

SOLANIO.
Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a ship.

SALARINO.
I would it might prove the end of his losses.

SOLANIO.
Let me say “amen” betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he
comes in the likeness of a Jew.

 Enter Shylock.

How now, Shylock, what news among the merchants?

SHYLOCK.
You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my daughter’s flight.

SALARINO.
That’s certain, I, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she
flew withal.

SOLANIO.
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged; and then it
is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.

SHYLOCK.
She is damn’d for it.

SALARINO.
That’s certain, if the devil may be her judge.

SHYLOCK.
My own flesh and blood to rebel!

SOLANIO.
Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?

SHYLOCK.
I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.

SALARINO.
There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet
and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at
sea or no?

SHYLOCK.
There I have another bad match, a bankrupt, a prodigal, who dare scarce
show his head on the Rialto, a beggar that used to come so smug upon
the mart; let him look to his bond. He was wont to call me usurer; let
him look to his bond: he was wont to lend money for a Christian cur’sy;
let him look to his bond.

SALARINO.
Why, I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his flesh! What’s that
good for?

SHYLOCK.
To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my
revenge. He hath disgrac’d me and hind’red me half a million, laugh’d
at my losses, mock’d at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my
bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies. And what’s his
reason? I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs,
dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Fed with the same food, hurt
with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same
means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a Christian
is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not
laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we
not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in
that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? Revenge. If a
Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian
example? Why, revenge! The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it
shall go hard but I will better the instruction.

 Enter a man from Antonio.

SERVANT.
Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house, and desires to speak with
you both.

SALARINO.
We have been up and down to seek him.

 Enter Tubal.

SOLANIO.
Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be match’d, unless the
devil himself turn Jew.

 [_Exeunt Solanio, Salarino and the Servant._]

SHYLOCK.
How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Hast thou found my daughter?

TUBAL.
I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.

SHYLOCK.
Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone cost me two thousand
ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in that, and other
precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot,
and the jewels in her ear; would she were hearsed at my foot, and the
ducats in her coffin. No news of them? Why so? And I know not what’s
spent in the search. Why, thou—loss upon loss! The thief gone with so
much, and so much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no revenge,
nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o’ my shoulders, no sighs but
o’ my breathing, no tears but o’ my shedding.

TUBAL.
Yes, other men have ill luck too. Antonio, as I heard in Genoa—

SHYLOCK.
What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?

TUBAL.
—hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.

SHYLOCK.
I thank God! I thank God! Is it true, is it true?

TUBAL.
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.

SHYLOCK.
I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa?

TUBAL.
Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night, fourscore ducats.

SHYLOCK.
Thou stick’st a dagger in me. I shall never see my gold again.
Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!

TUBAL.
There came divers of Antonio’s creditors in my company to Venice that
swear he cannot choose but break.

SHYLOCK.
I am very glad of it. I’ll plague him, I’ll torture him. I am glad of
it.

TUBAL.
One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.

SHYLOCK.
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my turquoise, I had it
of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would not have given it for a
wilderness of monkeys.

TUBAL.
But Antonio is certainly undone.

SHYLOCK.
Nay, that’s true, that’s very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an officer;
bespeak him a fortnight before. I will have the heart of him if he
forfeit, for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good Tubal, at our
synagogue, Tubal.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Bassanio, Portia, Gratiano, Nerissa and all their trains.

PORTIA.
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
There’s something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you, and you know yourself
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But lest you should not understand me well,—
And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought,—
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
So will I never be. So may you miss me.
But if you do, you’ll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o’erlook’d me and divided me.
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours. O these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but ’tis to peise the time,
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

BASSANIO.
Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

PORTIA.
Upon the rack, Bassanio! Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

BASSANIO.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th’ enjoying of my love.
There may as well be amity and life
’Tween snow and fire as treason and my love.

PORTIA.
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.

BASSANIO.
Promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth.

PORTIA.
Well then, confess and live.

BASSANIO.
“Confess and love”
Had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

PORTIA.
Away, then! I am lock’d in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.
Then if he lose he makes a swan-like end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And wat’ry death-bed for him. He may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
To a new-crowned monarch. Such it is
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s ear
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
With no less presence, but with much more love
Than young Alcides when he did redeem
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
To the sea-monster: I stand for sacrifice;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of th’ exploit. Go, Hercules!
Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
I view the fight than thou that mak’st the fray.

 A song, whilst Bassanio comments on the caskets to himself.

     _Tell me where is fancy bred,
     Or in the heart or in the head?
     How begot, how nourished?
        Reply, reply.
     It is engend’red in the eyes,
     With gazing fed, and fancy dies
     In the cradle where it lies.
        Let us all ring fancy’s knell:
        I’ll begin it.—Ding, dong, bell._

ALL.
     _Ding, dong, bell._

BASSANIO.
So may the outward shows be least themselves.
The world is still deceiv’d with ornament.
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
But, being season’d with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward search’d, have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valour’s excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see ’tis purchas’d by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
Which make such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore thou gaudy gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
’Tween man and man: but thou, thou meagre lead,
Which rather threaten’st than dost promise aught,
Thy palenness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I, joy be the consequence!

PORTIA.
[_Aside._] How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embrac’d despair,
And shudd’ring fear, and green-ey’d jealousy.
O love, be moderate; allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy; scant this excess!
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less,
For fear I surfeit.

BASSANIO.
What find I here? [_Opening the leaden casket_.]
Fair Portia’s counterfeit! What demi-god
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? Here are sever’d lips,
Parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
A golden mesh t’entrap the hearts of men
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!—
How could he see to do them? Having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave itself unfurnish’d. Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here’s the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.

     _You that choose not by the view
     Chance as fair and choose as true!
     Since this fortune falls to you,
     Be content and seek no new.
     If you be well pleas’d with this,
     And hold your fortune for your bliss,
     Turn to where your lady is,
     And claim her with a loving kiss._

A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave, [_Kissing her_.]
I come by note to give and to receive.
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in people’s eyes,
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no,
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirm’d, sign’d, ratified by you.

PORTIA.
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am; though for myself alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
To wish myself much better, yet for you
I would be trebled twenty times myself,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich,
That only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account. But the full sum of me
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Is an unlesson’d girl, unschool’d, unpractis’d;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed,
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o’er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours,—my lord’s. I give them with this ring,
Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

BASSANIO.
Madam, you have bereft me of all words,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved prince, there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together,
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Express’d and not express’d. But when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
O then be bold to say Bassanio’s dead!

NERISSA.
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry, good joy. Good joy, my lord and lady!

GRATIANO.
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish;
For I am sure you can wish none from me.
And when your honours mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

BASSANIO.
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

GRATIANO.
I thank your lordship, you have got me one.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
You lov’d, I lov’d; for intermission
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine too, as the matter falls.
For wooing here until I sweat again,
And swearing till my very roof was dry
With oaths of love, at last, (if promise last)
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achiev’d her mistress.

PORTIA.
Is this true, Nerissa?

NERISSA.
Madam, it is, so you stand pleas’d withal.

BASSANIO.
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?

GRATIANO.
Yes, faith, my lord.

BASSANIO.
Our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage.

GRATIANO.
We’ll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.

NERISSA.
What! and stake down?

GRATIANO.
No, we shall ne’er win at that sport and stake down.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend, Salerio!

 Enter Lorenzo, Jessica and Salerio.

BASSANIO.
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
If that the youth of my new int’rest here
Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,
I bid my very friends and countrymen,
Sweet Portia, welcome.

PORTIA.
So do I, my lord,
They are entirely welcome.

LORENZO.
I thank your honour. For my part, my lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
To come with him along.

SALERIO.
I did, my lord,
And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.

 [_Gives Bassanio a letter._]

BASSANIO.
Ere I ope his letter,
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

SALERIO.
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there
Will show you his estate.

 [_Bassanio opens the letter._]

GRATIANO.
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.
Your hand, Salerio. What’s the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
I know he will be glad of our success.
We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.

SALERIO.
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.

PORTIA.
There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper
That steals the colour from Bassanio’s cheek.
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.

BASSANIO.
O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins, I was a gentleman.
And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady,
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a braggart. When I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
I have engag’d myself to a dear friend,
Engag’d my friend to his mere enemy,
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures fail’d? What, not one hit?
From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch
Of merchant-marring rocks?

SALERIO.
Not one, my lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

JESSICA.
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio’s flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. And I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio.

PORTIA.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

BASSANIO.
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best condition’d and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
The ancient Roman honour more appears
Than any that draws breath in Italy.

PORTIA.
What sum owes he the Jew?

BASSANIO.
For me three thousand ducats.

PORTIA.
What, no more?
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond.
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend.
For never shall you lie by Portia’s side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime,
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away!
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.

BASSANIO.
_Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my creditors grow cruel,
my estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit, and since in
paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are clear’d
between you and I, if I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding,
use your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to come, let not my
letter._

PORTIA.
O love, dispatch all business and be gone!

BASSANIO.
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make haste; but, till I come again,
No bed shall e’er be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interposer ’twixt us twain.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A street.

 Enter Shylock, Salarino, Antonio and Gaoler.

SHYLOCK.
Gaoler, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Gaoler, look to him.

ANTONIO.
Hear me yet, good Shylock.

SHYLOCK.
I’ll have my bond, speak not against my bond.
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
Thou call’dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs;
The Duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder,
Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

ANTONIO.
I pray thee hear me speak.

SHYLOCK.
I’ll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak.
I’ll have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I’ll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors. Follow not,
I’ll have no speaking, I will have my bond.

 [_Exit._]

SALARINO.
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.

ANTONIO.
Let him alone.
I’ll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
He seeks my life, his reason well I know:
I oft deliver’d from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me.
Therefore he hates me.

SALARINO.
I am sure the Duke
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.

ANTONIO.
The Duke cannot deny the course of law,
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
’Twill much impeach the justice of the state,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go.
These griefs and losses have so bated me
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.
Well, gaoler, on, pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Portia, Nerissa, Lorenzo, Jessica and Balthazar.

LORENZO.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Than customary bounty can enforce you.

PORTIA.
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty!
This comes too near the praising of myself;
Therefore no more of it. Hear other things.
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord’s return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breath’d a secret vow
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord’s return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

LORENZO.
Madam, with all my heart
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

PORTIA.
My people do already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
So fare you well till we shall meet again.

LORENZO.
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

JESSICA.
I wish your ladyship all heart’s content.

PORTIA.
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleas’d
To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.

 [_Exeunt Jessica and Lorenzo._]

Now, Balthazar,
As I have ever found thee honest-true,
So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
And use thou all th’ endeavour of a man
In speed to Padua, see thou render this
Into my cousin’s hands, Doctor Bellario;
And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagin’d speed
Unto the traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.

BALTHAZAR.
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.

 [_Exit._]

PORTIA.
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of; we’ll see our husbands
Before they think of us.

NERISSA.
Shall they see us?

PORTIA.
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I’ll hold thee any wager,
When we are both accoutered like young men,
I’ll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice; and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies
How honourable ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died;
I could not do withal. Then I’ll repent,
And wish for all that, that I had not kill’d them.
And twenty of these puny lies I’ll tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
About a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
Which I will practise.

NERISSA.
Why, shall we turn to men?

PORTIA.
Fie, what a question’s that,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I’ll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles today.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same. A garden.

 Enter Launcelet and Jessica.

LAUNCELET.
Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon
the children, therefore, I promise you, I fear you. I was always plain
with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter. Therefore be
of good cheer, for truly I think you are damn’d. There is but one hope
in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope
neither.

JESSICA.
And what hope is that, I pray thee?

LAUNCELET.
Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are
not the Jew’s daughter.

JESSICA.
That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my mother
should be visited upon me.

LAUNCELET.
Truly then I fear you are damn’d both by father and mother; thus when I
shun Scylla your father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you
are gone both ways.

JESSICA.
I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made me a Christian.

LAUNCELET.
Truly the more to blame he, we were Christians enow before, e’en as
many as could well live one by another. This making of Christians will
raise the price of hogs; if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not
shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.

 Enter Lorenzo.

JESSICA.
I’ll tell my husband, Launcelet, what you say. Here he comes.

LORENZO.
I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelet, if you thus get my wife
into corners!

JESSICA.
Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Launcelet and I are out. He tells
me flatly there’s no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jew’s
daughter; and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for
in converting Jews to Christians you raise the price of pork.

LORENZO.
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting
up of the negro’s belly! The Moor is with child by you, Launcelet.

LAUNCELET.
It is much that the Moor should be more than reason; but if she be less
than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

LORENZO.
How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best grace of wit
will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none
only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them prepare for dinner.

LAUNCELET.
That is done, sir, they have all stomachs.

LORENZO.
Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them prepare dinner.

LAUNCELET.
That is done too, sir, only “cover” is the word.

LORENZO.
Will you cover, then, sir?

LAUNCELET.
Not so, sir, neither. I know my duty.

LORENZO.
Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show the whole wealth of
thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his plain
meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the
meat, and we will come in to dinner.

LAUNCELET.
For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for the meat, sir, it shall
be covered; for your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as
humours and conceits shall govern.

 [_Exit._]

LORENZO.
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnish’d like him, that for a tricksy word
Defy the matter. How cheer’st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio’s wife?

JESSICA.
Past all expressing. It is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his lady,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
And if on earth he do not merit it,
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawn’d with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.

LORENZO.
Even such a husband
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

JESSICA.
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that.

LORENZO.
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

JESSICA.
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.

LORENZO.
No pray thee, let it serve for table-talk.
Then howsome’er thou speak’st, ’mong other things
I shall digest it.

JESSICA.
Well, I’ll set you forth.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT IV

SCENE I. Venice. A court of justice.

 Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Antonio, Bassanio, Gratiano, Salerio
 and others.

DUKE.
What, is Antonio here?

ANTONIO.
Ready, so please your Grace.

DUKE.
I am sorry for thee, thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

ANTONIO.
I have heard
Your Grace hath ta’en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envy’s reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am arm’d
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.

DUKE.
Go one and call the Jew into the court.

SALARINO.
He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.

 Enter Shylock.

DUKE.
Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, ’tis thought,
Thou’lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touch’d with human gentleness and love,
Forgive a moiety of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enow to press a royal merchant down,
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks and Tartars never train’d
To offices of tender courtesy.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

SHYLOCK.
I have possess’d your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city’s freedom!
You’ll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
Three thousand ducats. I’ll not answer that,
But say it is my humour. Is it answer’d?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleas’d to give ten thousand ducats
To have it ban’d? What, are you answer’d yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
And others, when the bagpipe sings i’ the nose,
Cannot contain their urine; for affection
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be render’d
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
Why he a harmless necessary cat,
Why he a woollen bagpipe, but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame
As to offend, himself being offended,
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodg’d hate and a certain loathing
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
A losing suit against him. Are you answered?

BASSANIO.
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

SHYLOCK.
I am not bound to please thee with my answer.

BASSANIO.
Do all men kill the things they do not love?

SHYLOCK.
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

BASSANIO.
Every offence is not a hate at first.

SHYLOCK.
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

ANTONIO.
I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
You may as well go stand upon the beach
And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
You may as well use question with the wolf,
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that—than which what’s harder?—
His Jewish heart. Therefore, I do beseech you,
Make no moe offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conveniency.
Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.

BASSANIO.
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

SHYLOCK.
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond.

DUKE.
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend’ring none?

SHYLOCK.
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchas’d slave,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts,
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
“Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
Be season’d with such viands”? You will answer
“The slaves are ours.” So do I answer you:
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought; ’tis mine and I will have it.
If you deny me, fie upon your law!
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
I stand for judgment. Answer; shall I have it?

DUKE.
Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

SALARINO.
My lord, here stays without
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
New come from Padua.

DUKE.
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.

BASSANIO.
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.

ANTONIO.
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
You cannot better be employ’d, Bassanio,
Than to live still, and write mine epitaph.

 Enter Nerissa dressed like a lawyer’s clerk.

DUKE.
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?

NERISSA.
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.

 [_Presents a letter._]

BASSANIO.
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

SHYLOCK.
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.

GRATIANO.
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak’st thy knife keen. But no metal can,
No, not the hangman’s axe, bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?

SHYLOCK.
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

GRATIANO.
O, be thou damn’d, inexecrable dog!
And for thy life let justice be accus’d;
Thou almost mak’st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Govern’d a wolf who, hang’d for human slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infus’d itself in thee; for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starv’d and ravenous.

SHYLOCK.
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend’st thy lungs to speak so loud.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.

DUKE.
This letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and learned doctor to our court.
Where is he?

NERISSA.
He attendeth here hard by,
To know your answer, whether you’ll admit him.

DUKE OF VENICE.
With all my heart: some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario’s letter.

[_Reads._] _Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt of your
letter I am very sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in
loving visitation was with me a young doctor of Rome. His name is
Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the
Jew and Antonio the merchant. We turn’d o’er many books together. He is
furnished with my opinion, which, bettered with his own learning (the
greatness whereof I cannot enough commend), comes with him at my
importunity to fill up your Grace’s request in my stead. I beseech you
let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend
estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old a head. I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish
his commendation._

You hear the learn’d Bellario what he writes,
And here, I take it, is the doctor come.

 Enter Portia dressed like a doctor of laws.

Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?

PORTIA.
I did, my lord.

DUKE.
You are welcome. Take your place.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?

PORTIA.
I am informed throughly of the cause.
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

DUKE.
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

PORTIA.
Is your name Shylock?

SHYLOCK.
Shylock is my name.

PORTIA.
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
[_To Antonio_.] You stand within his danger, do you not?

ANTONIO.
Ay, so he says.

PORTIA.
Do you confess the bond?

ANTONIO.
I do.

PORTIA.
Then must the Jew be merciful.

SHYLOCK.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

PORTIA.
The quality of mercy is not strain’d,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest,
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
’Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown.
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God’s
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence ’gainst the merchant there.

SHYLOCK.
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

PORTIA.
Is he not able to discharge the money?

BASSANIO.
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times o’er
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you,
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

PORTIA.
It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;
’Twill be recorded for a precedent,
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

SHYLOCK.
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel!
O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!

PORTIA.
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

SHYLOCK.
Here ’tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.

PORTIA.
Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offered thee.

SHYLOCK.
An oath, an oath! I have an oath in heaven.
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice.

PORTIA.
Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant’s heart. Be merciful,
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

SHYLOCK.
When it is paid according to the tenour.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
You know the law; your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.

ANTONIO.
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

PORTIA.
Why then, thus it is:
You must prepare your bosom for his knife.

SHYLOCK.
O noble judge! O excellent young man!

PORTIA.
For the intent and purpose of the law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

SHYLOCK.
’Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!

PORTIA.
Therefore lay bare your bosom.

SHYLOCK.
Ay, his breast
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
“Nearest his heart”: those are the very words.

PORTIA.
It is so. Are there balance here to weigh
The flesh?

SHYLOCK.
I have them ready.

PORTIA.
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

SHYLOCK.
Is it so nominated in the bond?

PORTIA.
It is not so express’d, but what of that?
’Twere good you do so much for charity.

SHYLOCK.
I cannot find it; ’tis not in the bond.

PORTIA.
You, merchant, have you anything to say?

ANTONIO.
But little. I am arm’d and well prepar’d.
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well,
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Than is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty, from which ling’ring penance
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Commend me to your honourable wife,
Tell her the process of Antonio’s end,
Say how I lov’d you, speak me fair in death.
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I’ll pay it instantly with all my heart.

BASSANIO.
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
Are not with me esteem’d above thy life.
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

PORTIA.
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

GRATIANO.
I have a wife who I protest I love.
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

NERISSA.
’Tis well you offer it behind her back,
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

SHYLOCK.
These be the Christian husbands! I have a daughter—
Would any of the stock of Barabbas
Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!
We trifle time, I pray thee, pursue sentence.

PORTIA.
A pound of that same merchant’s flesh is thine,
The court awards it and the law doth give it.

SHYLOCK.
Most rightful judge!

PORTIA.
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.
The law allows it and the court awards it.

SHYLOCK.
Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare.

PORTIA.
Tarry a little, there is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are “a pound of flesh”:
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

GRATIANO.
O upright judge! Mark, Jew. O learned judge!

SHYLOCK.
Is that the law?

PORTIA.
Thyself shalt see the act.
For, as thou urgest justice, be assur’d
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir’st.

GRATIANO.
O learned judge! Mark, Jew, a learned judge!

SHYLOCK.
I take this offer then. Pay the bond thrice
And let the Christian go.

BASSANIO.
Here is the money.

PORTIA.
Soft!
The Jew shall have all justice. Soft! no haste!
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

GRATIANO.
O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge!

PORTIA.
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more,
But just a pound of flesh: if thou tak’st more
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

GRATIANO.
A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

PORTIA.
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

SHYLOCK.
Give me my principal, and let me go.

BASSANIO.
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

PORTIA.
He hath refus’d it in the open court,
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

GRATIANO.
A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel!
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

SHYLOCK.
Shall I not have barely my principal?

PORTIA.
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

SHYLOCK.
Why, then the devil give him good of it!
I’ll stay no longer question.

PORTIA.
Tarry, Jew.
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party ’gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender’s life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, ’gainst all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou stand’st;
For it appears by manifest proceeding
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr’d
The danger formerly by me rehears’d.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

GRATIANO.
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself,
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
Therefore thou must be hang’d at the state’s charge.

DUKE.
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s;
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

PORTIA.
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.

SHYLOCK.
Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that.
You take my house when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

PORTIA.
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?

GRATIANO.
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God’s sake!

ANTONIO.
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favour,
He presently become a Christian;
The other, that he do record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies possess’d
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

DUKE.
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

PORTIA.
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

SHYLOCK.
I am content.

PORTIA.
Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

SHYLOCK.
I pray you give me leave to go from hence;
I am not well; send the deed after me
And I will sign it.

DUKE.
Get thee gone, but do it.

GRATIANO.
In christ’ning shalt thou have two god-fathers.
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.

 [_Exit Shylock._]

DUKE.
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

PORTIA.
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is meet I presently set forth.

DUKE.
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.

 [_Exeunt Duke and his train._]

BASSANIO.
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof,
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

ANTONIO.
And stand indebted, over and above
In love and service to you evermore.

PORTIA.
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account myself well paid,
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

BASSANIO.
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you,
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

PORTIA.
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
[_To Antonio_.] Give me your gloves, I’ll wear them for your sake.
[_To Bassanio_.] And, for your love, I’ll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I’ll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

BASSANIO.
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle,
I will not shame myself to give you this.

PORTIA.
I will have nothing else but only this,
And now methinks I have a mind to it.

BASSANIO.
There’s more depends on this than on the value.
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation,
Only for this I pray you pardon me.

PORTIA.
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answer’d.

BASSANIO.
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.

PORTIA.
That ’scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
And if your wife be not a mad-woman,
And know how well I have deserv’d this ring,
She would not hold out enemy for ever
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!

 [_Exeunt Portia and Nerissa._]

ANTONIO.
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued ’gainst your wife’s commandment.

BASSANIO.
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him;
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst
Unto Antonio’s house. Away, make haste.

 [_Exit Gratiano._]

Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A street.

 Enter Portia and Nerissa.

PORTIA.
Inquire the Jew’s house out, give him this deed,
And let him sign it, we’ll away tonight,
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

 Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
Fair sir, you are well o’erta’en.
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.

PORTIA.
That cannot be;
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylock’s house.

GRATIANO.
That will I do.

NERISSA.
Sir, I would speak with you.
[_Aside to Portia_.]
I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

PORTIA.
[_To Nerissa_.] Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we’ll outface them, and outswear them too.
Away! make haste! Thou know’st where I will tarry.

NERISSA.
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT V

SCENE I. Belmont. The avenue to Portia’s house.

 Enter Lorenzo and Jessica.

LORENZO.
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no noise, in such a night,
Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls,
And sigh’d his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Did Thisbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew,
And saw the lion’s shadow ere himself,
And ran dismay’d away.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
To come again to Carthage.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Æson.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne’er a true one.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

JESSICA.
I would out-night you did no body come;
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

 Enter Stephano.

LORENZO.
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

STEPHANO.
A friend.

LORENZO.
A friend! What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?

STEPHANO.
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LORENZO.
Who comes with her?

STEPHANO.
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you is my master yet return’d?

LORENZO.
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

 Enter Launcelet.

LAUNCELET. Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola!

LORENZO.
Who calls?

LAUNCELET.
Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo! Sola, sola!

LORENZO.
Leave holloaing, man. Here!

LAUNCELET.
Sola! Where, where?

LORENZO.
Here!

LAUNCELET.
Tell him there’s a post come from my master with his horn full of good
news. My master will be here ere morning.

 [_Exit._]

LORENZO.
Sweet soul, let’s in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter; why should we go in?
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.

 [_Exit Stephano._]

How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

 Enter Musicians.

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress’ ear,
And draw her home with music.

 [_Music._]

JESSICA.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

LORENZO.
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turn’d to a modest gaze
By the sweet power of music: therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods,
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not mov’d with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

 Enter Portia and Nerissa.

PORTIA.
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

NERISSA.
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.

PORTIA.
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a king
Until a king be by, and then his state
Empties itself, as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Music! hark!

NERISSA.
It is your music, madam, of the house.

PORTIA.
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

NERISSA.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.

PORTIA.
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended; and I think
The nightingale, if she should sing by day
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season season’d are
To their right praise and true perfection!
Peace! How the moon sleeps with Endymion,
And would not be awak’d!

 [_Music ceases._]

LORENZO.
That is the voice,
Or I am much deceiv’d, of Portia.

PORTIA.
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
By the bad voice.

LORENZO.
Dear lady, welcome home.

PORTIA.
We have been praying for our husbands’ welfare,
Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
Are they return’d?

LORENZO.
Madam, they are not yet;
But there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.

PORTIA.
Go in, Nerissa.
Give order to my servants, that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence,
Nor you, Lorenzo; Jessica, nor you.

 [_A tucket sounds._]

LORENZO.
Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

PORTIA.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick,
It looks a little paler. ’Tis a day
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

 Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano and their Followers.

BASSANIO.
We should hold day with the Antipodes,
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

PORTIA.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.

BASSANIO.
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

PORTIA.
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.

ANTONIO.
No more than I am well acquitted of.

PORTIA.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

GRATIANO.
[_To Nerissa_.] By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong,
In faith, I gave it to the judge’s clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.

PORTIA.
A quarrel, ho, already! What’s the matter?

GRATIANO.
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
For all the world like cutlers’ poetry
Upon a knife, “Love me, and leave me not.”

NERISSA.
What talk you of the posy, or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge’s clerk! No, God’s my judge,
The clerk will ne’er wear hair on’s face that had it.

GRATIANO.
He will, and if he live to be a man.

NERISSA.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.

GRATIANO.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher than thyself, the judge’s clerk,
A prating boy that begg’d it as a fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

PORTIA.
You were to blame,—I must be plain with you,—
To part so slightly with your wife’s first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
An ’twere to me I should be mad at it.

BASSANIO.
[_Aside._] Why, I were best to cut my left hand off,
And swear I lost the ring defending it.

GRATIANO.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begg’d it, and indeed
Deserv’d it too. And then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he begg’d mine,
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.

PORTIA.
What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you receiv’d of me.

BASSANIO.
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it, but you see my finger
Hath not the ring upon it, it is gone.

PORTIA.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne’er come in your bed
Until I see the ring.

NERISSA.
Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine!

BASSANIO.
Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When nought would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

PORTIA.
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honour to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleas’d to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
I’ll die for’t but some woman had the ring.

BASSANIO.
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
And begg’d the ring, the which I did deny him,
And suffer’d him to go displeas’d away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforc’d to send it after him.
I was beset with shame and courtesy.
My honour would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady;
For by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begg’d
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

PORTIA.
Let not that doctor e’er come near my house,
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
I’ll not deny him anything I have,
No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus,
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honour which is yet mine own,
I’ll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.

NERISSA.
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advis’d
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

GRATIANO.
Well, do you so. Let not me take him then,
For if I do, I’ll mar the young clerk’s pen.

ANTONIO.
I am th’ unhappy subject of these quarrels.

PORTIA.
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome notwithstanding.

BASSANIO.
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see myself—

PORTIA.
Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
In each eye one. Swear by your double self,
And there’s an oath of credit.

BASSANIO.
Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

ANTONIO.
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
Which but for him that had your husband’s ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

PORTIA.
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
And bid him keep it better than the other.

ANTONIO.
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

BASSANIO.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

PORTIA.
I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio,
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

NERISSA.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor’s clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.

GRATIANO.
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserv’d it?

PORTIA.
Speak not so grossly. You are all amaz’d.
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now return’d. I have not yet
Enter’d my house. Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect: unseal this letter soon.
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbour suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

ANTONIO.
I am dumb.

BASSANIO.
Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?

GRATIANO.
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?

NERISSA.
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

BASSANIO.
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

ANTONIO.
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.

PORTIA.
How now, Lorenzo!
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

NERISSA.
Ay, and I’ll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possess’d of.

LORENZO.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.

PORTIA.
It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter’gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

GRATIANO.
Let it be so. The first inter’gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
Till I were couching with the doctor’s clerk.
Well, while I live, I’ll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.

 [_Exeunt._]




THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Windsor. Before Page’s house
 Scene II. The same
 Scene III. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene IV. A room in Doctor Caius’s house

 ACT II
 Scene I. Before Page’s house
 Scene II. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene III. A field near Windsor

 ACT III
 Scene I. A field near Frogmore
 Scene II. A street in Windsor
 Scene III. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene IV. A room in Page’s house
 Scene V. A room in the Garter Inn

 ACT IV
 Scene I. The street
 Scene II. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene III. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene IV. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene V. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene VI. Another room in the Garter Inn

 ACT V
 Scene I. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene II. Windsor Park
 Scene III. The street in Windsor
 Scene IV. Windsor Park
 Scene V. Another part of the Park




Dramatis Personæ

HOST of the Garter Inn
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
ROBIN, page to Falstaff
BARDOLPH, follower of Falstaff
PISTOL, follower of Falstaff
NYM, follower of Falstaff

Robert SHALLOW, a country justice
Abraham SLENDER, cousin to Shallow
Peter SIMPLE, servant to Slender
FENTON, a young gentleman

George PAGE, a Gentleman dwelling at Windsor
MISTRESS PAGE, his wife
MISTRESS ANNE PAGE, her daughter, in love with Fenton
WILLIAM PAGE, a boy, son to Page

Frank FORD, a Gentleman dwelling at Windsor
MISTRESS FORD, his wife
JOHN, Servant to Ford
ROBERT, Servant to Ford

SIR HUGH EVANS, a Welsh parson
DOCTOR CAIUS, a French physician
MISTRESS QUICKLY, servant to Doctor Caius
John RUGBY, servant to Doctor Caius

SERVANTS to Page, &c.

SCENE: Windsor and the neighbourhood




ACT I

SCENE I. Windsor. Before Page’s house


Enter Justice Shallow, Slender and Sir Hugh Evans.

SHALLOW.
Sir Hugh, persuade me not. I will make a Star Chamber matter of it. If
he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow,
esquire.

SLENDER.
In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace and Coram.

SHALLOW.
Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.

SLENDER.
Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born, Master Parson, who writes
himself “Armigero” in any bill, warrant, quittance, or
obligation—“Armigero.”

SHALLOW.
Ay, that I do, and have done any time these three hundred years.

SLENDER.
All his successors, gone before him hath done’t; and all his ancestors
that come after him may. They may give the dozen white luces in their
coat.

SHALLOW.
It is an old coat.

EVANS.
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well. It agrees well,
passant. It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.

SHALLOW.
The luce is the fresh fish. The salt fish is an old coat.

SLENDER.
I may quarter, coz.

SHALLOW.
You may, by marrying.

EVANS.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.

SHALLOW.
Not a whit.

EVANS.
Yes, py’r Lady. If he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three
skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures. But that is all one. If
Sir John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the
Church, and will be glad to do my benevolence to make atonements and
compremises between you.

SHALLOW.
The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.

EVANS.
It is not meet the Council hear a riot. There is no fear of Got in a
riot. The Council, look you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and
not to hear a riot. Take your vizaments in that.

SHALLOW.
Ha! O’ my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.

EVANS.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it; and there is also
another device in my prain, which peradventure prings goot discretions
with it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master George Page,
which is pretty virginity.

SLENDER.
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks small like a woman?

EVANS.
It is that fery person for all the ’orld, as just as you will desire,
and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and gold, and silver, is her
grandsire upon his death’s-bed—Got deliver to a joyful
resurrections!—give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years old.
It were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire
a marriage between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.

SHALLOW.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?

EVANS.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.

SHALLOW.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.

EVANS.
Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.

SHALLOW.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?

EVANS.
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do despise one that is
false, or as I despise one that is not true. The knight Sir John is
there, and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the
door for Master Page.

[_Knocks._]

What, ho! Got pless your house here!

PAGE.
[_Within_.] Who’s there?

EVANS.
Here is Got’s plessing, and your friend, and Justice Shallow, and here
young Master Slender, that peradventures shall tell you another tale,
if matters grow to your likings.

Enter Page.

PAGE.
I am glad to see your worships well. I thank you for my venison, Master
Shallow.

SHALLOW.
Master Page, I am glad to see you, much good do it your good heart! I
wished your venison better; it was ill killed. How doth good Mistress
Page? And I thank you always with my heart, la, with my heart.

PAGE.
Sir, I thank you.

SHALLOW.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.

PAGE.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

SLENDER.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he was outrun on
Cotsall.

PAGE.
It could not be judged, sir.

SLENDER.
You’ll not confess, you’ll not confess.

SHALLOW.
That he will not. ’Tis your fault; ’tis your fault. ’Tis a good dog.

PAGE.
A cur, sir.

SHALLOW.
Sir, he’s a good dog, and a fair dog, can there be more said? He is
good, and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?

PAGE.
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good office between you.

EVANS.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.

SHALLOW.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.

PAGE.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.

SHALLOW.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed. Is not that so, Master Page?
He hath wronged me, indeed he hath, at a word, he hath. Believe me.
Robert Shallow, esquire, saith he is wronged.

PAGE.
Here comes Sir John.

Enter Sir John Falstaff, Bardolph, Nym and Pistol.

FALSTAFF.
Now, Master Shallow, you’ll complain of me to the King?

SHALLOW.
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and broke open my
lodge.

FALSTAFF.
But not kissed your keeper’s daughter!

SHALLOW.
Tut, a pin! This shall be answered.

FALSTAFF.
I will answer it straight: I have done all this. That is now answered.

SHALLOW.
The Council shall know this.

FALSTAFF.
’Twere better for you if it were known in counsel: you’ll be laughed
at.

EVANS.
_Pauca verba_, Sir John; goot worts.

FALSTAFF.
Good worts? Good cabbage!—Slender, I broke your head. What matter have
you against me?

SLENDER.
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your
cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol. They carried me to
the tavern and made me drunk, and afterwards picked my pocket.

BARDOLPH.
You Banbury cheese!

SLENDER.
Ay, it is no matter.

PISTOL.
How now, Mephostophilus?

SLENDER.
Ay, it is no matter.

NYM.
Slice, I say! _Pauca, pauca_, slice, that’s my humour.

SLENDER.
Where’s Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?

EVANS.
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand; there is three umpires in
this matter, as I understand: that is, Master Page, _fidelicet_ Master
Page; and there is myself, _fidelicet_ myself; and the three party is,
lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.

PAGE.
We three to hear it and end it between them.

EVANS.
Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my notebook, and we will
afterwards ’ork upon the cause with as great discreetly as we can.

FALSTAFF.
Pistol!

PISTOL.
He hears with ears.

EVANS.
The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, “He hears with ear”? Why,
it is affectations.

FALSTAFF.
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender’s purse?

SLENDER.
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might never come in mine own
great chamber again else! Of seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two
Edward shovel-boards that cost me two shilling and two pence a-piece of
Yed Miller, by these gloves.

FALSTAFF.
Is this true, Pistol?

EVANS.
No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.

PISTOL.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner!—Sir John and master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.—
Word of denial in thy _labras_ here!
Word of denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.

SLENDER.
[_Points at Nym_.] By these gloves, then, ’twas he.

NYM.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours. I will say “marry trap with
you”, if you run the nuthook’s humour on me. That is the very note of
it.

SLENDER.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it. For though I cannot
remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an
ass.

FALSTAFF.
What say you, Scarlet and John?

BARDOLPH.
Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had drunk himself out of his
five sentences.

EVANS.
It is his “five senses”. Fie, what the ignorance is!

BARDOLPH.
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; and so conclusions
passed the careers.

SLENDER.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but ’tis no matter. I’ll ne’er be
drunk whilst I live again, but in honest, civil, godly company, for
this trick. If I be drunk, I’ll be drunk with those that have the fear
of God, and not with drunken knaves.

EVANS.
So Got ’udge me, that is a virtuous mind.

FALSTAFF.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.

Enter Mistress Ford, Mistress Page and her daughter Anne Page with
wine.

PAGE
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in, we’ll drink within.

[_Exit Anne Page._]

SLENDER
O heaven, this is Mistress Anne Page.

PAGE.
How now, Mistress Ford?

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met. By your leave, good
mistress.

[_Kisses her._]

PAGE.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a hot venison pasty to
dinner. Come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.

[_Exeunt all but Slender._]

SLENDER.
I had rather than forty shillings I had my book of _Songs and Sonnets_
here.

Enter Simple.

How now, Simple, where have you been? I must wait on myself, must I?
You have not the _Book of Riddles_ about you, have you?

SIMPLE.
_Book of Riddles?_ Why, did you not lend it to Alice Shortcake upon
Allhallowmas last, a fortnight afore Michaelmas?

Enter Shallow and Sir Hugh Evans.

SHALLOW.
Come, coz; come, coz, we stay for you. A word with you, coz. Marry,
this, coz: there is, as ’twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made afar
off by Sir Hugh here. Do you understand me?

SLENDER.
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable. If it be so, I shall do that
that is reason.

SHALLOW.
Nay, but understand me.

SLENDER.
So I do, sir.

EVANS.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender. I will description the matter
to you, if you be capacity of it.

SLENDER.
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says. I pray you pardon me, he’s a
Justice of Peace in his country, simple though I stand here.

EVANS.
But that is not the question. The question is concerning your marriage.

SHALLOW.
Ay, there’s the point, sir.

EVANS.
Marry, is it; the very point of it—to Mistress Anne Page.

SLENDER.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any reasonable demands.

EVANS.
But can you affection the ’oman? Let us command to know that of your
mouth, or of your lips; for divers philosophers hold that the lips is
parcel of the mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your good will
to the maid?

SHALLOW.
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?

SLENDER.
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that would do reason.

EVANS.
Nay, Got’s lords and his ladies! You must speak possitable, if you can
carry her your desires towards her.

SHALLOW.
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?

SLENDER.
I will do a greater thing than that, upon your request, cousin, in any
reason.

SHALLOW.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz. What I do is to pleasure you,
coz. Can you love the maid?

SLENDER.
I will marry her, sir, at your request. But if there be no great love
in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance,
when we are married and have more occasion to know one another. I hope
upon familiarity will grow more contempt. But if you say “Marry her,” I
will marry her. That I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.

EVANS.
It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the ’ord
“dissolutely.” The ’ort is, according to our meaning, “resolutely.” His
meaning is good.

SHALLOW.
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.

SLENDER.
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!

SHALLOW.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.

Enter Anne Page.

SHALLOW.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.—Would I were young for your sake,
Mistress Anne.

ANNE.
The dinner is on the table, my father desires your worships’ company.

SHALLOW.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.

EVANS.
’Od’s plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.

[_Exeunt Shallow and Sir Hugh Evans._]

ANNE
Will’t please your worship to come in, sir?

SLENDER.
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.

ANNE.
The dinner attends you, sir.

SLENDER.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. [_To Simple_.] Go, sirrah,
for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin Shallow.

[_Exit Simple._]

A Justice of Peace sometime may be beholding to his friend for a man. I
keep but three men and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what
though? Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.

ANNE.
I may not go in without your worship. They will not sit till you come.

SLENDER.
I’ faith, I’ll eat nothing. I thank you as much as though I did.

ANNE.
I pray you, sir, walk in.

SLENDER.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised my shin th’ other day
with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence—three veneys
for a dish of stewed prunes—and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell
of hot meat since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i’ the
town?

ANNE.
I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.

SLENDER.
I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel at it as any man in
England. You are afraid, if you see the bear loose, are you not?

ANNE.
Ay, indeed, sir.

SLENDER.
That’s meat and drink to me now. I have seen Sackerson loose twenty
times, and have taken him by the chain. But, I warrant you, the women
have so cried and shrieked at it that it passed. But women, indeed,
cannot abide ’em; they are very ill-favoured rough things.

Enter Page.

PAGE
Come, gentle Master Slender, come. We stay for you.

SLENDER.
I’ll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.

PAGE.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come, come.

SLENDER.
Nay, pray you lead the way.

PAGE.
Come on, sir.

SLENDER.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.

ANNE.
Not I, sir; pray you keep on.

SLENDER.
Truly, I will not go first; truly, la! I will not do you that wrong.

ANNE.
I pray you, sir.

SLENDER.
I’ll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You do yourself wrong,
indeed, la!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same

Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple.

EVANS.
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius’ house which is the way. And
there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse,
or his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer and his
wringer.

SIMPLE.
Well, sir.

EVANS.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter. For it is a ’oman that
altogether’s acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page; and the letter is to
desire and require her to solicit your master’s desires to Mistress
Anne Page. I pray you be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there’s
pippins and cheese to come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff, Host, Bardolph, Nym, Pistol and Robin.

FALSTAFF.
Mine host of the Garter!

HOST.
What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and wisely.

FALSTAFF.
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my followers.

HOST.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier. Let them wag; trot, trot.

FALSTAFF.
I sit at ten pounds a week.

HOST.
Thou’rt an emperor—Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar. I will entertain
Bardolph. He shall draw, he shall tap. Said I well, bully Hector?

FALSTAFF.
Do so, good mine host.

HOST.
I have spoke, let him follow.—Let me see thee froth and lime. I am at a
word, follow.

[_Exit Host._]

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade. An old cloak makes a
new jerkin; a withered servingman a fresh tapster. Go, adieu.

BARDOLPH.
It is a life that I have desired. I will thrive.

PISTOL.
O base Hungarian wight, wilt thou the spigot wield?

[_Exit Bardolph._]

NYM
He was gotten in drink. Is not the humour conceited?

FALSTAFF.
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox. His thefts were too open.
His filching was like an unskilful singer, he kept not time.

NYM.
The good humour is to steal at a minute’s rest.

PISTOL.
“Convey,” the wise it call. “Steal?” Foh! A _fico_ for the phrase!

FALSTAFF.
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

PISTOL.
Why, then, let kibes ensue.

FALSTAFF.
There is no remedy, I must cony-catch, I must shift.

PISTOL.
Young ravens must have food.

FALSTAFF.
Which of you know Ford of this town?

PISTOL.
I ken the wight, he is of substance good.

FALSTAFF.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.

PISTOL.
Two yards, and more.

FALSTAFF.
No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the waist two yards about, but I
am now about no waste; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make
love to Ford’s wife. I spy entertainment in her. She discourses, she
carves, she gives the leer of invitation. I can construe the action of
her familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behaviour, to be
Englished rightly, is “I am Sir John Falstaff’s.”

PISTOL.
He hath studied her will and translated her will—out of honesty into
English.

NYM.
The anchor is deep. Will that humour pass?

FALSTAFF.
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her husband’s purse. He
hath a legion of angels.

PISTOL.
As many devils entertain, and “To her, boy,” say I.

NYM.
The humour rises; it is good. Humour me the angels.

FALSTAFF.
I have writ me here a letter to her; and here another to Page’s wife,
who even now gave me good eyes too, examined my parts with most
judicious oeillades. Sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot,
sometimes my portly belly.

PISTOL.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.

NYM.
I thank thee for that humour.

FALSTAFF.
O, she did so course o’er my exteriors with such a greedy intention
that the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up like a
burning-glass. Here’s another letter to her. She bears the purse too;
she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will be cheaters to
them both, and they shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East
and West Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go, bear thou this
letter to Mistress Page;—and thou this to Mistress Ford. We will
thrive, lads, we will thrive.

PISTOL.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!

NYM.
I will run no base humour. Here, take the humour-letter. I will keep
the ’haviour of reputation.

FALSTAFF.
[_To Robin_.] Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.—
Rogues, hence, avaunt! Vanish like hailstones, go!
Trudge, plod away o’ th’ hoof, seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of this age:
French thrift, you rogues—myself and skirted page.

[_Exeunt Falstaff and Robin._]

PISTOL
Let vultures gripe thy guts! For gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguile the rich and poor.
Tester I’ll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!

NYM.
I have operations in my head which be humours of revenge.

PISTOL.
Wilt thou revenge?

NYM.
By welkin and her star!

PISTOL.
With wit or steel?

NYM.
With both the humours, I.
I will discuss the humour of this love to Ford.

PISTOL.
And I to Page shall eke unfold
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.

NYM.
My humour shall not cool. I will incense Ford to deal with poison, I
will possess him with yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous.
That is my true humour.

PISTOL.
Thou art the Mars of malcontents. I second thee. Troop on.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Doctor Caius’s house

Enter Mistress Quickly and Simple.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
What, John Rugby!

Enter Rugby.

I pray thee go to the casement, and see if you can see my master,
Master Doctor Caius, coming. If he do, i’ faith, and find anybody in
the house, here will be an old abusing of God’s patience and the King’s
English.

RUGBY.
I’ll go watch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Go; and we’ll have a posset for’t soon at night, in faith, at the
latter end of a sea-coal fire.

[_Exit Rugby._]

An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in house
withal; and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no breed-bate. His worst
fault is that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish that way,
but nobody but has his fault. But let that pass. Peter Simple you say
your name is?

SIMPLE.
Ay, for fault of a better.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And Master Slender’s your master?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a glover’s paring-knife?

SIMPLE.
No, forsooth, he hath but a little wee face, with a little yellow
beard, a Cain-coloured beard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth. But he is as tall a man of his hands as any is between
this and his head. He hath fought with a warrener.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
How say you? O, I should remember him. Does he not hold up his head, as
it were, and strut in his gait?

SIMPLE.
Yes, indeed, does he.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell Master Parson Evans
I will do what I can for your master. Anne is a good girl, and I wish—

Enter Rugby.

RUGBY
Out, alas! Here comes my master.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man, go into this
closet. He will not stay long.

[_Simple steps into the closet._]

What, John Rugby! John! What, John, I say! Go, John, go inquire for my
master. I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home.

[_Exit Rugby._]

[_Sings_.] _And down, down, adown-a, etc._

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS
Vat is you sing? I do not like dese toys. Pray you, go and vetch me in
my closet _une boîtine verte_, a box, a green-a box. Do intend vat I
speak? A green-a box.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth, I’ll fetch it you.
[_Aside_.] I am glad he went not in himself. If he had found the young
man, he would have been horn-mad.

CAIUS.
_Fe, fe, fe fe! Ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je m’en vais à la cour—la
grande affaire._

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Is it this, sir?

CAIUS.
_Oui, mette-le au mon_ pocket. _Dépêche_, quickly—Vere is dat knave
Rugby?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
What, John Rugby, John!

Enter Rugby.

RUGBY
Here, sir.

CAIUS.
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come, take-a your rapier,
and come after my heel to the court.

RUGBY.
’Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.

CAIUS.
By my trot, I tarry too long. ’Od’s me! _Qu’ay j’oublié?_ Dere is some
simples in my closet dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay me, he’ll find the young man there, and be mad!

CAIUS.
_O diable, diable!_ Vat is in my closet? Villainy! _Larron!_ [_Pulling
Simple out_.] Rugby, my rapier!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Good master, be content.

CAIUS.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
The young man is an honest man.

CAIUS.
What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is no honest man dat
shall come in my closet.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth of it. He came of
an errand to me from Parson Hugh.

CAIUS.
Vell?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth, to desire her to—

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Peace, I pray you.

CAIUS.
Peace-a your tongue!—Speak-a your tale.

SIMPLE.
To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to speak a good word to
Mistress Anne Page for my master in the way of marriage.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
This is all, indeed, la! But I’ll ne’er put my finger in the fire, and
need not.

CAIUS.
Sir Hugh send-a you?—Rugby, _baille_ me some paper.—Tarry you a
little-a while.

[_Writes._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
[_Aside to Simple_.] I am glad he is so quiet. If he had been throughly
moved, you should have heard him so loud and so melancholy. But
notwithstanding, man, I’ll do you your master what good I can; and the
very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my master—I may call him my
master, look you, for I keep his house, and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and do all myself—

SIMPLE.
[_Aside to Mistress Quickly_.] ’Tis a great charge to come under one
body’s hand.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
[_Aside to Simple_.] Are you avised o’ that? You shall find it a great
charge, and to be up early and down late; but notwithstanding—to tell
you in your ear, I would have no words of it—my master himself is in
love with Mistress Anne Page; but notwithstanding that, I know Anne’s
mind. That’s neither here nor there.

CAIUS.
You jack’nape, give-a dis letter to Sir Hugh. By gar, it is a
shallenge. I will cut his troat in de park, and I will teach a scurvy
jackanape priest to meddle or make. You may be gone, it is not good you
tarry here.—By gar, I will cut all his two stones. By gar, he shall not
have a stone to throw at his dog.

[_Exit Simple._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

CAIUS.
It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a me dat I shall have Anne
Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest; and I have
appointed mine host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I will
myself have Anne Page.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We must give folks
leave to prate. What, the good-year!

CAIUS.
Rugby, come to the court with me. [_To Mistress Quickly_.] By gar, if I
have not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.—Follow my
heels, Rugby.

[_Exeunt Caius and Rugby._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
You shall have An—fool’s head of your own. No, I know Anne’s mind for
that. Never a woman in Windsor knows more of Anne’s mind than I do, nor
can do more than I do with her, I thank heaven.

FENTON.
[_Within_.] Who’s within there, ho?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Who’s there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray you.

Enter Fenton.

FENTON
How now, good woman? How dost thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
The better, that it pleases your good worship to ask.

FENTON.
What news? How does pretty Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle; and one that
is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.

FENTON.
Shall I do any good, think’st thou? Shall I not lose my suit?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Troth, sir, all is in His hands above. But notwithstanding, Master
Fenton, I’ll be sworn on a book she loves you. Have not your worship a
wart above your eye?

FENTON.
Yes, marry, have I; what of that?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, thereby hangs a tale. Good faith, it is such another Nan! But, I
detest, an honest maid as ever broke bread. We had an hour’s talk of
that wart. I shall never laugh but in that maid’s company. But, indeed,
she is given too much to allicholy and musing. But for you—well, go to.

FENTON.
Well, I shall see her today. Hold, there’s money for thee. Let me have
thy voice in my behalf. If thou seest her before me, commend me.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Will I? I’ faith, that we will! And I will tell your worship more of
the wart the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers.

FENTON.
Well, farewell, I am in great haste now.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Farewell to your worship.

[_Exit Fenton._]

Truly, an honest gentleman—but Anne loves him not, for I know Anne’s
mind as well as another does. Out upon ’t, what have I forgot?

[_Exit._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Before Page’s house


Enter Mistress Page reading a letter.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-time of my beauty, and
am I now a subject for them? Let me see.
[_Reads_.] _Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Reason
for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor. You are not
young, no more am I. Go to, then, there’s sympathy. You are merry, so
am I. Ha, ha, then there’s more sympathy. You love sack, and so do I.
Would you desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,
at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice, that I love thee. I
will not say, pity me—’tis not a soldier-like phrase—but I say love me.
By me,
        Thine own true knight,
        By day or night,
        Or any kind of light,
        With all his might,
        For thee to fight,
        John Falstaff._
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked world! One that is
well-nigh worn to pieces with age, to show himself a young gallant!
What an unweighed behaviour hath this Flemish drunkard picked—with the
devil’s name!—out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner
assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What should I say
to him? I was then frugal of my mirth. Heaven forgive me! Why, I’ll
exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men. How shall
I be revenged on him? For revenged I will be, as sure as his guts are
made of puddings.

Enter Mistress Ford.

MISTRESS FORD.
Mistress Page! Trust me, I was going to your house.

MISTRESS PAGE.
And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very ill.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I’ll ne’er believe that. I have to show to the contrary.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.

MISTRESS FORD.
Well, I do, then. Yet I say I could show you to the contrary. O,
Mistress Page, give me some counsel.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What’s the matter, woman?

MISTRESS FORD.
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such
honour!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What is it? Dispense with
trifles. What is it?

MISTRESS FORD.
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so, I could be
knighted.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What? Thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights will hack, and so thou
shouldst not alter the article of thy gentry.

MISTRESS FORD.
We burn daylight. Here, read, read. Perceive how I might be knighted. I
shall think the worse of fat men as long as I have an eye to make
difference of men’s liking. And yet he would not swear; praised women’s
modesty; and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof to all
uncomeliness that I would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
the truth of his words. But they do no more adhere and keep place
together than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of “Greensleeves.” What
tempest, I trow, threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I think the
best way were to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust
have melted him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and Ford differs! To thy
great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here’s the twin brother
of thy letter. But let thine inherit first, for I protest mine never
shall. I warrant he hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank
space for different names—sure, more, and these are of the second
edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not what he
puts into the press, when he would put us two. I had rather be a
giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you twenty
lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, this is the very same—the very hand, the very words. What doth he
think of us?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, I know not. It makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own
honesty. I’ll entertain myself like one that I am not acquainted
withal; for, sure, unless he know some strain in me that I know not
myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury.

MISTRESS FORD.
“Boarding” call you it? I’ll be sure to keep him above deck.

MISTRESS PAGE.
So will I. If he come under my hatches, I’ll never to sea again. Let’s
be revenged on him. Let’s appoint him a meeting, give him a show of
comfort in his suit, and lead him on with a fine-baited delay, till he
hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against him that may not sully
the chariness of our honesty. O, that my husband saw this letter! It
would give eternal food to his jealousy.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too. He’s as far from
jealousy as I am from giving him cause, and that, I hope, is an
unmeasurable distance.

MISTRESS FORD.
You are the happier woman.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Let’s consult together against this greasy knight. Come hither.

[_They retire._]

Enter Ford with Pistol, and Page with Nym.

FORD
Well, I hope it be not so.

PISTOL.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
Sir John affects thy wife.

FORD.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.

PISTOL.
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford.
He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.

FORD.
Love my wife?

PISTOL.
With liver burning hot.
Prevent, or go thou like Sir Actaeon he,
With Ringwood at thy heels.
O, odious is the name!

FORD.
What name, sir?

PISTOL.
The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night.
Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds do sing.—
Away, Sir Corporal Nym.—Believe it, Page, he speaks sense.

[_Exit Pistol._]

FORD
[_Aside_.] I will be patient. I will find out this.

NYM.
[_To Page_.] And this is true, I like not the humour of lying. He hath
wronged me in some humours. I should have borne the humoured letter to
her; but I have a sword, and it shall bite upon my necessity. He loves
your wife; there’s the short and the long. My name is Corporal Nym. I
speak, and I avouch ’tis true. My name is Nym, and Falstaff loves your
wife. Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese. Adieu.

[_Exit Nym._]

PAGE
[_Aside_.] “The humour of it,” quoth ’a! Here’s a fellow frights
English out of his wits.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] I will seek out Falstaff.

PAGE.
[_Aside_.] I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] If I do find it—well.

PAGE.
[_Aside_.] I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest o’ the
town commended him for a true man.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] ’Twas a good sensible fellow—well.

Mistress Page and Mistress Ford come forward.

PAGE.
How now, Meg?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Whither go you, George? Hark you.

MISTRESS FORD.
How now, sweet Frank, why art thou melancholy?

FORD.
I melancholy? I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.

MISTRESS FORD.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head now.—Will you go, Mistress
Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Have with you. You’ll come to dinner, George?
[_Aside to Mistress Ford_.] Look who comes yonder. She shall be our
messenger to this paltry knight.

MISTRESS FORD.
[_Aside to Mistress Page_.] Trust me, I thought on her. She’ll fit it.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You are come to see my daughter Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth. And, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Go in with us and see. We’d have an hour’s talk with you.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Mistress Quickly._]

PAGE
How now, Master Ford?

FORD.
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?

PAGE.
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?

FORD.
Do you think there is truth in them?

PAGE.
Hang ’em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it, but these
that accuse him in his intent towards our wives are a yoke of his
discarded men, very rogues, now they be out of service.

FORD.
Were they his men?

PAGE.
Marry, were they.

FORD.
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at the Garter?

PAGE.
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage toward my wife, I
would turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her than sharp
words, let it lie on my head.

FORD.
I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be loath to turn them together.
A man may be too confident. I would have nothing lie on my head. I
cannot be thus satisfied.

Enter Host.

PAGE.
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes. There is either liquor
in his pate or money in his purse when he looks so merrily.—How now,
mine host?

HOST.
How now, bully rook? Thou’rt a gentleman.—Cavaliero Justice, I say!

Enter Shallow.

SHALLOW.
I follow, mine host, I follow.—Good even and twenty, good Master Page.
Master Page, will you go with us? We have sport in hand.

HOST.
Tell him, Cavaliero Justice; tell him, bully rook.

SHALLOW.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and
Caius the French doctor.

FORD.
Good mine host o’ the Garter, a word with you.

HOST.
What say’st thou, my bully rook?

[_Ford and the Host talk apart._]

SHALLOW
[_To Page_.] Will you go with us to behold it? My merry host hath had
the measuring of their weapons, and, I think, hath appointed them
contrary places; for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark,
I will tell you what our sport shall be.

[_Shallow and Page talk apart. Ford and the Host come forward._]

HOST
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my guest cavaliero?

FORD.
None, I protest. But I’ll give you a pottle of burnt sack to give me
recourse to him, and tell him my name is Brook, only for a jest.

HOST.
My hand, bully. Thou shalt have egress and regress—said I well?—and thy
name shall be Brook. It is a merry knight. Will you go, myn-heers?

SHALLOW.
Have with you, mine host.

PAGE.
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his rapier.

SHALLOW.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times you stand on
distance—your passes, stoccadoes, and I know not what. ’Tis the heart,
Master Page; ’tis here, ’tis here. I have seen the time, with my long
sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.

HOST.
Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?

PAGE.
Have with you. I had rather hear them scold than fight.

[_Exeunt Host, Shallow and Page._]

FORD
Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his wife’s
frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so easily. She was in his
company at Page’s house, and what they made there I know not. Well, I
will look further into ’t, and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff. If
I find her honest, I lose not my labour. If she be otherwise, ’tis
labour well bestowed.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff and Pistol.

FALSTAFF.
I will not lend thee a penny.

PISTOL.
Why then, the world’s mine oyster,
Which I with sword will open.

FALSTAFF.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should lay my countenance to
pawn; I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for you
and your coach-fellow Nym, or else you had looked through the grate
like a gemini of baboons. I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen
my friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows. And when Mistress
Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took ’t upon mine honour thou
hadst it not.

PISTOL.
Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen pence?

FALSTAFF.
Reason, you rogue, reason. Think’st thou I’ll endanger my soul gratis?
At a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go—a short
knife and a throng—to your manor of Pickt-hatch, go. You’ll not bear a
letter for me, you rogue? You stand upon your honour! Why, thou
unconfinable baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the terms of
my honour precise. Ay, ay, I myself sometimes, leaving the fear of God
on the left hand, and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to
shuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet you, rogue, will ensconce your
rags, your cat-a-mountain looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your
bold beating oaths, under the shelter of your honour! You will not do
it! You!

PISTOL.
I do relent. What wouldst thou more of man?

Enter Robin.

ROBIN
Sir, here’s a woman would speak with you.

FALSTAFF.
Let her approach.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Give your worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF.
Good morrow, goodwife.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Not so, an’t please your worship.

FALSTAFF.
Good maid, then.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I’ll be sworn, as my mother was, the first hour I was born.

FALSTAFF.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?

FALSTAFF.
Two thousand, fair woman; and I’ll vouchsafe thee the hearing.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
There is one Mistress Ford, sir—I pray, come a little nearer this ways.
I myself dwell with Master Doctor Caius.

FALSTAFF.
Well, on; Mistress Ford, you say—

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Your worship says very true. I pray your worship come a little nearer
this ways.

FALSTAFF.
I warrant thee, nobody hears. Mine own people, mine own people.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Are they so? God bless them, and make them His servants!

FALSTAFF.
Well, Mistress Ford, what of her?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Why, sir, she’s a good creature. Lord, Lord, your worship’s a wanton!
Well, heaven forgive you, and all of us, I pray!

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, come, Mistress Ford.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you have brought her into
such a canaries as ’tis wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when
the court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her to such a
canary. Yet there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with
their coaches, I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter,
gift after gift, smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so rushling, I
warrant you, in silk and gold, and in such alligant terms, and in such
wine and sugar of the best and the fairest, that would have won any
woman’s heart; and I warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of
her. I had myself twenty angels given me this morning, but I defy all
angels in any such sort, as they say, but in the way of honesty. And, I
warrant you, they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the
proudest of them all. And yet there has been earls—nay, which is more,
pensioners—but, I warrant you, all is one with her.

FALSTAFF.
But what says she to me? Be brief, my good she-Mercury.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which she thanks you a
thousand times; and she gives you to notify that her husband will be
absence from his house between ten and eleven.

FALSTAFF.
Ten and eleven?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the picture, she says, that
you wot of. Master Ford, her husband, will be from home. Alas, the
sweet woman leads an ill life with him. He’s a very jealousy man; she
leads a very frampold life with him, good heart.

FALSTAFF.
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I will not fail her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to your worship.
Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations to you too; and let me tell
you in your ear, she’s as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell
you, that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in
Windsor, whoe’er be the other; and she bade me tell your worship that
her husband is seldom from home, but she hopes there will come a time.
I never knew a woman so dote upon a man. Surely I think you have
charms, la! Yes, in truth.

FALSTAFF.
Not I, I assure thee. Setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I
have no other charms.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Blessing on your heart for ’t!

FALSTAFF.
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford’s wife and Page’s wife
acquainted each other how they love me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
That were a jest indeed! They have not so little grace, I hope. That
were a trick indeed! But Mistress Page would desire you to send her
your little page, of all loves. Her husband has a marvellous infection
to the little page; and, truly, Master Page is an honest man. Never a
wife in Windsor leads a better life than she does. Do what she will,
say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she list, rise
when she list, all is as she will, and truly she deserves it, for if
there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must send her your
page, no remedy.

FALSTAFF.
Why, I will.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Nay, but do so then, and, look you, he may come and go between you
both; and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another’s
mind, and the boy never need to understand anything; for ’tis not good
that children should know any wickedness. Old folks, you know, have
discretion, as they say, and know the world.

FALSTAFF.
Fare thee well, commend me to them both. There’s my purse; I am yet thy
debtor. Boy, go along with this woman.—This news distracts me.

[_Exeunt Mistress Quickly and Robin._]

PISTOL.
This punk is one of Cupid’s carriers;
Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;
Give fire! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!

[_Exit Pistol._]

FALSTAFF.
Sayst thou so, old Jack? Go thy ways, I’ll make more of thy old body
than I have done. Will they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the
expense of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee. Let
them say ’tis grossly done; so it be fairly done, no matter.

Enter Bardolph with a cup of sack.

BARDOLPH
Sir John, there’s one Master Brook below would fain speak with you and
be acquainted with you, and hath sent your worship a morning’s draught
of sack.

FALSTAFF.
Brook is his name?

BARDOLPH.
Ay, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Call him in.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

Such Brooks are welcome to me, that o’erflow such liquor. Ah, ha,
Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed you? Go to, _via!_

Enter Bardolph with Ford disguised as Brook.

FORD
God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF.
And you, sir. Would you speak with me?

FORD.
I make bold to press with so little preparation upon you.

FALSTAFF.
You’re welcome. What’s your will?—Give us leave, drawer.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

FORD
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much. My name is Brook.

FALSTAFF.
Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.

FORD.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours; not to charge you, for I must let you
understand I think myself in better plight for a lender than you are,
the which hath something emboldened me to this unseasoned intrusion;
for they say, if money go before, all ways do lie open.

FALSTAFF.
Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.

FORD.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me. If you will help to
bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.

FALSTAFF.
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.

FORD.
I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.

FALSTAFF.
Speak, good Master Brook. I shall be glad to be your servant.

FORD.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar—I will be brief with you—and you have
been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means as desire
to make myself acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you,
wherein I must very much lay open mine own imperfection. But, good Sir
John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded,
turn another into the register of your own, that I may pass with a
reproof the easier, sith you yourself know how easy it is to be such an
offender.

FALSTAFF.
Very well, sir, proceed.

FORD.
There is a gentlewoman in this town, her husband’s name is Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Well, sir.

FORD.
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you, bestowed much on her,
followed her with a doting observance, engrossed opportunities to meet
her, fee’d every slight occasion that could but niggardly give me sight
of her, not only bought many presents to give her, but have given
largely to many to know what she would have given. Briefly, I have
pursued her as love hath pursued me, which hath been on the wing of all
occasions. But whatsoever I have merited, either in my mind or in my
means, meed, I am sure, I have received none, unless experience be a
jewel. That I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught
me to say this:
Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues,
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.

FALSTAFF.
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?

FORD.
Never.

FALSTAFF.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?

FORD.
Never.

FALSTAFF.
Of what quality was your love, then?

FORD.
Like a fair house built on another man’s ground, so that I have lost my
edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it.

FALSTAFF.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?

FORD.
When I have told you that, I have told you all. Some say that though
she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her mirth so
far that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now, Sir John, here
is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding,
admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your place and
person, generally allowed for your many warlike, courtlike, and learned
preparations.

FALSTAFF.
O, sir!

FORD.
Believe it, for you know it. There is money. Spend it, spend it; spend
more; spend all I have; only give me so much of your time in exchange
of it as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Ford’s wife.
Use your art of wooing, win her to consent to you. If any man may, you
may as soon as any.

FALSTAFF.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection that I should
win what you would enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very
preposterously.

FORD.
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on the excellency of her
honour that the folly of my soul dares not present itself; she is too
bright to be looked against. Now, could I come to her with any
detection in my hand, my desires had instance and argument to commend
themselves. I could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her
reputation, her marriage vow, and a thousand other her defences, which
now are too too strongly embattled against me. What say you to’t, Sir
John?

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will first make bold with your money; next, give me
your hand; and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy
Ford’s wife.

FORD.
O good sir!

FALSTAFF.
I say you shall.

FORD.
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.

FALSTAFF.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall want none. I shall be
with her, I may tell you, by her own appointment; even as you came in
to me, her assistant or go-between parted from me. I say I shall be
with her between ten and eleven, for at that time the jealous rascally
knave her husband will be forth. Come you to me at night. You shall
know how I speed.

FORD.
I am blessed in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not. Yet I wrong him to call
him poor. They say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money, for
the which his wife seems to me well-favoured. I will use her as the key
of the cuckoldly rogue’s coffer, and there’s my harvest-home.

FORD.
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him if you saw him.

FALSTAFF.
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will stare him out of his
wits, I will awe him with my cudgel; it shall hang like a meteor o’er
the cuckold’s horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate
over the peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife. Come to me soon at
night. Ford’s a knave, and I will aggravate his style. Thou, Master
Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold. Come to me soon at night.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

FORD.
What a damned epicurean rascal is this! My heart is ready to crack with
impatience. Who says this is improvident jealousy? My wife hath sent to
him, the hour is fixed, the match is made. Would any man have thought
this? See the hell of having a false woman: my bed shall be abused, my
coffers ransacked, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall not only receive
this villanous wrong, but stand under the adoption of abominable terms,
and by him that does me this wrong. Terms, names! Amaimon sounds well;
Lucifer, well; Barbason, well; yet they are devils’ additions, the
names of fiends. But cuckold? Wittol? Cuckold? The devil himself hath
not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass; he will trust his wife,
he will not be jealous. I will rather trust a Fleming with my butter,
Parson Hugh the Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my aqua-vitae
bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling gelding, than my wife with
herself. Then she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what
they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break their
hearts but they will effect. God be praised for my jealousy! Eleven
o’clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it. Better three hours too
soon than a minute too late. Fie, fie, fie! Cuckold, cuckold, cuckold!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A field near Windsor

Enter Doctor Caius and Rugby.

CAIUS.
Jack Rugby!

RUGBY.
Sir?

CAIUS.
Vat is de clock, Jack?

RUGBY.
’Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised to meet.

CAIUS.
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come. He has pray his Pible
well dat he is no come. By gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he
be come.

RUGBY.
He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would kill him if he came.

CAIUS.
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him. Take your rapier,
Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.

RUGBY.
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.

CAIUS.
Villainy, take your rapier.

RUGBY.
Forbear; here’s company.

Enter Page, Shallow, Slender and Host.

HOST
God bless thee, bully doctor!

SHALLOW.
God save you, Master Doctor Caius!

PAGE.
Now, good Master Doctor!

SLENDER.
Give you good morrow, sir.

CAIUS.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?

HOST.
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse; to see thee
here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy
reverse, thy distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he
dead, my Francisco? Ha, bully? What says my Aesculapius, my Galen, my
heart of elder, ha? Is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?

CAIUS.
By gar, he is de coward Jack-priest of de vorld. He is not show his
face.

HOST.
Thou art a Castalion King Urinal Hector of Greece, my boy!

CAIUS.
I pray you, bear witness that me have stay six or seven, two, tree
hours for him, and he is no come.

SHALLOW.
He is the wiser man, Master doctor. He is a curer of souls, and you a
curer of bodies. If you should fight, you go against the hair of your
professions. Is it not true, Master Page?

PAGE.
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter, though now a
man of peace.

SHALLOW.
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, and of the peace, if I see
a sword out, my finger itches to make one. Though we are justices and
doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in
us. We are the sons of women, Master Page.

PAGE.
’Tis true, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
It will be found so, Master Page.—Master Doctor Caius, I come to fetch
you home. I am sworn of the peace. You have showed yourself a wise
physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient
churchman. You must go with me, Master Doctor.

HOST.
Pardon, guest justice.—A word, Monsieur Mockwater.

CAIUS.
Mockvater? Vat is dat?

HOST.
Mockwater, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.

CAIUS.
By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog
priest! By gar, me vill cut his ears.

HOST.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.

CAIUS.
Clapper-de-claw? Vat is dat?

HOST.
That is, he will make thee amends.

CAIUS.
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me, for, by gar, me vill
have it.

HOST.
And I will provoke him to’t, or let him wag.

CAIUS.
Me tank you for dat.

HOST.
And, moreover, bully—but first, Master guest, and Master Page, and eke
Cavaliero Slender, go you through the town to Frogmore.

PAGE
[_Aside to Host_.] Sir Hugh is there, is he?

HOST.
[_Aside to Page_.] He is there. See what humour he is in; and I will
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?

SHALLOW.
[_Aside to Host_.] We will do it.

PAGE, SHALLOW and SLENDER
Adieu, good Master Doctor.

[_Exeunt Page, Shallow and Slender._]

CAIUS
By gar, me vill kill de priest, for he speak for a jackanape to Anne
Page.

HOST.
Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water on thy choler. Go
about the fields with me through Frogmore. I will bring thee where
Mistress Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting, and thou shalt woo
her. Cried game! Said I well?

CAIUS.
By gar, me tank you for dat. By gar, I love you; and I shall procure-a
you de good guest: de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my
patients.

HOST.
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page. Said I well?

CAIUS.
By gar, ’tis good; vell said.

HOST.
Let us wag, then.

CAIUS.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A field near Frogmore


Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple.

EVANS.
I pray you now, good Master Slender’s servingman, and friend Simple by
your name, which way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls
himself doctor of physic?

SIMPLE.
Marry, sir, the Petty-ward, the Park-ward, every way; old Windsor way,
and every way but the town way.

EVANS.
I most fehemently desire you, you will also look that way.

SIMPLE.
I will, Sir.

[_Exit Simple._]

EVANS
Pless my soul, how full of cholers I am, and trempling of mind! I shall
be glad if he have deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog his
urinals about his knave’s costard when I have good opportunities for
the ’ork. Pless my soul!

[_Sings._]

_To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sings madrigals.
There will we make our peds of roses
And a thousand fragrant posies.
To shallow_—

Mercy on me, I have a great dispositions to cry.

[_Sings._]

_Melodious birds sing madrigals—
Whenas I sat in Pabylon—
And a thousand vagram posies.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals._

Enter Simple.

SIMPLE
Yonder he is, coming this way, Sir Hugh.

EVANS.
He’s welcome.

[_Sings._] _To shallow rivers, to whose falls—_
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?

SIMPLE.
No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master Shallow, and another
gentleman, from Frogmore, over the stile, this way.

EVANS.
Pray you, give me my gown—or else keep it in your arms.

Enter Page, Shallow and Slender.

SHALLOW
How now, Master Parson? Good morrow, good Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester
from the dice, and a good student from his book, and it is wonderful.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] Ah, sweet Anne Page!

PAGE.
God save you, good Sir Hugh!

EVANS.
God pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!

SHALLOW.
What, the sword and the word? Do you study them both, Master Parson?

PAGE.
And youthful still—in your doublet and hose, this raw rheumatic day?

EVANS.
There is reasons and causes for it.

PAGE.
We are come to you to do a good office, Master Parson.

EVANS.
Fery well; what is it?

PAGE.
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman who, belike having received wrong
by some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience that
ever you saw.

SHALLOW.
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never heard a man of his
place, gravity, and learning, so wide of his own respect.

EVANS.
What is he?

PAGE.
I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the renowned French
physician.

EVANS.
Got’s will and His passion of my heart! I had as lief you would tell me
of a mess of porridge.

PAGE.
Why?

EVANS.
He has no more knowledge in Hibbocrates and Galen, and he is a knave
besides, a cowardly knave as you would desires to be acquainted withal.

PAGE.
I warrant you, he’s the man should fight with him.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] O, sweet Anne Page!

SHALLOW.
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder. Here comes Doctor
Caius.

Enter Host, Caius and Rugby.

PAGE
Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.

SHALLOW.
So do you, good Master Doctor.

HOST.
Disarm them, and let them question. Let them keep their limbs whole and
hack our English.

CAIUS.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear. Verefore will you not
meet-a me?

EVANS.
[_Aside to Caius_.] Pray you, use your patience. In good time.

CAIUS.
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.

EVANS.
[_Aside to Caius_.] Pray you, let us not be laughing stocks to other
men’s humours. I desire you in friendship, and I will one way or other
make you amends.
[_Aloud_.] By Jeshu, I will knog your urinal about your knave’s
cogscomb.

CAIUS.
_Diable!_ Jack Rugby, mine Host de Jarteer, have I not stay for him to
kill him? Have I not, at de place I did appoint?

EVANS.
As I am a Christians soul, now look you, this is the place appointed.
I’ll be judgment by mine host of the Garter.

HOST.
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh, soul-curer and
body-curer!

CAIUS.
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.

HOST.
Peace, I say! Hear mine host of the Garter. Am I politic? Am I subtle?
Am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my doctor? No, he gives me the potions
and the motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? No, he
gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs. [_To Caius_.] Give me thy hand,
terrestrial; so. [_To Evans_.] Give me thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of
art, I have deceived you both. I have directed you to wrong places.
Your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be the
issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace,
follow, follow, follow.

[_Exit Host._]

SHALLOW.
Afore God, a mad host! Follow, gentlemen, follow.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] O, sweet Anne Page!

[_Exeunt Shallow, Slender and Page._]

CAIUS
Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a de sot of us, ha, ha?

EVANS.
This is well, he has made us his vlouting-stog. I desire you that we
may be friends, and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on
this same scall, scurvy, cogging companion, the host of the Garter.

CAIUS.
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me where is Anne Page;
by gar, he deceive me too.

EVANS.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you follow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A street in Windsor

Enter Mistress Page following Robin.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, keep your way, little gallant. You were wont to be a follower, but
now you are a leader. Whether had you rather, lead mine eyes, or eye
your master’s heels?

ROBIN.
I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than follow him like a
dwarf.

MISTRESS PAGE.
O, you are a flattering boy! Now I see you’ll be a courtier.

Enter Ford.

FORD
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?

FORD.
Ay, and as idle as she may hang together, for want of company. I think
if your husbands were dead you two would marry.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Be sure of that—two other husbands.

FORD.
Where had you this pretty weathercock?

MISTRESS PAGE.
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my husband had him of. What
do you call your knight’s name, sirrah?

ROBIN.
Sir John Falstaff.

FORD.
Sir John Falstaff!

MISTRESS PAGE.
He, he; I can never hit on’s name. There is such a league between my
good man and he! Is your wife at home indeed?

FORD.
Indeed she is.

MISTRESS PAGE.
By your leave, sir, I am sick till I see her.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page and Robin._]

FORD
Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any thinking? Sure, they
sleep; he hath no use of them. Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty
mile as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve score. He pieces
out his wife’s inclination, he gives her folly motion and advantage.
And now she’s going to my wife, and Falstaff’s boy with her. A man may
hear this shower sing in the wind. And Falstaff’s boy with her! Good
plots they are laid, and our revolted wives share damnation together.
Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of
modesty from the so-seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a
secure and wilful Actaeon, and to these violent proceedings all my
neighbours shall cry aim. [_Clock strikes_.] The clock gives me my cue,
and my assurance bids me search. There I shall find Falstaff. I shall
be rather praised for this than mocked, for it is as positive as the
earth is firm that Falstaff is there. I will go.

Enter Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Sir Hugh Evans, Caius and Rugby.

SHALLOW, PAGE, etc.
Well met, Master Ford.

FORD.
Trust me, a good knot. I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all go
with me.

SHALLOW.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.

SLENDER.
And so must I, sir; we have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne, and I
would not break with her for more money than I’ll speak of.

SHALLOW.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and my cousin Slender,
and this day we shall have our answer.

SLENDER.
I hope I have your good will, father Page.

PAGE.
You have, Master Slender, I stand wholly for you.—But my wife, Master
doctor, is for you altogether.

CAIUS.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me! My nursh-a Quickly tell me so
mush.

HOST.
What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has eyes
of youth, he writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April and May.
He will carry ’t, he will carry ’t. ’Tis in his buttons he will carry
’t.

PAGE.
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is of no having. He
kept company with the wild Prince and Poins. He is of too high a
region, he knows too much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes
with the finger of my substance. If he take her, let him take her
simply. The wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes not
that way.

FORD.
I beseech you, heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner. Besides
your cheer, you shall have sport: I will show you a monster. Master
Doctor, you shall go; so shall you, Master Page, and you, Sir Hugh.

SHALLOW.
Well, fare you well. We shall have the freer wooing at Master Page’s.

[_Exeunt Shallow and Slender._]

CAIUS
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.

[_Exit Rugby._]

HOST
Farewell, my hearts. I will to my honest knight Falstaff, and drink
canary with him.

[_Exit Host._]

FORD
[_Aside_.] I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first with him; I’ll make
him dance.—Will you go, gentles?

ALL.
Have with you to see this monster.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.

MISTRESS FORD.
What, John! What, Robert!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket—

MISTRESS FORD.
I warrant.—What, Robin, I say!

Enter John and Robert with a great buck-basket.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, come, come.

MISTRESS FORD.
Here, set it down.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Give your men the charge; we must be brief.

MISTRESS FORD.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be ready here hard by in
the brew-house; and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and, without
any pause or staggering, take this basket on your shoulders. That done,
trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters in
Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames
side.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You will do it?

MISTRESS FORD.
I ha’ told them over and over, they lack no direction.—Be gone, and
come when you are called.

[_Exeunt John and Robert._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Here comes little Robin.

Enter Robin.

MISTRESS FORD.
How now, my eyas-musket, what news with you?

ROBIN.
My Master, Sir John, is come in at your back door, Mistress Ford, and
requests your company.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?

ROBIN.
Ay, I’ll be sworn. My master knows not of your being here, and hath
threatened to put me into everlasting liberty if I tell you of it; for
he swears he’ll turn me away.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Thou’rt a good boy, this secrecy of thine shall be a tailor to thee,
and shall make thee a new doublet and hose. I’ll go hide me.

MISTRESS FORD.
Do so.—Go tell thy master I am alone.

[_Exit Robin._]

Mistress Page, remember you your cue.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I warrant thee. If I do not act it, hiss me.

[_Exit Mistress Page._]

MISTRESS FORD.
Go to, then. We’ll use this unwholesome humidity, this gross watery
pumpion; we’ll teach him to know turtles from jays.

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
“Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?” Why, now let me die, for I
have lived long enough. This is the period of my ambition. O this
blessed hour!

MISTRESS FORD.
O, sweet Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate, Mistress Ford. Now shall I
sin in my wish: I would thy husband were dead. I’ll speak it before the
best lord: I would make thee my lady.

MISTRESS FORD.
I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful lady.

FALSTAFF.
Let the court of France show me such another. I see how thine eye would
emulate the diamond. Thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow that
becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian
admittance.

MISTRESS FORD.
A plain kerchief, Sir John. My brows become nothing else, nor that well
neither.

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so. Thou wouldst make an
absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of thy foot would give an
excellent motion to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale. I see what
thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend. Come, thou
canst not hide it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Believe me, there’s no such thing in me.

FALSTAFF.
What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee there’s something
extraordinary in thee. Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and
that, like a many of these lisping hawthorn buds that come like women
in men’s apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple-time. I cannot.
But I love thee, none but thee; and thou deservest it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Do not betray me, sir; I fear you love Mistress Page.

FALSTAFF.
Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the Counter gate, which is
as hateful to me as the reek of a lime-kiln.

MISTRESS FORD.
Well, heaven knows how I love you, and you shall one day find it.

FALSTAFF.
Keep in that mind, I’ll deserve it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could not be in that mind.

Enter Robin.

ROBIN.
Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford, here’s Mistress Page at the door,
sweating and blowing and looking wildly, and would needs speak with you
presently.

FALSTAFF.
She shall not see me; I will ensconce me behind the arras.

MISTRESS FORD.
Pray you, do so; she’s a very tattling woman.

[_Falstaff hides himself behind the arras._]

Enter Mistress Page.

What’s the matter? How now?

MISTRESS PAGE.
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You’re shamed, you’re overthrown,
you’re undone for ever!

MISTRESS FORD.
What’s the matter, good Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest man to your husband, to
give him such cause of suspicion!

MISTRESS FORD.
What cause of suspicion?

MISTRESS PAGE.
What cause of suspicion? Out upon you! How am I mistook in you!

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, alas, what’s the matter?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Your husband’s coming hither, woman, with all the officers in Windsor,
to search for a gentleman that he says is here now in the house, by
your consent, to take an ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.

MISTRESS FORD.
’Tis not so, I hope.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here! But ’tis most
certain your husband’s coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to
search for such a one. I come before to tell you. If you know yourself
clear, why, I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here, convey,
convey him out. Be not amazed, call all your senses to you; defend your
reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.

MISTRESS FORD.
What shall I do? There is a gentleman, my dear friend; and I fear not
mine own shame as much as his peril. I had rather than a thousand pound
he were out of the house.

MISTRESS PAGE.
For shame! Never stand “you had rather” and “you had rather”. Your
husband’s here at hand. Bethink you of some conveyance. In the house
you cannot hide him. O, how have you deceived me! Look, here is a
basket. If he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and
throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking. Or—it is
whiting-time—send him by your two men to Datchet Mead.

MISTRESS FORD.
He’s too big to go in there. What shall I do?

FALSTAFF.
[_Comes out of hiding_.] Let me see ’t, let me see ’t! O, let me see
’t! I’ll in, I’ll in. Follow your friend’s counsel. I’ll in.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What, Sir John Falstaff? Are these your letters, knight?

FALSTAFF.
I love thee, and none but thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.
I’ll never—

[_He goes into the basket; they cover him with dirty clothes._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Help to cover your master, boy.—Call your men, Mistress Ford.—You
dissembling knight!

[_Exit Robin._]

MISTRESS FORD.
What, John! Robert! John!

Enter John and Robert.

Go, take up these clothes here, quickly. Where’s the cowl-staff? Look
how you drumble! Carry them to the laundress in Datchet Mead; quickly,
come.

Enter Ford, Page, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD.
Pray you come near. If I suspect without cause, why then make sport at
me, then let me be your jest; I deserve it.—How now? Whither bear you
this?

JOHN and ROBERT.
To the laundress, forsooth.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You were best meddle
with buck-washing!

FORD.
Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck! Buck, buck, buck! Ay,
buck! I warrant you, buck, and of the season too, it shall appear.

[_Exeunt John and Robert with the basket._]

Gentlemen, I have dreamed tonight; I’ll tell you my dream. Here, here,
here be my keys. Ascend my chambers, search, seek, find out. I’ll
warrant we’ll unkennel the fox. Let me stop this way first. [_Locks the
door_.] So, now uncape.

PAGE.
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.

FORD.
True, Master Page.—Up, gentlemen, you shall see sport anon. Follow me,
gentlemen.

[_Exit Ford._]

EVANS
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.

CAIUS.
By gar, ’tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous in France.

PAGE.
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.

[_Exeunt Page, Evans and Caius._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Is there not a double excellency in this?

MISTRESS FORD.
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband is deceived, or Sir
John.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket!

MISTRESS FORD.
I am half afraid he will have need of washing, so throwing him into the
water will do him a benefit.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same strain were in the
same distress.

MISTRESS FORD.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of Falstaff’s being
here, for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have more tricks with
Falstaff. His dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine.

MISTRESS FORD.
Shall we send that foolish carrion Mistress Quickly to him, and excuse
his throwing into the water, and give him another hope, to betray him
to another punishment?

MISTRESS PAGE.
We will do it. Let him be sent for tomorrow eight o’clock to have
amends.

Enter Ford, Page, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD
I cannot find him. Maybe the knave bragged of that he could not
compass.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Aside to Mistress Ford_.] Heard you that?

MISTRESS FORD.
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?

FORD.
Ay, I do so.

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven make you better than your thoughts!

FORD.
Amen!

MISTRESS PAGE.
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.

FORD.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.

EVANS.
If there be anypody in the house, and in the chambers, and in the
coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive my sins at the day of
judgment!

CAIUS.
Be gar, nor I too; there is nobodies.

PAGE.
Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil
suggests this imagination? I would not ha’ your distemper in this kind
for the wealth of Windsor Castle.

FORD.
’Tis my fault, Master Page. I suffer for it.

EVANS.
You suffer for a pad conscience. Your wife is as honest a ’omans as I
will desires among five thousand, and five hundred too.

CAIUS.
By gar, I see ’tis an honest woman.

FORD.
Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in the park. I pray you
pardon me; I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this.
Come, wife, come, Mistress Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray heartily,
pardon me.

PAGE.
Let’s go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we’ll mock him. I do invite you
tomorrow morning to my house to breakfast; after, we’ll a-birding
together; I have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?

FORD.
Anything.

EVANS.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.

CAIUS.
If there be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.

FORD.
Pray you go, Master Page.

[_Exeunt all but Evans and Caius._]

EVANS.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy knave, mine host.

CAIUS.
Dat is good, by gar, with all my heart.

EVANS.
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Page’s house

Enter Fenton and Anne Page.

FENTON.
I see I cannot get thy father’s love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.

ANNE.
Alas, how then?

FENTON.
Why, thou must be thyself.
He doth object I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me:
My riots past, my wild societies—
And tells me ’tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.

ANNE.
Maybe he tells you true.

FENTON.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father’s wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee, Anne,
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags.
And ’tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at.

ANNE.
Gentle Master Fenton,
Yet seek my father’s love, still seek it, sir.
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why then—hark you hither.

[_They talk apart._]

Enter Shallow, Slender and Mistress Quickly.

SHALLOW.
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly. My kinsman shall speak for himself.

SLENDER.
I’ll make a shaft or a bolt on ’t. ’Slid, ’tis but venturing.

SHALLOW.
Be not dismayed.

SLENDER.
No, she shall not dismay me. I care not for that, but that I am afeard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word with you.

ANNE.
I come to him.
[_Aside_.] This is my father’s choice.
O, what a world of vile ill-favoured faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.

[_They talk aside._]

SHALLOW.
[_To Slender_.] She’s coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!

SLENDER.
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell you good jests of
him.—Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne the jest how my father stole
two geese out of a pen, good uncle.

SHALLOW.
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.

SLENDER.
Ay, that I do, as well as I love any woman in Gloucestershire.

SHALLOW.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.

SLENDER.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the degree of a squire.

SHALLOW.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.

ANNE.
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.

SHALLOW.
Marry, I thank you for it, I thank you for that good comfort.—She calls
you, coz; I’ll leave you.

ANNE.
Now, Master Slender.

SLENDER.
Now, good Mistress Anne.

ANNE.
What is your will?

SLENDER.
My will? ’Od’s heartlings, that’s a pretty jest indeed! I ne’er made my
will yet, I thank heaven. I am not such a sickly creature, I give
heaven praise.

ANNE.
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?

SLENDER.
Truly, for mine own part I would little or nothing with you. Your
father and my uncle hath made motions. If it be my luck, so; if not,
happy man be his dole. They can tell you how things go better than I
can. You may ask your father. Here he comes.

Enter Page and Mistress Page.

PAGE
Now, Master Slender.—Love him, daughter Anne.—
Why, how now? What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.

FENTON.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.

PAGE.
She is no match for you.

FENTON.
Sir, will you hear me?

PAGE.
No, good Master Fenton.—
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.—
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.

[_Exeunt Page, Shallow and Slender._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Speak to Mistress Page.

FENTON.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love
And not retire. Let me have your good will.

ANNE.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
That’s my master, Master Doctor.

ANNE.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i’ th’ earth,
And bowled to death with turnips.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, trouble not yourself, good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend, nor enemy.
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then, farewell, sir. She must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.

FENTON.
Farewell, gentle mistress. Farewell, Nan.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page and Anne._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
This is my doing now. “Nay,” said I, “will you cast away your child on
a fool, and a physician? Look on Master Fenton.” This is my doing.

FENTON.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once tonight
Give my sweet Nan this ring. There’s for thy pains.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Now Heaven send thee good fortune!

[_Exit Fenton._]

A kind heart he hath. A woman would run through fire and water for such
a kind heart. But yet I would my master had Mistress Anne, or I would
Master Slender had her; or, in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her. I
will do what I can for them all three, for so I have promised and I’ll
be as good as my word—but speciously for Master Fenton. Well, I must of
another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two mistresses. What a
beast am I to slack it!

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, I say!

Enter Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in ’t.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

Have I lived to be carried in a basket like a barrow of butcher’s
offal, and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if I be served such
another trick, I’ll have my brains ta’en out and buttered, and give
them to a dog for a New Year’s gift. ’Sblood, the rogues slighted me
into the river with as little remorse as they would have drowned a
blind bitch’s puppies, fifteen i’ the litter; and you may know by my
size that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as
deep as hell, I should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was
shelvy and shallow—a death that I abhor, for the water swells a man,
and what a thing should I have been when I had been swelled! I should
have been a mountain of mummy.

Enter Bardolph with sack.

BARDOLPH
Here’s Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.

FALSTAFF.
Come, let me pour in some sack to the Thames water, for my belly’s as
cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins. Call
her in.

BARDOLPH.
Come in, woman.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
By your leave, I cry you mercy. Give your worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF.
Take away these chalices. Go, brew me a pottle of sack finely.

BARDOLPH.
With eggs, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Simple of itself. I’ll no pullet sperm in my brewage.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

How now?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford? I have had ford enough. I was thrown into the ford, I
have my belly full of ford.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault. She does so take on
with her men; they mistook their erection.

FALSTAFF.
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman’s promise.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn your heart to see
it. Her husband goes this morning a-birding; she desires you once more
to come to her, between eight and nine. I must carry her word quickly.
She’ll make you amends, I warrant you.

FALSTAFF.
Well, I will visit her. Tell her so, and bid her think what a man is.
Let her consider his frailty, and then judge of my merit.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I will tell her.

FALSTAFF.
Do so. Between nine and ten, sayst thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Eight and nine, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Well, be gone. I will not miss her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Peace be with you, sir.

[_Exit Mistress Quickly._]

FALSTAFF.
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me word to stay within. I
like his money well. O, here he comes.

Enter Ford disguised.

FORD
God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Now, Master Brook, you come to know what hath passed between me and
Ford’s wife?

FORD.
That indeed, Sir John, is my business.

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will not lie to you. I was at her house the hour she
appointed me.

FORD.
And how sped you, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Very ill-favouredly, Master Brook.

FORD.
How so, sir? Did she change her determination?

FALSTAFF.
No. Master Brook, but the peaking cornuto her husband, Master Brook,
dwelling in a continual ’larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of
our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested, and, as it
were, spoke the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of
his companions, thither provoked and instigated by his distemper, and,
forsooth, to search his house for his wife’s love.

FORD.
What, while you were there?

FALSTAFF.
While I was there.

FORD.
And did he search for you, and could not find you?

FALSTAFF.
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mistress Page,
gives intelligence of Ford’s approach; and, in her invention and Ford’s
wife’s distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.

FORD.
A buck-basket!

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, a buck-basket! Rammed me in with foul shirts and smocks,
socks, foul stockings, greasy napkins, that, Master Brook, there was
the rankest compound of villainous smell that ever offended nostril.

FORD.
And how long lay you there?

FALSTAFF.
Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have suffered to bring this
woman to evil for your good. Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple
of Ford’s knaves, his hinds, were called forth by their mistress to
carry me in the name of foul clothes to Datchet Lane. They took me on
their shoulders, met the jealous knave their master in the door, who
asked them once or twice what they had in their basket. I quaked for
fear lest the lunatic knave would have searched it; but Fate, ordaining
he should be a cuckold, held his hand. Well, on went he for a search,
and away went I for foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master Brook. I
suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first, an intolerable
fright to be detected with a jealous rotten bell-wether; next, to be
compassed like a good bilbo in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in, like a strong
distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease.
Think of that, a man of my kidney, think of that—that am as subject to
heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw. It was a
miracle to ’scape suffocation. And in the height of this bath, when I
was more than half stewed in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be thrown
into the Thames and cooled, glowing hot, in that surge, like a
horseshoe! Think of that—hissing hot—think of that, Master Brook.

FORD.
In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my sake you have suffered all
this. My suit, then, is desperate. You’ll undertake her no more?

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames,
ere I will leave her thus. Her husband is this morning gone a-birding;
I have received from her another embassy of meeting. ’Twixt eight and
nine is the hour, Master Brook.

FORD.
’Tis past eight already, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment. Come to me at your
convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed; and the conclusion
shall be crowned with your enjoying her. Adieu. You shall have her,
Master Brook. Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

FORD
Hum! Ha! Is this a vision? Is this a dream? Do I sleep? Master Ford,
awake; awake, Master Ford! There’s a hole made in your best coat,
Master Ford. This ’tis to be married; this ’tis to have linen and
buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself what I am. I will now take
the lecher. He is at my house. He cannot scape me. ’Tis impossible he
should. He cannot creep into a half-penny purse, nor into a pepperbox.
But, lest the devil that guides him should aid him, I will search
impossible places. Though what I am I cannot avoid, yet to be what I
would not shall not make me tame. If I have horns to make one mad, let
the proverb go with me: I’ll be horn-mad.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The street


Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Quickly and William.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Is he at Master Ford’s already, think’st thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sure he is by this; or will be presently. But truly he is very
courageous mad about his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires
you to come suddenly.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I’ll be with her by and by. I’ll but bring my young man here to school.
Look where his master comes; ’tis a playing day, I see.

Enter Sir Hugh Evans.

How now, Sir Hugh, no school today?

EVANS.
No, Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Blessing of his heart!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his
book. I pray you ask him some questions in his accidence.

EVANS.
Come hither, William. Hold up your head, come.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come on, sirrah. Hold up your head. Answer your master, be not afraid.

EVANS.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?

WILLIAM.
Two.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Truly, I thought there had been one number more, because they say
“’Od’s nouns.”

EVANS.
Peace your tattlings! What is “fair,” William?

WILLIAM.
_Pulcher_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Polecats? There are fairer things than polecats, sure.

EVANS.
You are a very simplicity ’oman; I pray you, peace.—What is _lapis_,
William?

WILLIAM.
A stone.

EVANS.
And what is “a stone,” William?

WILLIAM.
A pebble.

EVANS.
No, it is _lapis_. I pray you remember in your prain.

WILLIAM.
_Lapis_.

EVANS.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that does lend articles?

WILLIAM.
Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus declined:
_singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc_.

EVANS.
_Nominativo, hig, haeg, hog_, pray you, mark: _genitivo, huius_. Well,
what is your accusative case?

WILLIAM.
_Accusativo, hinc_.

EVANS.
I pray you, have your remembrance, child. _Accusativo, hung, hang,
hog_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
“Hang-hog” is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.

EVANS.
Leave your prabbles, ’oman.—What is the focative case, William?

WILLIAM.
O—_vocativo_—O—

EVANS.
Remember, William; focative is _caret_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And that’s a good root.

EVANS.
’Oman, forbear.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Peace.

EVANS.
What is your genitive case plural, William?

WILLIAM.
Genitive case?

EVANS.
Ay.

WILLIAM.
Genitive: _horum, harum, horum_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Vengeance of Jenny’s case, fie on her! Never name her, child, if she be
a whore.

EVANS.
For shame, ’oman.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
You do ill to teach the child such words.—He teaches him to hick and to
hack, which they’ll do fast enough of themselves; and to call “whore
’m”!—Fie upon you!

EVANS.
’Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings for thy cases,
and the numbers of the genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures
as I would desires.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_To Quickly_.] Prithee, hold thy peace.

EVANS.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.

WILLIAM.
Forsooth, I have forgot.

EVANS.
It is _qui, quae, quod_. If you forget your _quis_, your _quaes_, and
your _quods_, you must be preeches. Go your ways and play, go.

MISTRESS PAGE.
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.

EVANS.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.

[_Exit Sir Hugh Evans._]

Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Falstaff and Mistress Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my sufferance. I see you are
obsequious in your love, and I profess requital to a hair’s breadth,
not only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the
accoutrement, compliment, and ceremony of it. But are you sure of your
husband now?

MISTRESS FORD.
He’s a-birding, sweet Sir John.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Within_.] What ho, gossip Ford, what ho!

MISTRESS FORD.
Step into the chamber, Sir John.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

Enter Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
How now, sweetheart, who’s at home besides yourself?

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, none but mine own people.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Indeed?

MISTRESS FORD.
No, certainly.
[_Aside to her_.] Speak louder.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again. He so takes on
yonder with my husband, so rails against all married mankind, so curses
all Eve’s daughters, of what complexion soever, and so buffets himself
on the forehead, crying “Peer out, peer out!” that any madness I ever
yet beheld seemed but tameness, civility, and patience, to this his
distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight is not here.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, does he talk of him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Of none but him, and swears he was carried out, the last time he
searched for him, in a basket; protests to my husband he is now here;
and hath drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport, to
make another experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is
not here. Now he shall see his own foolery.

MISTRESS FORD.
How near is he, Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hard by, at street end. He will be here anon.

MISTRESS FORD.
I am undone! The knight is here.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, then, you are utterly shamed, and he’s but a dead man. What a
woman are you! Away with him, away with him! Better shame than murder.

MISTRESS FORD.
Which way should he go? How should I bestow him? Shall I put him into
the basket again?

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
No, I’ll come no more i’ the basket. May I not go out ere he come?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas, three of Master Ford’s brothers watch the door with pistols, that
none shall issue out, otherwise you might slip away ere he came. But
what make you here?

FALSTAFF.
What shall I do? I’ll creep up into the chimney.

MISTRESS FORD.
There they always use to discharge their birding-pieces.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Creep into the kiln-hole.

FALSTAFF.
Where is it?

MISTRESS FORD.
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press, coffer, chest, trunk,
well, vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such
places, and goes to them by his note. There is no hiding you in the
house.

FALSTAFF.
I’ll go out then.

MISTRESS PAGE.
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir John—unless you go
out disguised.

MISTRESS FORD.
How might we disguise him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas the day, I know not. There is no woman’s gown big enough for him;
otherwise he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so
escape.

FALSTAFF.
Good hearts, devise something. Any extremity rather than a mischief.

MISTRESS FORD.
My maid’s aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a gown above.

MISTRESS PAGE.
On my word, it will serve him. She’s as big as he is. And there’s her
thrummed hat, and her muffler too.—Run up, Sir John.

MISTRESS FORD.
Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page and I will look some linen for
your head.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Quick, quick! We’ll come dress you straight; put on the gown the while.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

MISTRESS FORD.
I would my husband would meet him in this shape. He cannot abide the
old woman of Brentford; he swears she’s a witch, forbade her my house,
and hath threatened to beat her.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Heaven guide him to thy husband’s cudgel and the devil guide his cudgel
afterwards!

MISTRESS FORD.
But is my husband coming?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Ay, in good sadness is he, and talks of the basket too, howsoever he
hath had intelligence.

MISTRESS FORD.
We’ll try that; for I’ll appoint my men to carry the basket again, to
meet him at the door with it as they did last time.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, but he’ll be here presently. Let’s go dress him like the witch of
Brentford.

MISTRESS FORD.
I’ll first direct my men what they shall do with the basket. Go up,
I’ll bring linen for him straight.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang him, dishonest varlet! We cannot misuse him enough.
We’ll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
’Tis old but true: “Still swine eats all the draff.”

[_Exit._]

Enter Mistress Ford with John and Robert.

MISTRESS FORD.
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders. Your master is hard
at door; if he bid you set it down, obey him. Quickly, dispatch.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

JOHN.
Come, come, take it up.

ROBERT.
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.

JOHN.
I hope not, I had lief as bear so much lead.

Enter Ford, Page, Shallow, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any way then to unfool
me again?—Set down the basket, villain! Somebody call my wife. Youth in
a basket! O you panderly rascals! There’s a knot, a gin, a pack, a
conspiracy against me. Now shall the devil be shamed.—What, wife, I
say! Come, come forth! Behold what honest clothes you send forth to
bleaching!

PAGE.
Why, this passes, Master Ford! You are not to go loose any longer; you
must be pinioned.

EVANS.
Why, this is lunatics, this is mad as a mad dog.

SHALLOW.
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.

FORD.
So say I too, sir.

Enter Mistress Ford.

Come hither, Mistress Ford—Mistress Ford, the honest woman, the modest
wife, the virtuous creature, that hath the jealous fool to her husband!
I suspect without cause, mistress, do I?

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.

FORD.
Well said, brazen-face, hold it out.—Come forth, sirrah.

[_Pulls clothes out of the basket._]

PAGE.
This passes.

MISTRESS FORD.
Are you not ashamed? Let the clothes alone.

FORD.
I shall find you anon.

EVANS.
’Tis unreasonable. Will you take up your wife’s clothes? Come, away.

FORD.
Empty the basket, I say.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, man, why?

FORD.
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed out of my house
yesterday in this basket. Why may not he be there again? In my house I
am sure he is. My intelligence is true, my jealousy is
reasonable.—Pluck me out all the linen.

MISTRESS FORD.
If you find a man there, he shall die a flea’s death.

PAGE.
Here’s no man.

SHALLOW.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford, this wrongs you.

EVANS.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your own
heart. This is jealousies.

FORD.
Well, he’s not here I seek for.

PAGE.
No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.

FORD
Help to search my house this one time. If I find not what I seek, show
no colour for my extremity, let me for ever be your table-sport. Let
them say of me “As jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow walnut for
his wife’s leman.” Satisfy me once more, once more search with me.

[_Exeunt John and Robert with the basket._]

MISTRESS FORD.
What, ho, Mistress Page! Come you and the old woman down; my husband
will come into the chamber.

FORD.
Old woman? What old woman’s that?

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, it is my maid’s aunt of Brentford.

FORD.
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not forbid her my
house? She comes of errands, does she? We are simple men; we do not
know what’s brought to pass under the profession of fortune-telling.
She works by charms, by spells, by the figure, and such daubery as this
is, beyond our element. We know nothing.—Come down, you witch, you hag,
you! Come down, I say!

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, good sweet husband!—Good gentlemen, let him not strike the old
woman.

Enter Falstaff disguised as an old woman, led by Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, Mother Prat; come, give me your hand.

FORD.
I’ll prat her. [_Beats him_.] Out of my door, you witch, you rag, you
baggage, you polecat, you runnion! Out, out! I’ll conjure you, I’ll
fortune-tell you.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the poor woman.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, he will do it. ’Tis a goodly credit for you.

FORD.
Hang her, witch!

EVANS.
By yea and no, I think the ’oman is a witch indeed. I like not when a
’oman has a great peard. I spy a great peard under her muffler.

FORD.
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you follow, see but the issue of
my jealousy. If I cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when I
open again.

PAGE.
Let’s obey his humour a little further. Come, gentlemen.

[_Exeunt Ford, Page, Caius, Evans and Shallow._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, by th’ mass, that he did not; he beat him most unpitifully,
methought.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I’ll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o’er the altar. It hath done
meritorious service.

MISTRESS FORD.
What think you? May we, with the warrant of womanhood and the witness
of a good conscience, pursue him with any further revenge?

MISTRESS PAGE.
The spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him. If the devil have
him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, I think,
in the way of waste, attempt us again.

MISTRESS FORD.
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Yes, by all means, if it be but to scrape the figures out of your
husband’s brains. If they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous
fat knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be the
ministers.

MISTRESS FORD.
I’ll warrant they’ll have him publicly shamed, and methinks there would
be no period to the jest should he not be publicly shamed.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, to the forge with it, then shape it. I would not have things
cool.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Host and Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your horses. The Duke himself
will be tomorrow at court, and they are going to meet him.

HOST.
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the
court. Let me speak with the gentlemen. They speak English?

BARDOLPH.
Ay, sir. I’ll call them to you.

HOST.
They shall have my horses, but I’ll make them pay, I’ll sauce them.
They have had my house a week at command; I have turned away my other
guests. They must come off, I’ll sauce them. Come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Page, Ford, Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Sir Hugh Evans.

EVANS.
’Tis one of the best discretions of a ’oman as ever I did look upon.

PAGE.
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Within a quarter of an hour.

FORD.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth, do what thou wilt.
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honour stand,
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.

PAGE.
’Tis well, ’tis well, no more.
Be not as extreme in submission as in offence.
But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.

FORD.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.

PAGE.
How? To send him word they’ll meet him in the park at midnight? Fie,
fie, he’ll never come.

EVANS.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers, and has been grievously
peaten as an old ’oman. Methinks there should be terrors in him, that
he should not come. Methinks his flesh is punished; he shall have no
desires.

PAGE.
So think I too.

MISTRESS FORD.
Devise but how you’ll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.

MISTRESS PAGE.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the winter time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliver to our age,
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.

PAGE.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne’s oak.
But what of this?

MISTRESS FORD.
Marry, this is our device,
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
Disguised like Herne, with huge horns on his head.

PAGE.
Well, let it not be doubted but he’ll come,
And in this shape; when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

MISTRESS PAGE.
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we’ll dress
Like urchins, oafs and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands. Upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song; upon their sight
We two in great amazedness will fly.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.

MISTRESS FORD.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.

MISTRESS PAGE.
The truth being known,
We’ll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.

FORD.
The children must
Be practised well to this, or they’ll ne’er do ’t.

EVANS.
I will teach the children their behaviours, and I will be like a
jackanapes also, to burn the knight with my taber.

FORD.
That will be excellent. I’ll go buy them vizards.

MISTRESS PAGE.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.

PAGE.
That silk will I go buy.
[_Aside_.] And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away,
And marry her at Eton.—Go, send to Falstaff straight.

FORD.
Nay, I’ll to him again in name of Brook.
He’ll tell me all his purpose. Sure, he’ll come.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Fear not you that. Go, get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.

EVANS.
Let us about it. It is admirable pleasures and fery honest knaveries.

[_Exeunt Page, Ford and Evans._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Go, Mistress Ford.
Send quickly to Sir John to know his mind.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

I’ll to the Doctor. He hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot,
And he my husband best of all affects.
The Doctor is well moneyed, and his friends
Potent at court. He, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Host and Simple.

HOST.
What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thick-skin? Speak, breathe,
discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.

SIMPLE.
Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from Master Slender.

HOST.
There’s his chamber, his house, his castle, his standing-bed and
truckle-bed. ’Tis painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh
and new. Go, knock and call. He’ll speak like an Anthropophaginian unto
thee. Knock, I say.

SIMPLE.
There’s an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his chamber. I’ll be so
bold as stay, sir, till she come down. I come to speak with her,
indeed.

HOST.
Ha? A fat woman? The knight may be robbed. I’ll call.—Bully knight!
Bully Sir John! Speak from thy lungs military. Art thou there? It is
thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.

FALSTAFF.
[_Above_.] How now, mine host?

HOST.
Here’s a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of thy fat woman. Let
her descend, bully, let her descend. My chambers are honourable. Fie!
Privacy? Fie!

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with me, but she’s
gone.

SIMPLE.
Pray you, sir, was’t not the wise woman of Brentford?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, marry was it, mussel-shell. What would you with her?

SIMPLE.
My master, sir, my Master Slender, sent to her, seeing her go through
the streets, to know, sir, whether one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a
chain, had the chain or no.

FALSTAFF.
I spake with the old woman about it.

SIMPLE.
And what says she, I pray, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Marry, she says that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of
his chain cozened him of it.

SIMPLE.
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself. I had other things
to have spoken with her too, from him.

FALSTAFF.
What are they? Let us know.

HOST.
Ay, come. Quick.

SIMPLE.
I may not conceal them, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Conceal them, or thou diest.

SIMPLE.
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it
were my master’s fortune to have her or no.

FALSTAFF.
’Tis, ’tis his fortune.

SIMPLE.
What sir?

FALSTAFF.
To have her, or no. Go, say the woman told me so.

SIMPLE.
May I be bold to say so, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, sir; like who more bold?

SIMPLE.
I thank your worship; I shall make my master glad with these tidings.

[_Exit Simple._]

HOST
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was there a wise woman
with thee?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath taught me more wit than
ever I learned before in my life; and I paid nothing for it neither,
but was paid for my learning.

Enter Bardolph.

BARDOLPH
Out, alas, sir, cozenage, mere cozenage!

HOST.
Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.

BARDOLPH.
Run away, with the cozeners. For so soon as I came beyond Eton, they
threw me off from behind one of them, in a slough of mire, and set
spurs and away, like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.

HOST.
They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain, do not say they be fled.
Germans are honest men.

Enter Sir Hugh Evans.

EVANS
Where is mine host?

HOST.
What is the matter, sir?

EVANS.
Have a care of your entertainments. There is a friend of mine come to
town tells me there is three cozen-Germans that has cozened all the
hosts of Readings, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and money. I
tell you for good will, look you. You are wise, and full of gibes and
vlouting-stocks, and ’tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare
you well.

[_Exit Evans._]

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS.
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?

HOST.
Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.

CAIUS.
I cannot tell vat is dat, but it is tell-a me dat you make grand
preparation for a Duke de Jamany. By my trot, dere is no duke that the
court is know to come. I tell you for good will. Adieu.

[_Exit Doctor Caius._]

HOST
Hue and cry, villain, go!—Assist me, knight, I am undone.—Fly, run, hue
and cry, villain, I am undone!

[_Exeunt Host and Bardolph._]

FALSTAFF.
I would all the world might be cozened, for I have been cozened and
beaten too. If it should come to the ear of the court how I have been
transformed, and how my transformation hath been washed and cudgelled,
they would melt me out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor fishermen’s
boots with me. I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits till I
were as crestfallen as a dried pear. I never prospered since I forswore
myself at primero. Well, if my wind were but long enough, I would
repent.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

Now, whence come you?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
From the two parties, forsooth.

FALSTAFF.
The devil take one party and his dam the other, and so they shall be
both bestowed. I have suffered more for their sakes, more than the
villainous inconstancy of man’s disposition is able to bear.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant, speciously one of them.
Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you cannot
see a white spot about her.

FALSTAFF.
What tellst thou me of black and blue? I was beaten myself into all the
colours of the rainbow, and was like to be apprehended for the witch of
Brentford. But that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting
the action of an old woman, delivered me, the knave constable had set
me i’ the stocks, i’ the common stocks, for a witch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber, you shall hear how things
go, and, I warrant, to your content. Here is a letter will say
somewhat. Good hearts, what ado here is to bring you together! Sure,
one of you does not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.

FALSTAFF.
Come up into my chamber.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another room in the Garter Inn

Enter Fenton and Host.

HOST.
Master Fenton, talk not to me. My mind is heavy. I will give over all.

FENTON.
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I’ll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.

HOST.
I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will, at the least, keep your
counsel.

FENTON.
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath answered my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish. I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at,
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
That neither singly can be manifested
Without the show of both, wherein fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene; the image of the jest
I’ll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host:
Tonight at Herne’s oak, just ’twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen—
The purpose why is here—in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry. She hath consented. Now, sir,
Her mother, even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the dean’ry, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her. To this her mother’s plot
She, seemingly obedient, likewise hath
Made promise to the doctor. Now thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him. Her mother hath intended
The better to denote her to the doctor,
For they must all be masked and vizarded—
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribbons pendant flaring ’bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token
The maid hath given consent to go with him.

HOST.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?

FENTON.
Both, my good host, to go along with me.
And here it rests, that you’ll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church, ’twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.

HOST.
Well, husband your device; I’ll to the vicar.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.

FENTON.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I’ll make a present recompense.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A room in the Garter Inn


Enter Falstaff and Mistress Quickly.

FALSTAFF.
Prithee, no more prattling. Go. I’ll hold. This is the third time; I
hope good luck lies in odd numbers. Away, go! They say there is
divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I’ll provide you a chain, and I’ll do what I can to get you a pair of
horns.

FALSTAFF.
Away, I say; time wears. Hold up your head, and mince.

[_Exit Mistress Quickly._]

Enter Ford.

How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter will be known tonight
or never. Be you in the park about midnight, at Herne’s oak, and you
shall see wonders.

FORD.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me you had appointed?

FALSTAFF.
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor old man, but I
came from her, Master Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave
Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master
Brook, that ever governed frenzy. I will tell you he beat me
grievously, in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master
Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver’s beam, because I know also
life is a shuttle. I am in haste. Go along with me; I’ll tell you all,
Master Brook. Since I plucked geese, played truant, and whipped top, I
knew not what ’twas to be beaten till lately. Follow me, I’ll tell you
strange things of this knave Ford, on whom tonight I will be revenged,
and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow. Strange things in
hand, Master Brook! Follow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Windsor Park

Enter Page, Shallow and Slender.

PAGE.
Come, come. We’ll couch i’ the castle ditch till we see the light of
our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter—

SLENDER.
Ay, forsooth. I have spoke with her, and we have a nay-word how to know
one another. I come to her in white and cry “mum”; she cries “budget”;
and by that we know one another.

SHALLOW.
That’s good too. But what needs either your “mum” or her “budget”? The
white will decipher her well enough. It hath struck ten o’clock.

PAGE.
The night is dark. Light and spirits will become it well. Heaven
prosper our sport! No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know
him by his horns. Let’s away; follow me.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The street in Windsor

Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Doctor Caius.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Master Doctor, my daughter is in green. When you see your time, take
her by the hand, away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly.
Go before into the park. We two must go together.

CAIUS.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Fare you well, sir.

[_Exit Caius._]

My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
chafe at the doctor’s marrying my daughter. But ’tis no matter. Better
a little chiding than a great deal of heartbreak.

MISTRESS FORD.
Where is Nan now, and her troop of fairies, and the Welsh devil Hugh?

MISTRESS PAGE.
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne’s oak, with obscured
lights, which, at the very instant of Falstaff’s and our meeting, they
will at once display to the night.

MISTRESS FORD.
That cannot choose but amaze him.

MISTRESS PAGE.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; if he be amazed, he will every
way be mocked.

MISTRESS FORD.
We’ll betray him finely.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
Those that betray them do no treachery.

MISTRESS FORD.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Windsor Park

Enter Sir Hugh Evans disguised, and children as Fairies.

EVANS.
Trib, trib, fairies. Come, and remember your parts. Be pold, I pray
you, follow me into the pit, and when I give the watch-’ords, do as I
pid you. Come, come; trib, trib.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Park

Enter Falstaff wearing a buck’s head.

FALSTAFF.
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve, the minute draws on. Now the
hot-blooded gods assist me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy
Europa; love set on thy horns. O powerful love, that in some respects,
makes a beast a man, in some other a man a beast! You were also,
Jupiter, a swan for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love, how near the
god drew to the complexion of a goose! A fault done first in the form
of a beast; O Jove, a beastly fault! And then another fault in the
semblance of a fowl; think on’t, Jove, a foul fault! When gods have hot
backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor stag, and
the fattest, I think, i’ the forest. Send me a cool rut-time, Jove, or
who can blame me to piss my tallow? Who comes here? My doe?

Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.

MISTRESS FORD.
Sir John? Art thou there, my deer, my male deer?

FALSTAFF.
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain potatoes, let it thunder
to the tune of “Greensleeves”, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes;
let there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.

[_He embraces her._]

MISTRESS FORD.
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.

FALSTAFF.
Divide me like a bribed buck, each a haunch. I will keep my sides to
myself, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk, and my horns I
bequeath your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the
hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution.
As I am a true spirit, welcome!

[_A noise of horns within._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas, what noise?

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven forgive our sins!

FALSTAFF.
What should this be?

MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE.
Away, away!

[_They run off._]

FALSTAFF.
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the oil that’s in me
should set hell on fire; he would never else cross me thus.

Enter Mistress Quickly as the Queen of Fairies, Sir Hugh Evans as a
Satyr, Pistol as Hobgoblin, Anne Page and children as Fairies, carrying
tapers.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.

PISTOL.
Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys!
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap,
Where fires thou find’st unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry.
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.

FALSTAFF.
They are fairies, he that speaks to them shall die.
I’ll wink and couch. No man their works must eye.

[_Lies down upon his face._]

EVANS
Where’s Bead? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Rein up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy.
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
About, about!
Search Windsor castle, elves, within and out.
Strew good luck, oafs, on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom
In state as wholesome as in state ’tis fit,
Worthy the owner and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower.
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter’s compass, in a ring.
Th’ expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And _Honi soit qui mal y pense_ write
In em’rald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white,
Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood’s bending knee.
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away, disperse! But till ’tis one o’clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter let us not forget.

EVANS.
Pray you, lock hand in hand, yourselves in order set;
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth.

FALSTAFF.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he transform me to a
piece of cheese!

PISTOL.
Vile worm, thou wast o’erlooked even in thy birth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end.
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

PISTOL.
A trial, come.

EVANS.
Come, will this wood take fire?

[_They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts._]

FALSTAFF.
O, o, o!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies, sing a scornful rhyme,
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

SONG.
Fie on sinful fantasy!
Fie on lust and luxury!
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him and burn him and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.

[_During the song they pinch him, and Doctor Caius comes one way and
steals away a boy in green; and Slender another way takes a boy in
white; Fenton comes in and steals away Anne Page. A noise of hunting is
heard within and all the fairies run away. Falstaff pulls off his
buck’s head, and rises up._]

Enter Page, Ford, Mistress Page and Mistress Ford.

PAGE.
Nay, do not fly. I think we have watched you now.
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?

MISTRESS PAGE.
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.—
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband?

[_She points to the horns._]

Do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?

FORD.
Now, sir, who’s a cuckold now? Master Brook, Falstaff’s a knave, a
cuckoldly knave. Here are his horns, Master Brook. And, Master Brook,
he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford’s but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and
twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Master Brook. His horses
are arrested for it, Master Brook.

MISTRESS FORD.
Sir John, we have had ill luck, we could never meet. I will never take
you for my love again, but I will always count you my deer.

FALSTAFF.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.

FORD.
Ay, and an ox too. Both the proofs are extant.

FALSTAFF.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four times in the thought
they were not fairies; and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden
surprise of my powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into a
received belief, in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that
they were fairies. See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent when ’tis
upon ill employment!

EVANS.
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and fairies will
not pinse you.

FORD.
Well said, fairy Hugh.

EVANS.
And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.

FORD.
I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able to woo her in
good English.

FALSTAFF.
Have I laid my brain in the sun, and dried it, that it wants matter to
prevent so gross o’erreaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat
too? Shall I have a cox-comb of frieze? ’Tis time I were choked with a
piece of toasted cheese.

EVANS.
Seese is not good to give putter. Your belly is all putter.

FALSTAFF.
“Seese” and “putter”? Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that
makes fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and
late-walking through the realm.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, Sir John, do you think, though we would have thrust virtue out of
our hearts by the head and shoulders, and have given ourselves without
scruple to hell, that ever the devil could have made you our delight?

FORD.
What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?

MISTRESS PAGE.
A puffed man?

PAGE.
Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?

FORD.
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?

PAGE.
And as poor as Job?

FORD.
And as wicked as his wife?

EVANS.
And given to fornications, and to taverns, and sack, and wine, and
metheglins, and to drinkings and swearings and starings, pribbles and
prabbles?

FALSTAFF.
Well, I am your theme. You have the start of me. I am dejected, I am
not able to answer the Welsh flannel. Ignorance itself is a plummet
o’er me. Use me as you will.

FORD.
Marry, sir, we’ll bring you to Windsor to one Master Brook, that you
have cozened of money, to whom you should have been a pander. Over and
above that you have suffered, I think to repay that money will be a
biting affliction.

PAGE.
Yet be cheerful, knight. Thou shalt eat a posset tonight at my house,
where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee.
Tell her Master Slender hath married her daughter.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Aside_.] Doctors doubt that. If Anne Page be my daughter, she is, by
this, Doctor Caius’ wife.

Enter Slender.

SLENDER
Whoa, ho, ho, father Page!

PAGE.
Son, how now! How now, son, have you dispatched?

SLENDER.
Dispatched? I’ll make the best in Gloucestershire know on’t. Would I
were hanged, la, else!

PAGE.
Of what, son?

SLENDER.
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she’s a great
lubberly boy. If it had not been i’ the church, I would have swinged
him, or he should have swinged me. If I did not think it had been Anne
Page, would I might never stir! And ’tis a postmaster’s boy.

PAGE.
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.

SLENDER.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a boy for a girl.
If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman’s apparel, I
would not have had him.

PAGE.
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how you should know my
daughter by her garments?

SLENDER.
I went to her in white and cried “mum”, and she cried “budget”, as Anne
and I had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a postmaster’s boy.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Good George, be not angry. I knew of your purpose, turned my daughter
into green, and indeed she is now with the doctor at the deanery, and
there married.

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened, I ha’ married _un garçon_,
a boy; _un paysan_, by gar, a boy. It is not Anne Page. By gar, I am
cozened.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, did you take her in green?

CAIUS.
Ay, by gar, and ’tis a boy. By gar, I’ll raise all Windsor.

FORD
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?

Enter Fenton and Anne Page.

PAGE.
My heart misgives me. Here comes Master Fenton.—How now, Master Fenton!

ANNE.
Pardon, good father. Good my mother, pardon.

PAGE.
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?

FENTON.
You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
Th’ offence is holy that she hath committed,
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.

FORD.
Stand not amazed, here is no remedy.
In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state.
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.

FALSTAFF.
I am glad, though you have ta’en a special stand to strike at me, that
your arrow hath glanced.

PAGE.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschewed must be embraced.

FALSTAFF.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Well, I will muse no further.—Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o’er by a country fire,
Sir John and all.

FORD.
Let it be so, Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word,
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.

[_Exeunt._]




A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM




Contents

ACT I
Scene I.
Athens. A room in the Palace of Theseus
Scene II.
The Same. A Room in a Cottage

ACT II
Scene I.
A wood near Athens
Scene II.
Another part of the wood

ACT III
Scene I.
The Wood.
Scene II.
Another part of the wood

ACT IV
Scene I.
The Wood
Scene II.
Athens. A Room in Quince’s House

ACT V
Scene I.
Athens. An Apartment in the Palace of Theseus




Dramatis Personæ


THESEUS, Duke of Athens
HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
EGEUS, Father to Hermia
HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander
HELENA, in love with Demetrius
LYSANDER, in love with Hermia
DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia
PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus

QUINCE, the Carpenter
SNUG, the Joiner
BOTTOM, the Weaver
FLUTE, the Bellows-mender
SNOUT, the Tinker
STARVELING, the Tailor

OBERON, King of the Fairies
TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW, a Fairy
PEASEBLOSSOM, Fairy
COBWEB, Fairy
MOTH, Fairy
MUSTARDSEED, Fairy

PYRAMUS, THISBE, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION; Characters in the Interlude
performed by the Clowns

Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta

SCENE: Athens, and a wood not far from it




ACT I

SCENE I. Athens. A room in the Palace of Theseus


 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate and Attendants.

THESEUS.
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
Another moon; but oh, methinks, how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
Long withering out a young man’s revenue.

HIPPOLYTA.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.

THESEUS.
Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.

 [_Exit Philostrate._]

Hippolyta, I woo’d thee with my sword,
And won thy love doing thee injuries;
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.

 Enter Egeus, Hermia, Lysander and Demetrius.

EGEUS.
Happy be Theseus, our renownèd Duke!

THESEUS.
Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?

EGEUS.
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.
Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,
This man hath bewitch’d the bosom of my child.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
And interchang’d love-tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
With feigning voice, verses of feigning love;
And stol’n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats (messengers
Of strong prevailment in unharden’d youth)
With cunning hast thou filch’d my daughter’s heart,
Turn’d her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
Be it so she will not here before your grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine I may dispose of her;
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.

THESEUS.
What say you, Hermia? Be advis’d, fair maid.
To you your father should be as a god;
One that compos’d your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

HERMIA.
So is Lysander.

THESEUS.
In himself he is.
But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,
The other must be held the worthier.

HERMIA.
I would my father look’d but with my eyes.

THESEUS.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

HERMIA.
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts:
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

THESEUS.
Either to die the death, or to abjure
For ever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice,
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mew’d,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distill’d
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.

HERMIA.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his lordship, whose unwishèd yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

THESEUS.
Take time to pause; and by the next new moon
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship,
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father’s will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana’s altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.

DEMETRIUS.
Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazèd title to my certain right.

LYSANDER.
You have her father’s love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.

EGEUS.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him;
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.

LYSANDER.
I am, my lord, as well deriv’d as he,
As well possess’d; my love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly rank’d,
If not with vantage, as Demetrius’;
And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
I am belov’d of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.

THESEUS.
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being over-full of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.—But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.—
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father’s will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death, or to a vow of single life.
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?
Demetrius and Egeus, go along;
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial, and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

EGEUS.
With duty and desire we follow you.

 [_Exeunt all but Lysander and Hermia._]

LYSANDER.
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?

HERMIA.
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

LYSANDER.
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood—

HERMIA.
O cross! Too high to be enthrall’d to low.

LYSANDER.
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—

HERMIA.
O spite! Too old to be engag’d to young.

LYSANDER.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—

HERMIA.
O hell! to choose love by another’s eyes!

LYSANDER.
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say, ‘Behold!’
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
So quick bright things come to confusion.

HERMIA.
If then true lovers have ever cross’d,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience,
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.

LYSANDER.
A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night;
And in the wood, a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.

HERMIA.
My good Lysander!
I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus’ doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burn’d the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.

LYSANDER.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

 Enter Helena.

HERMIA.
God speed fair Helena! Whither away?

HELENA.
Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue’s sweet air
More tuneable than lark to shepherd’s ear,
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O were favour so,
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I’d give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look, and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius’ heart!

HERMIA.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

HELENA.
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!

HERMIA.
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

HELENA.
O that my prayers could such affection move!

HERMIA.
The more I hate, the more he follows me.

HELENA.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.

HERMIA.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.

HELENA.
None but your beauty; would that fault were mine!

HERMIA.
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see,
Seem’d Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
That he hath turn’d a heaven into hell!

LYSANDER.
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the watery glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers’ flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens’ gates have we devis’d to steal.

HERMIA.
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet,
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers’ food, till morrow deep midnight.

LYSANDER.
I will, my Hermia.

 [_Exit Hermia._]

Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!

 [_Exit Lysander._]

HELENA.
How happy some o’er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He will not know what all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath love’s mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is love said to be a child,
Because in choice he is so oft beguil’d.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjur’d everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius look’d on Hermia’s eyne,
He hail’d down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolv’d, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her; and for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.

 [_Exit Helena._]


SCENE II. The Same. A Room in a Cottage

 Enter Quince, Snug, Bottom, Flute, Snout  and Starveling.

QUINCE.
Is all our company here?

BOTTOM.
You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the
scrip.

QUINCE.
Here is the scroll of every man’s name, which is thought fit through
all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke and Duchess, on
his wedding-day at night.

BOTTOM.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then read the
names of the actors; and so grow to a point.

QUINCE.
Marry, our play is _The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of
Pyramus and Thisbe_.

BOTTOM.
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter
Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters, spread
yourselves.

QUINCE.
Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

BOTTOM.
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.

QUINCE.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

BOTTOM.
What is Pyramus—a lover, or a tyrant?

QUINCE.
A lover, that kills himself most gallantly for love.

BOTTOM.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let
the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in
some measure. To the rest—yet my chief humour is for a tyrant. I could
play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split.

    The raging rocks
    And shivering shocks
    Shall break the locks
           Of prison gates,
    And Phibbus’ car
    Shall shine from far,
    And make and mar
           The foolish Fates.

This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles’ vein,
a tyrant’s vein; a lover is more condoling.

QUINCE.
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

FLUTE.
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.

FLUTE.
What is Thisbe? A wandering knight?

QUINCE.
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

FLUTE.
Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a beard coming.

QUINCE.
That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small
as you will.

BOTTOM.
And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. I’ll speak in a
monstrous little voice; ‘Thisne, Thisne!’—‘Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear!
thy Thisbe dear! and lady dear!’

QUINCE.
No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisbe.

BOTTOM.
Well, proceed.

QUINCE.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.

STARVELING.
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.

SNOUT
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
You, Pyramus’ father; myself, Thisbe’s father;
Snug, the joiner, you, the lion’s part. And, I hope here is a play
fitted.

SNUG
Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I
am slow of study.

QUINCE.
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.

BOTTOM.
Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any man’s heart
good to hear me. I will roar that I will make the Duke say ‘Let him
roar again, let him roar again.’

QUINCE.
If you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the
ladies, that they would shriek; and that were enough to hang us all.

ALL
That would hang us every mother’s son.

BOTTOM.
I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their
wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will
aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove; I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.

QUINCE.
You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man; a
proper man as one shall see in a summer’s day; a most lovely
gentleman-like man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.

BOTTOM.
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?

QUINCE.
Why, what you will.

BOTTOM.
I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.

QUINCE.
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play
bare-faced. But, masters, here are your parts, and I am to entreat you,
request you, and desire you, to con them by tomorrow night; and meet me
in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight; there will
we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall be dogg’d with
company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of
properties, such as our play wants. I pray you fail me not.

BOTTOM.
We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and
courageously. Take pains, be perfect; adieu.

QUINCE.
At the Duke’s oak we meet.

BOTTOM.
Enough. Hold, or cut bow-strings.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A wood near Athens


 Enter a Fairy at one door, and Puck at another.

PUCK.
How now, spirit! Whither wander you?

FAIRY
    Over hill, over dale,
        Thorough bush, thorough brier,
    Over park, over pale,
        Thorough flood, thorough fire,
    I do wander everywhere,
    Swifter than the moon’s sphere;
    And I serve the Fairy Queen,
    To dew her orbs upon the green.
    The cowslips tall her pensioners be,
    In their gold coats spots you see;
    Those be rubies, fairy favours,
    In those freckles live their savours.
I must go seek some dew-drops here,
And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I’ll be gone.
Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.

PUCK.
The King doth keep his revels here tonight;
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy, stol’n from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild:
But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square; that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there.

FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Call’d Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?

PUCK.
Thou speak’st aright;
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile,
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And ‘tailor’ cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.

FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

 Enter Oberon at one door, with his Train, and Titania at another, with
 hers.

OBERON.
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

TITANIA.
What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
I have forsworn his bed and company.

OBERON.
Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?

TITANIA.
Then I must be thy lady; but I know
When thou hast stol’n away from fairyland,
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskin’d mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded; and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?

OBERON.
How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
From Perigenia, whom he ravished?
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?

TITANIA.
These are the forgeries of jealousy:
And never, since the middle summer’s spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook,
Or on the beachèd margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb’d our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge, have suck’d up from the sea
Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretch’d his yoke in vain,
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attain’d a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drownèd field,
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
The nine-men’s-morris is fill’d up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blest.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
By their increase, now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.

OBERON.
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.

TITANIA.
Set your heart at rest;
The fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot’ress of my order,
And in the spicèd Indian air, by night,
Full often hath she gossip’d by my side;
And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands,
Marking th’ embarkèd traders on the flood,
When we have laugh’d to see the sails conceive,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire),
Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.

OBERON.
How long within this wood intend you stay?

TITANIA.
Perchance till after Theseus’ wedding-day.
If you will patiently dance in our round,
And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

OBERON.
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.

TITANIA.
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.

 [_Exit Titania with her Train._]

OBERON.
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.—
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb’rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory,
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid’s music.

PUCK.
I remember.

OBERON.
That very time I saw, (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
Cupid all arm’d: a certain aim he took
At a fair vestal, thronèd by the west,
And loos’d his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft
Quench’d in the chaste beams of the watery moon;
And the imperial votress passed on,
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet mark’d I where the bolt of Cupid fell:
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound,
And maidens call it love-in-idleness.
Fetch me that flower, the herb I showed thee once:
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

PUCK.
I’ll put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes.

 [_Exit Puck._]

OBERON.
Having once this juice,
I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes:
The next thing then she waking looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb)
I’ll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible;
And I will overhear their conference.

 Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.

DEMETRIUS.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I’ll slay, the other slayeth me.
Thou told’st me they were stol’n into this wood,
And here am I, and wode within this wood
Because I cannot meet with Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.

HELENA.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant,
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.

DEMETRIUS.
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?

HELENA.
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love,
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be usèd as you use your dog?

DEMETRIUS.
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
For I am sick when I do look on thee.

HELENA.
And I am sick when I look not on you.

DEMETRIUS.
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place,
With the rich worth of your virginity.

HELENA.
Your virtue is my privilege: for that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night;
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?

DEMETRIUS.
I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

HELENA.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will, the story shall be chang’d;
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin, the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed,
When cowardice pursues and valour flies!

DEMETRIUS.
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

HELENA.
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be woo’d, and were not made to woo.

 [_Exit Demetrius._]

I’ll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
To die upon the hand I love so well.

 [_Exit Helena._]

OBERON.
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

 Enter Puck.

Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

PUCK.
Ay, there it is.

OBERON.
I pray thee give it me.
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lull’d in these flowers with dances and delight;
And there the snake throws her enamell’d skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes,
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes;
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love:
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

PUCK.
Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so.

 [_Exeunt._]


SCENE II. Another part of the wood

 Enter Titania with her Train.

TITANIA.
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then for the third part of a minute, hence;
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings,
To make my small elves coats; and some keep back
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
Then to your offices, and let me rest.

Fairies sing.

FIRST FAIRY.
    You spotted snakes with double tongue,
       Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
    Newts and blind-worms do no wrong,
       Come not near our Fairy Queen:

CHORUS.
    Philomel, with melody,
    Sing in our sweet lullaby:
Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
    Never harm, nor spell, nor charm,
    Come our lovely lady nigh;
    So good night, with lullaby.

FIRST FAIRY.
    Weaving spiders, come not here;
       Hence, you long-legg’d spinners, hence.
    Beetles black, approach not near;
       Worm nor snail do no offence.

CHORUS.
    Philomel with melody, &c.

SECOND FAIRY.
Hence away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.

 [_Exeunt Fairies. Titania sleeps._]

 Enter Oberon.

OBERON.
What thou seest when thou dost wake,

 [_Squeezes the flower on  Titania’s eyelids._]

Do it for thy true love take;
Love and languish for his sake.
Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
In thy eye that shall appear
When thou wak’st, it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing is near.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Lysander and Hermia.

LYSANDER.
Fair love, you faint with wand’ring in the wood.
And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
And tarry for the comfort of the day.

HERMIA.
Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.

LYSANDER.
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.

HERMIA.
Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.

LYSANDER.
O take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love’s conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it:
Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath,
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny;
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

HERMIA.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
Lie further off, in human modesty,
Such separation as may well be said
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend:
Thy love ne’er alter till thy sweet life end!

LYSANDER.
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!

HERMIA.
With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed!

 [_They sleep._]

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
Through the forest have I gone,
But Athenian found I none,
On whose eyes I might approve
This flower’s force in stirring love.
Night and silence! Who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
This is he, my master said,
Despisèd the Athenian maid;
And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
On the dank and dirty ground.
Pretty soul, she durst not lie
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the power this charm doth owe;
When thou wak’st let love forbid
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone;
For I must now to Oberon.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.

HELENA.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS.
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

HELENA.
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.

DEMETRIUS.
Stay, on thy peril; I alone will go.

 [_Exit Demetrius._]

HELENA.
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe’er she lies,
For she hath blessèd and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener wash’d than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear:
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.

LYSANDER.
[_Waking._] And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

HELENA.
Do not say so, Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.

LYSANDER.
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason sway’d,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
And leads me to your eyes, where I o’erlook
Love’s stories, written in love’s richest book.

HELENA.
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is’t not enough, is’t not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius’ eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well; perforce I must confess,
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refus’d,
Should of another therefore be abus’d!

 [_Exit._]

LYSANDER.
She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings;
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive;
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honour Helen, and to be her knight!

 [_Exit._]

HERMIA.
[_Starting._] Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander! lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, and if you hear;
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I’ll find immediately.

 [_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. The Wood.


 The Queen of Fairies still lying asleep.

 Enter Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug and Flute.

BOTTOM.
Are we all met?

QUINCE.
Pat, pat; and here’s a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsal.
This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn brake our
tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we will do it before the
Duke.

BOTTOM.
Peter Quince?

QUINCE.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

BOTTOM.
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never
please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself; which the
ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?

SNOUT
By’r lakin, a parlous fear.

STARVELING.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.

BOTTOM.
Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and
let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and
that Pyramus is not killed indeed; and for the more better assurance,
tell them that I Pyramus am not Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This
will put them out of fear.

QUINCE.
Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written in eight
and six.

BOTTOM.
No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.

SNOUT
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

STARVELING.
I fear it, I promise you.

BOTTOM.
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves, to bring in (God shield
us!) a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a
more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and we ought to look to
it.

SNOUT
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.

BOTTOM.
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the
lion’s neck; and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: ‘Ladies,’ or, ‘Fair ladies, I would wish you,’ or, ‘I
would request you,’ or, ’I would entreat you, not to fear, not to
tremble: my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it
were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing; I am a man as other men
are’: and there, indeed, let him name his name, and tell them plainly
he is Snug the joiner.

QUINCE.
Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring
the moonlight into a chamber, for you know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.

SNOUT
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?

BOTTOM.
A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out moonshine, find
out moonshine.

QUINCE.
Yes, it doth shine that night.

BOTTOM.
Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window, where
we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the casement.

QUINCE.
Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and
say he comes to disfigure or to present the person of Moonshine. Then
there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber; for
Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a
wall.

SNOUT
You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?

BOTTOM.
Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or
some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to signify wall; and let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe
whisper.

QUINCE.
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every mother’s son,
and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake; and so everyone according to his cue.

 Enter Puck behind.

PUCK.
What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here,
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor;
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.

QUINCE.
Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.

PYRAMUS.
_Thisbe, the flowers of odious savours sweet_

QUINCE.
Odours, odours.

PYRAMUS.
_. . . odours savours sweet.
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.
But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
And by and by I will to thee appear._

 [_Exit._]

PUCK.
A stranger Pyramus than e’er played here!

 [_Exit._]

THISBE.
Must I speak now?

QUINCE.
Ay, marry, must you, For you must understand he goes but to see a noise
that he heard, and is to come again.

THISBE.
_Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire,
I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb._

QUINCE.
Ninus’ tomb, man! Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to
Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues, and all.—Pyramus enter!
Your cue is past; it is ‘never tire.’

THISBE.
O, _As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire._

 Enter Puck and Bottom with an ass’s head.

PYRAMUS.
_If I were fair, Thisbe, I were only thine._

QUINCE.
O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters, fly, masters!
Help!

 [_Exeunt Clowns._]

PUCK.
I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;
Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.

 [_Exit._]

BOTTOM.
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afeard.

 Enter Snout.

SNOUT
O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?

BOTTOM.
What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do you?

 [_Exit Snout._]

 Enter Quince.

QUINCE.
Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! Thou art translated.

 [_Exit._]

BOTTOM.
I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of me, to fright me, if
they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I
will walk up and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am
not afraid.
[_Sings._]
       The ousel cock, so black of hue,
          With orange-tawny bill,
       The throstle with his note so true,
          The wren with little quill.

TITANIA.
[_Waking._] What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?

BOTTOM.
[_Sings._]
       The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
          The plain-song cuckoo gray,
       Whose note full many a man doth mark,
          And dares not answer nay.
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give
a bird the lie, though he cry ‘cuckoo’ never so?

TITANIA.
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamour’d of thy note.
So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape;
And thy fair virtue’s force perforce doth move me,
On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.

BOTTOM.
Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. And yet, to
say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbours will not make them
friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.

TITANIA.
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

BOTTOM.
Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I
have enough to serve mine own turn.

TITANIA.
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state;
And I do love thee: therefore, go with me.
I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
And sing, while thou on pressèd flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.—
Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!

 Enter four Fairies.

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Ready.


COBWEB.
And I.


MOTH.
And I.


MUSTARDSEED.
And I.


ALL.
Where shall we go?

TITANIA.
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers, crop their waxen thighs,
And light them at the fiery glow-worm’s eyes,
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.


PEASEBLOSSOM.
Hail, mortal!


COBWEB.
Hail!


MOTH.
Hail!


MUSTARDSEED.
Hail!

BOTTOM.
I cry your worships mercy, heartily.—I beseech your worship’s name.

COBWEB.
Cobweb.

BOTTOM.
I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb. If I cut
my finger, I shall make bold with you.—Your name, honest gentleman?

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Peaseblossom.

BOTTOM.
I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master
Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.—Your name, I beseech you, sir?

MUSTARDSEED.
Mustardseed.

BOTTOM.
Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly
giant-like ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you
of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.

TITANIA.
Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a watery eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my love’s tongue, bring him silently.

 [_Exeunt._]


SCENE II. Another part of the wood

 Enter Oberon.

OBERON.
I wonder if Titania be awak’d;
Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.

 Enter Puck.

Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?

PUCK.
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus’ nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and enter’d in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass’s nole I fixed on his head.
Anon, his Thisbe must be answerèd,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun’s report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And at our stamp, here o’er and o’er one falls;
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears, thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania wak’d, and straightway lov’d an ass.

OBERON.
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latch’d the Athenian’s eyes
With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?

PUCK.
I took him sleeping—that is finish’d too—
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he wak’d, of force she must be ey’d.

 Enter Demetrius and Hermia.

OBERON.
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.

PUCK.
This is the woman, but not this the man.

DEMETRIUS.
O why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.

HERMIA.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o’er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stol’n away
From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as soon
This whole earth may be bor’d, and that the moon
May through the centre creep and so displease
Her brother’s noontide with th’ Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murder’d him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

DEMETRIUS.
So should the murder’d look, and so should I,
Pierc’d through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

HERMIA.
What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?

DEMETRIUS.
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

HERMIA.
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv’st me past the bounds
Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never number’d among men!
O once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have look’d upon him, being awake,
And hast thou kill’d him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it; for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

DEMETRIUS.
You spend your passion on a mispris’d mood:
I am not guilty of Lysander’s blood;
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

HERMIA.
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

DEMETRIUS.
And if I could, what should I get therefore?

HERMIA.
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so:
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.

 [_Exit._]

DEMETRIUS.
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.

 [_Lies down._]

OBERON.
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
And laid the love-juice on some true-love’s sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true love turn’d, and not a false turn’d true.

PUCK.
Then fate o’er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

OBERON.
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is, and pale of cheer
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here;
I’ll charm his eyes against she do appear.

PUCK.
I go, I go; look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.

 [_Exit._]

OBERON.
    Flower of this purple dye,
    Hit with Cupid’s archery,
    Sink in apple of his eye.
    When his love he doth espy,
    Let her shine as gloriously
    As the Venus of the sky.—
    When thou wak’st, if she be by,
    Beg of her for remedy.

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
    Captain of our fairy band,
    Helena is here at hand,
    And the youth mistook by me,
    Pleading for a lover’s fee.
    Shall we their fond pageant see?
    Lord, what fools these mortals be!

OBERON.
    Stand aside. The noise they make
    Will cause Demetrius to awake.

PUCK.
    Then will two at once woo one.
    That must needs be sport alone;
    And those things do best please me
    That befall prepost’rously.

 Enter Lysander and Helena.

LYSANDER.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?

HELENA.
You do advance your cunning more and more.
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
These vows are Hermia’s: will you give her o’er?
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.

LYSANDER.
I had no judgment when to her I swore.

HELENA.
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o’er.

LYSANDER.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

DEMETRIUS.
[_Waking._] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealèd white, high Taurus’ snow,
Fann’d with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold’st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!

HELENA.
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil, and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so;
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
And now both rivals, to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid’s eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin, and extort
A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.

LYSANDER.
You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
In Hermia’s love I yield you up my part;
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.

HELENA.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.

DEMETRIUS.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
If e’er I lov’d her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn’d;
And now to Helen is it home return’d,
There to remain.

LYSANDER.
Helen, it is not so.

DEMETRIUS.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.

 Enter Hermia.

HERMIA.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

LYSANDER.
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?

HERMIA.
What love could press Lysander from my side?

LYSANDER.
Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek’st thou me? Could not this make thee know
The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?

HERMIA.
You speak not as you think; it cannot be.

HELENA.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoin’d all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid!
Have you conspir’d, have you with these contriv’d,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shar’d,
The sisters’ vows, the hours that we have spent,
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us—O, is all forgot?
All school-days’ friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet a union in partition,
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem;
So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crownèd with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly, ’tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.

HERMIA.
I am amazèd at your passionate words:
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.

HELENA.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me, and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unlov’d?
This you should pity rather than despise.

HERMIA.
I understand not what you mean by this.

HELENA.
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare ye well. ’Tis partly my own fault,
Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.

LYSANDER.
Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!

HELENA.
O excellent!

HERMIA.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.

DEMETRIUS.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.

LYSANDER.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
I swear by that which I will lose for thee
To prove him false that says I love thee not.

DEMETRIUS.
I say I love thee more than he can do.

LYSANDER.
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.

DEMETRIUS.
Quick, come.

HERMIA.
Lysander, whereto tends all this?

LYSANDER.
Away, you Ethiope!

DEMETRIUS.
No, no. He will
Seem to break loose. Take on as you would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!

LYSANDER.
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

HERMIA.
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?

LYSANDER.
Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathèd medicine! O hated potion, hence!

HERMIA.
Do you not jest?

HELENA.
Yes, sooth, and so do you.

LYSANDER.
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

DEMETRIUS.
I would I had your bond; for I perceive
A weak bond holds you; I’ll not trust your word.

LYSANDER.
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.

HERMIA.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me! what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you lov’d me; yet since night you left me.
Why then, you left me—O, the gods forbid!—
In earnest, shall I say?

LYSANDER.
Ay, by my life;
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
Be certain, nothing truer; ’tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.

HERMIA.
O me! You juggler! You cankerblossom!
You thief of love! What! have you come by night
And stol’n my love’s heart from him?

HELENA.
Fine, i’ faith!
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!

HERMIA.
Puppet! Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urg’d her height;
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail’d with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak,
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

HELENA.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
I am a right maid for my cowardice;
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.

HERMIA.
Lower! Hark, again.

HELENA.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong’d you,
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He follow’d you; for love I follow’d him;
But he hath chid me hence, and threaten’d me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back,
And follow you no further. Let me go:
You see how simple and how fond I am.

HERMIA.
Why, get you gone. Who is’t that hinders you?

HELENA.
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.

HERMIA.
What! with Lysander?

HELENA.
With Demetrius.

LYSANDER.
Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.

DEMETRIUS.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

HELENA.
O, when she’s angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.

HERMIA.
Little again! Nothing but low and little?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.

LYSANDER.
Get you gone, you dwarf;
You minimus, of hind’ring knot-grass made;
You bead, you acorn.

DEMETRIUS.
You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena;
Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.

LYSANDER.
Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou dar’st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

DEMETRIUS.
Follow! Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jole.

 [_Exeunt Lysander and Demetrius._]

HERMIA.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Nay, go not back.

HELENA.
I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.

 [_Exit._]

HERMIA.
I am amaz’d, and know not what to say.

 [_Exit, pursuing Helena._]

OBERON.
This is thy negligence: still thou mistak’st,
Or else commit’st thy knaveries willfully.

PUCK.
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have ’nointed an Athenian’s eyes:
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

OBERON.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog, as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another’s way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o’er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I’ll to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmèd eye release
From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.

PUCK.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wandering here and there
Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all,
That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone;
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for aye consort with black-brow’d night.

OBERON.
But we are spirits of another sort:
I with the morning’s love have oft made sport;
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.

 [_Exit Oberon._]

PUCK.
    Up and down, up and down,
    I will lead them up and down.
    I am fear’d in field and town.
    Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.

 Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.

PUCK.
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?

LYSANDER.
I will be with thee straight.

PUCK.
Follow me then to plainer ground.

 [_Exit Lysander as following the voice._]

 Enter Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS.
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak. In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?

PUCK.
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child!
I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defil’d
That draws a sword on thee.

DEMETRIUS.
Yea, art thou there?

PUCK.
Follow my voice; we’ll try no manhood here.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER.
He goes before me, and still dares me on;
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heel’d than I:
I follow’d fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me.  Come, thou gentle day!
[_Lies down._] For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
I’ll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.

 [_Sleeps._]

 Enter Puck and Demetrius.

PUCK.
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com’st thou not?

DEMETRIUS.
Abide me, if thou dar’st; for well I wot
Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place,
And dar’st not stand, nor look me in the face.
Where art thou?

PUCK.
Come hither; I am here.

DEMETRIUS.
Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see:
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day’s approach look to be visited.

 [_Lies down and sleeps._]

 Enter Helena.

HELENA.
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.

 [_Sleeps._]

PUCK.
    Yet but three? Come one more.
    Two of both kinds makes up four.
    Here she comes, curst and sad.
    Cupid is a knavish lad
    Thus to make poor females mad.

 Enter Hermia.

HERMIA.
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go;
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!

 [_Lies down._]

PUCK.
         On the ground
         Sleep sound.
         I’ll apply
         To your eye,
       Gentle lover, remedy.

 [_Squeezing the juice on Lysander’s eye._]

         When thou wak’st,
         Thou tak’st
         True delight
         In the sight
       Of thy former lady’s eye.
       And the country proverb known,
       That every man should take his own,
       In your waking shall be shown:
         Jack shall have Jill;
         Nought shall go ill;
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.

 [_Exit Puck._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Wood


 Lysander, Demetrius, Helena and Hermia still asleep.

 Enter Titania and Bottom; Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, Mustardseed and
 other Fairies attending; Oberon behind, unseen.

TITANIA.
Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

BOTTOM.
Where’s Peaseblossom?

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?

COBWEB.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Monsieur Cobweb; good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and
kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle; and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the
action, monsieur; and, good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey-bag, signior.
Where’s Monsieur Mustardseed?

MUSTARDSEED.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy,
good monsieur.

MUSTARDSEED.
What’s your will?

BOTTOM.
Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must
to the barber’s, monsieur, for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the
face; and I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must
scratch.

TITANIA.
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?

BOTTOM.
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let us have the tongs and the
bones.


TITANIA.
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.

BOTTOM.
Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry oats. Methinks
I have a great desire to a bottle of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.

TITANIA.
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel’s hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.

BOTTOM.
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let
none of your people stir me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon
me.

TITANIA.
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist, the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!

 [_They sleep._]

 Oberon advances. Enter Puck.

OBERON.
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her:
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets’ eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begg’d my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child;
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformèd scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair,
And think no more of this night’s accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.

 [_Touching her eyes with an herb._]

    Be as thou wast wont to be;
    See as thou was wont to see.
    Dian’s bud o’er Cupid’s flower
    Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.

TITANIA.
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamour’d of an ass.

OBERON.
There lies your love.

TITANIA.
How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!

OBERON.
Silence awhile.—Robin, take off this head.
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep, of all these five the sense.

TITANIA.
Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep.

PUCK.
Now when thou wak’st, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.

OBERON.
Sound, music.

 [_Still music._]

Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus’ house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity:
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.

PUCK.
    Fairy king, attend and mark.
    I do hear the morning lark.

OBERON.
    Then, my queen, in silence sad,
    Trip we after night’s shade.
    We the globe can compass soon,
    Swifter than the wand’ring moon.

TITANIA.
    Come, my lord, and in our flight,
    Tell me how it came this night
    That I sleeping here was found
    With these mortals on the ground.

 [_Exeunt. Horns sound within._]

 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus and Train.

THESEUS.
Go, one of you, find out the forester;
For now our observation is perform’d;
And since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch I say, and find the forester.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

We will, fair queen, up to the mountain’s top,
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

HIPPOLYTA.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bay’d the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding; for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seem’d all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

THESEUS.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flew’d, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-knee’d and dewlap’d like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but match’d in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tuneable
Was never holla’d to, nor cheer’d with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.—But, soft, what nymphs are these?

EGEUS.
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is;
This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena:
I wonder of their being here together.

THESEUS.
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

EGEUS.
It is, my lord.

THESEUS.
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.

 Horns, and shout within. Demetrius, Lysander, Hermia and Helena wake
 and start up.

Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?

LYSANDER.
Pardon, my lord.

 He and the rest kneel to  Theseus.

THESEUS.
I pray you all, stand up.
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?

LYSANDER.
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think (for truly would I speak)
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might be
Without the peril of the Athenian law.

EGEUS.
Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stol’n away, they would, Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife, and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.

DEMETRIUS.
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
And I in fury hither follow’d them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betroth’d ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.

THESEUS.
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
Egeus, I will overbear your will;
For in the temple, by and by with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purpos’d hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.

 [_Exeunt Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus and Train._]

DEMETRIUS.
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turnèd into clouds.

HERMIA.
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.

HELENA.
So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own, and not mine own.

DEMETRIUS.
Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?

HERMIA.
Yea, and my father.

HELENA.
And Hippolyta.

LYSANDER.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.

DEMETRIUS.
Why, then, we are awake: let’s follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.

 [_Exeunt._]

BOTTOM.
[_Waking._] When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is
‘Most fair Pyramus.’ Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender!
Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God’s my life! Stol’n hence, and left me
asleep! I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past the wit
of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to
expound this dream. Methought I was—there is no man can tell what.
Methought I was, and methought I had—but man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not
heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man’s hand is not able to taste,
his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I
will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream: it shall be
called ‘Bottom’s Dream’, because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it
in the latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure, to make it
the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.

 [_Exit._]


SCENE II. Athens. A Room in Quince’s House

 Enter Quince, Flute, Snout and Starveling.

QUINCE.
Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come home yet?

STARVELING.
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.

FLUTE.
If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward, doth it?

QUINCE.
It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge
Pyramus but he.

FLUTE.
No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.

QUINCE.
Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very paramour for a sweet
voice.


FLUTE.
You must say paragon. A paramour is, God bless us, a thing of naught.

 Enter Snug.

SNUG
Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three
lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had
all been made men.

FLUTE.
O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life;
he could not have ’scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given him
sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be hanged. He would have
deserved it: sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.

 Enter Bottom.

BOTTOM.
Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?

QUINCE.
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!

BOTTOM.
Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not what; for if I tell
you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you everything, right as it
fell out.

QUINCE.
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

BOTTOM.
Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the Duke hath
dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new
ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace; every man look
o’er his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. In
any case, let Thisbe have clean linen; and let not him that plays the
lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion’s claws. And
most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlick, for we are to utter sweet
breath; and I do not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy.
No more words. Away! Go, away!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Athens. An Apartment in the Palace of Theseus


 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate, Lords and Attendants.

HIPPOLYTA.
’Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

THESEUS.
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact:
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
That is the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt:
The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination,
That if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear?

HIPPOLYTA.
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigur’d so together,
More witnesseth than fancy’s images,
And grows to something of great constancy;
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

 Enter lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia and Helena.

THESEUS.
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!

LYSANDER.
More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!

THESEUS.
Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bed-time?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE.
Here, mighty Theseus.

THESEUS.
Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
What masque? What music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time, if not with some delight?

PHILOSTRATE.
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.

 [_Giving a paper._]

THESEUS.
[_Reads_] ‘The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.’
We’ll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
‘The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage?’
That is an old device, and it was play’d
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
‘The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceas’d in beggary.’
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
‘A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
And his love Thisbe; very tragical mirth.’
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?

PHILOSTRATE.
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
Which is as brief as I have known a play;
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious. For in all the play
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehears’d, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.

THESEUS.
What are they that do play it?

PHILOSTRATE.
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labour’d in their minds till now;
And now have toil’d their unbreath’d memories
With this same play against your nuptial.

THESEUS.
And we will hear it.

PHILOSTRATE.
No, my noble lord,
It is not for you: I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretch’d and conn’d with cruel pain
To do you service.

THESEUS.
I will hear that play;
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies.

 [_Exit Philostrate._]

HIPPOLYTA.
I love not to see wretchedness o’ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.

THESEUS.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIPPOLYTA.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.

THESEUS.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake:
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practis’d accent in their fears,
And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I pick’d a welcome;
And in the modesty of fearful duty
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most to my capacity.

 Enter Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE.
So please your grace, the Prologue is address’d.

THESEUS.
Let him approach.

 Flourish of trumpets. Enter the Prologue.

PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think, we come not to offend,
But with good will.  To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then, we come but in despite.
We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is.  All for your delight
We are not here.  That you should here repent you,
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.

THESEUS.
This fellow doth not stand upon points.

LYSANDER.
He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows not the stop. A
good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.

HIPPOLYTA.
Indeed he hath played on this prologue like a child on a recorder; a
sound, but not in government.

THESEUS.
His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing impaired, but all
disordered. Who is next?

 Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine and Lion as in dumb show.

PROLOGUE
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
Wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder;
And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are content
To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
Presenteth Moonshine, for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus’ tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which Lion hight by name)
The trusty Thisbe, coming first by night,
Did scare away, or rather did affright;
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth, and tall,
And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain;
Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
He bravely broach’d his boiling bloody breast;
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
At large discourse while here they do remain.

 [_Exeunt Prologue, Pyramus, Thisbe, Lion and Moonshine._]

THESEUS.
I wonder if the lion be to speak.

DEMETRIUS.
No wonder, my lord. One lion may, when many asses do.

WALL.
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall:
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly.
This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show
That I am that same wall; the truth is so:
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

THESEUS.
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?

DEMETRIUS.
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.

THESEUS.
Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.

 Enter Pyramus.

PYRAMUS.
O grim-look’d night! O night with hue so black!
O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbe’s promise is forgot!
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
That stand’st between her father’s ground and mine;
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.

 [_Wall holds up his fingers._]

Thanks, courteous wall: Jove shield thee well for this!
But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
Curs’d be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

THESEUS.
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.

PYRAMUS.
No, in truth, sir, he should not. ‘Deceiving me’ is Thisbe’s cue: she
is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see it
will fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.

 Enter Thisbe.

THISBE.
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kiss’d thy stones,
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

PYRAMUS.
I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face.
Thisbe?

THISBE.
My love thou art, my love I think.

PYRAMUS.
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace;
And like Limander am I trusty still.

THISBE.
And I like Helen, till the fates me kill.

PYRAMUS.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

THISBE.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

PYRAMUS.
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.

THISBE.
I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.

PYRAMUS.
Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?

THISBE.
’Tide life, ’tide death, I come without delay.

WALL.
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.

 [_Exeunt Wall, Pyramus and Thisbe._]

THESEUS.
Now is the mural down between the two neighbours.

DEMETRIUS.
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear without warning.

HIPPOLYTA.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.

THESEUS.
The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst are no worse, if
imagination amend them.

HIPPOLYTA.
It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.

THESEUS.
If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass
for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

 Enter Lion and Moonshine.

LION.
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, ’twere pity on my life.

THESEUS.
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.

DEMETRIUS.
The very best at a beast, my lord, that e’er I saw.

LYSANDER.
This lion is a very fox for his valour.

THESEUS.
True; and a goose for his discretion.

DEMETRIUS.
Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his discretion, and the
fox carries the goose.

THESEUS.
His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour; for the goose
carries not the fox. It is well; leave it to his discretion, and let us
listen to the moon.

MOONSHINE.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.

DEMETRIUS.
He should have worn the horns on his head.

THESEUS.
He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
circumference.

MOONSHINE.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present;
Myself the man i’ the moon do seem to be.

THESEUS.
This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should be put into
the lantern. How is it else the man i’ the moon?

DEMETRIUS.
He dares not come there for the candle, for you see, it is already in
snuff.

HIPPOLYTA.
I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!

THESEUS.
It appears by his small light of discretion that he is in the wane; but
yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.

LYSANDER.
Proceed, Moon.

MOON.
All that I have to say, is to tell you that the lantern is the moon; I
the man i’ the moon; this thorn-bush my thorn-bush; and this dog my
dog.

DEMETRIUS.
Why, all these should be in the lantern, for all these are in the moon.
But silence; here comes Thisbe.

 Enter Thisbe.

THISBE.
This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love?

LION.
Oh!

 [_The Lion roars, Thisbe runs off._]

DEMETRIUS.
Well roared, Lion.

THESEUS.
Well run, Thisbe.

HIPPOLYTA.
Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good grace.

 [_The Lion tears Thisbe’s mantle, and exit._]

THESEUS.
Well moused, Lion.

DEMETRIUS.
And then came Pyramus.

LYSANDER.
And so the lion vanished.

 Enter Pyramus.

PYRAMUS.
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.
             But stay! O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
         What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it be?
         O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What, stained with blood?
         Approach, ye Furies fell!
             O Fates, come, come;
             Cut thread and thrum;
         Quail, rush, conclude, and quell!

THESEUS.
This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go near to make a
man look sad.

HIPPOLYTA.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.

PYRAMUS.
O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
Since lion vile hath here deflower’d my dear?
Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame
That liv’d, that lov’d, that lik’d, that look’d with cheer.
             Come, tears, confound!
             Out, sword, and wound
         The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop:
         Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             Now am I dead,
             Now am I fled;
         My soul is in the sky.
             Tongue, lose thy light!
             Moon, take thy flight!
         Now die, die, die, die, die.

 [_Dies. Exit Moonshine._]

DEMETRIUS.
No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.

LYSANDER.
Less than an ace, man; for he is dead, he is nothing.

THESEUS.
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.

HIPPOLYTA.
How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her
lover?


THESEUS.
She will find him by starlight.

 Enter Thisbe.

Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.

HIPPOLYTA.
Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus. I hope she
will be brief.

DEMETRIUS.
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the
better: he for a man, God warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us!

LYSANDER.
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.

DEMETRIUS.
And thus she means, _videlicet_—

THISBE.
             Asleep, my love?
             What, dead, my dove?
         O Pyramus, arise,
             Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
             Dead, dead? A tomb
         Must cover thy sweet eyes.
             These lily lips,
             This cherry nose,
         These yellow cowslip cheeks,
             Are gone, are gone!
             Lovers, make moan;
         His eyes were green as leeks.
             O Sisters Three,
             Come, come to me,
         With hands as pale as milk;
             Lay them in gore,
             Since you have shore
         With shears his thread of silk.
             Tongue, not a word:
             Come, trusty sword,
         Come, blade, my breast imbrue;
             And farewell, friends.
             Thus Thisbe ends.
         Adieu, adieu, adieu.

 [_Dies._]

THESEUS.
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.

DEMETRIUS.
Ay, and Wall too.

BOTTOM.
No, I assure you; the wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it
please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?

THESEUS.
No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse. Never excuse;
for when the players are all dead there need none to be blamed. Marry,
if he that writ it had played Pyramus, and hanged himself in Thisbe’s
garter, it would have been a fine tragedy; and so it is, truly; and
very notably discharged. But come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue
alone.

 [_Here a dance of Clowns._]

The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed; ’tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatch’d.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguil’d
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
   Now the hungry lion roars,
      And the wolf behowls the moon;
   Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
      All with weary task fordone.
   Now the wasted brands do glow,
      Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
   Puts the wretch that lies in woe
      In remembrance of a shroud.
   Now it is the time of night
      That the graves, all gaping wide,
   Every one lets forth his sprite,
      In the church-way paths to glide.
   And we fairies, that do run
      By the triple Hecate’s team
   From the presence of the sun,
      Following darkness like a dream,
   Now are frolic; not a mouse
      Shall disturb this hallow’d house.
   I am sent with broom before,
      To sweep the dust behind the door.

 Enter Oberon and Titania with their Train.

OBERON.
   Through the house give glimmering light,
        By the dead and drowsy fire.
   Every elf and fairy sprite
        Hop as light as bird from brier,
   And this ditty after me,
   Sing and dance it trippingly.

TITANIA.
   First rehearse your song by rote,
        To each word a warbling note;
   Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
   Will we sing, and bless this place.

 [_Song and Dance._]

OBERON.
   Now, until the break of day,
   Through this house each fairy stray.
   To the best bride-bed will we,
   Which by us shall blessèd be;
   And the issue there create
   Ever shall be fortunate.
   So shall all the couples three
   Ever true in loving be;
   And the blots of Nature’s hand
   Shall not in their issue stand:
   Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
   Nor mark prodigious, such as are
   Despised in nativity,
   Shall upon their children be.
   With this field-dew consecrate,
   Every fairy take his gait,
   And each several chamber bless,
   Through this palace, with sweet peace;
   And the owner of it blest.
   Ever shall it in safety rest,
   Trip away. Make no stay;
   Meet me all by break of day.

 [_Exeunt Oberon, Titania and Train._]

PUCK.
   If we shadows have offended,
   Think but this, and all is mended,
   That you have but slumber’d here
   While these visions did appear.
   And this weak and idle theme,
   No more yielding but a dream,
   Gentles, do not reprehend.
   If you pardon, we will mend.
   And, as I am an honest Puck,
   If we have unearnèd luck
   Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue,
   We will make amends ere long;
   Else the Puck a liar call.
   So, good night unto you all.
   Give me your hands, if we be friends,
   And Robin shall restore amends.

 [_Exit._]




MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING




Contents

ACT I

Scene I.
Before Leonato’s House.

Scene II.
A room in Leonato’s house.

Scene III.
Another room in Leonato’s house.

ACT II

Scene I.
A hall in Leonato’s house.

Scene II.
Another room in Leonato’s house.

Scene III.
Leonato’s Garden.

ACT III

Scene I.
Leonato’s Garden.

Scene II.
A Room in Leonato’s House.

Scene III.
A Street.

Scene IV.
A Room in Leonato’s House.

Scene V.
Another Room in Leonato’s House.

ACT IV

Scene I.
The Inside of a Church.

Scene II.
A Prison.

ACT V

Scene I.
Before Leonato’s House.

Scene II.
Leonato’s Garden.

Scene III.
The Inside of a Church.

Scene IV.
A Room in Leonato’s House.




Dramatis Personæ

DON PEDRO, Prince of Arragon.
DON JOHN, his bastard Brother.
CLAUDIO, a young Lord of Florence.
BENEDICK, a young Lord of Padua.
LEONATO, Governor of Messina.
ANTONIO, his Brother.
BALTHASAR, Servant to Don Pedro.
BORACHIO, follower of Don John.
CONRADE, follower of Don John.
DOGBERRY, a Constable.
VERGES, a Headborough.
FRIAR FRANCIS.
A Sexton.
A Boy.

HERO, Daughter to Leonato.
BEATRICE, Niece to Leonato.
MARGARET, Waiting gentlewoman attending on Hero.
URSULA, Waiting gentlewoman attending on Hero.

Messengers, Watch, Attendants, &c.

SCENE. Messina.




ACT I

SCENE I. Before Leonato’s House.


Enter Leonato, Hero, Beatrice and others,
with a Messenger.

LEONATO.
I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Arragon comes this night
to Messina.

MESSENGER.
He is very near by this: he was not three leagues off when I left him.

LEONATO.
How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?

MESSENGER.
But few of any sort, and none of name.

LEONATO.
A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full
numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honour on a
young Florentine called Claudio.

MESSENGER.
Much deserved on his part, and equally remembered by Don Pedro.
He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure
of a lamb the feats of a lion: he hath indeed better bettered expectation
than you must expect of me to tell you how.

LEONATO.
He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.

MESSENGER.
I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much
joy in him; even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough
without a badge of bitterness.

LEONATO.
Did he break out into tears?

MESSENGER.
In great measure.

LEONATO.
A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than those
that are so washed; how much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at
weeping!

BEATRICE.
I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned from the wars or no?

MESSENGER.
I know none of that name, lady: there was none such in the army
of any sort.

LEONATO.
What is he that you ask for, niece?

HERO.
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.

MESSENGER.
O! he is returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.

BEATRICE.
He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the
flight; and my uncle’s fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for
Cupid, and challenged him at the bird-bolt. I pray you, how many hath he
killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath he killed? for, indeed,
I promised to eat all of his killing.

LEONATO.
Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much; but he’ll
be meet with you, I doubt it not.

MESSENGER.
He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.

BEATRICE.
You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it; he is a very
valiant trencher-man; he hath an excellent stomach.

MESSENGER.
And a good soldier too, lady.

BEATRICE.
And a good soldier to a lady; but what is he to a lord?

MESSENGER.
A lord to a lord, a man to a man; stuffed with all honourable
virtues.

BEATRICE.
It is so indeed; he is no less than a stuffed man; but for the
stuffing,—well, we are all mortal.

LEONATO.
You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of merry war
betwixt Signior Benedick and her; they never meet but there’s a
skirmish of wit between them.

BEATRICE.
Alas! he gets nothing by that. In our last conflict four of his
five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one! so
that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a
difference between himself and his horse; for it is all the wealth that he
hath left to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion now? He
hath every month a new sworn brother.

MESSENGER.
Is’t possible?

BEATRICE.
Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as the fashion of
his hat; it ever changes with the next block.

MESSENGER.
I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.

BEATRICE.
No; and he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is
his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with
him to the devil?

MESSENGER.
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.

BEATRICE.
O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he is sooner
caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the
noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will cost him a thousand
pound ere he be cured.

MESSENGER.
I will hold friends with you, lady.

BEATRICE.
Do, good friend.

LEONATO.
You will never run mad, niece.

BEATRICE.
No, not till a hot January.

MESSENGER.
Don Pedro is approached.

Enter Don Pedro, Don John, Claudio, Benedick,
Balthasar and Others.

DON PEDRO.
Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your trouble: the
fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.

LEONATO.
Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace, for
trouble being gone, comfort should remain; but when you depart from me,
sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.

DON PEDRO.
You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is
your daughter.

LEONATO.
Her mother hath many times told me so.

BENEDICK.
Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?

LEONATO.
Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.

DON PEDRO.
You have it full, Benedick: we may guess by this what you are,
being a man. Truly the lady fathers herself. Be happy, lady, for you are
like an honourable father.

BENEDICK.
If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on
her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.

BEATRICE.
I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior Benedick:
nobody marks you.

BENEDICK.
What! my dear Lady Disdain, are you yet living?

BEATRICE.
Is it possible Disdain should die while she hath such meet food
to feed it as Signior Benedick? Courtesy itself must convert to disdain if
you come in her presence.

BENEDICK.
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of all
ladies, only you excepted; and I would I could find in my heart that I had
not a hard heart; for, truly, I love none.

BEATRICE.
A dear happiness to women: they would else have been troubled
with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood, I am of your
humour for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear
he loves me.

BENEDICK.
God keep your Ladyship still in that mind; so some gentleman or
other shall scape a predestinate scratched face.

BEATRICE.
Scratching could not make it worse, and ’twere such a face
as yours were.

BENEDICK.
Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.

BEATRICE.
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.

BENEDICK.
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a
continuer. But keep your way, i’ God’s name; I have done.

BEATRICE.
You always end with a jade’s trick: I know you of old.

DON PEDRO.
That is the sum of all, Leonato: Signior Claudio, and Signior
Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall
stay here at the least a month, and he heartly prays some occasion may
detain us longer: I dare swear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his
heart.

LEONATO.
If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. [To
Don John] Let me bid you welcome, my lord: being reconciled to
the Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.

DON JOHN.
I thank you: I am not of many words, but I thank you.

LEONATO.
Please it your Grace lead on?

DON PEDRO.
Your hand, Leonato; we will go together.

[Exeunt all but Benedick and Claudio.]

CLAUDIO.
Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?

BENEDICK.
I noted her not; but I looked on her.

CLAUDIO.
Is she not a modest young lady?

BENEDICK.
Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for my simple
true judgment; or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a
professed tyrant to their sex?

CLAUDIO.
No; I pray thee speak in sober judgment.

BENEDICK.
Why, i’ faith, methinks she’s too low for a high
praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise;
only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other than she is,
she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, I do not like her.

CLAUDIO.
Thou thinkest I am in sport: I pray thee tell me truly how thou
likest her.

BENEDICK.
Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?

CLAUDIO.
Can the world buy such a jewel?

BENEDICK.
Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this with a sad
brow, or do you play the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a good
hare-finder, and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a man
take you, to go in the song?

CLAUDIO.
In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I looked on.

BENEDICK.
I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such matter: there’s
her cousin and she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in
beauty as the first of May doth the last of December. But I hope you have
no intent to turn husband, have you?

CLAUDIO.
I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn to the contrary,
if Hero would be my wife.

BENEDICK.
Is’t come to this, in faith? Hath not the world one
man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor
of threescore again? Go to, i’ faith; and thou wilt needs thrust thy
neck into a yoke, wear the print of it and sigh away Sundays.

Re-enter Don Pedro.

Look! Don Pedro is returned to seek you.

DON PEDRO.
What secret hath held you here, that you followed not to
Leonato’s?

BENEDICK.
I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.

DON PEDRO.
I charge thee on thy allegiance.

BENEDICK.
You hear, Count Claudio: I can be secret as a dumb man; I would
have you think so; but on my allegiance mark you this, on my allegiance:
he is in love. With who? now that is your Grace’s part. Mark how
short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato’s short daughter.

CLAUDIO.
If this were so, so were it uttered.

BENEDICK.
Like the old tale, my lord: ‘it is not so, nor
’twas not so; but indeed, God forbid it should be so.’

CLAUDIO.
If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.

DON PEDRO.
Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy.

CLAUDIO.
You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
By my troth, I speak my thought.

CLAUDIO.
And in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.

BENEDICK.
And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.

CLAUDIO.
That I love her, I feel.

DON PEDRO.
That she is worthy, I know.

BENEDICK.
That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she
should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me: I will
die in it at the stake.

DON PEDRO.
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.

CLAUDIO.
And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.

BENEDICK.
That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she brought me up,
I likewise give her most humble thanks; but that I will have a recheat
winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick, all
women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust
any, I will do myself the right to trust none; and the fine is,—for the
which I may go the finer,—I will live a bachelor.

DON PEDRO.
I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.

BENEDICK.
With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord; not with
love: prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again
with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker’s pen and hang
me up at the door of a brothel-house for the sign of blind Cupid.

DON PEDRO.
Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt prove a
notable argument.

BENEDICK.
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me; and he
that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called Adam.

DON PEDRO.
Well, as time shall try: ‘In time the savage bull
doth bear the yoke.’

BENEDICK.
The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible Benedick bear it,
pluck off the bull’s horns and set them in my forehead; and let me
be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write, ‘Here is
good horse to hire,’ let them signify under my sign ‘Here you
may see Benedick the married man.’

CLAUDIO.
If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.

DON PEDRO.
Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou
wilt quake for this shortly.

BENEDICK.
I look for an earthquake too then.

DON PEDRO.
Well, you will temporize with the hours. In the meantime,
good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato’s: commend me to him
and tell him I will not fail him at supper; for indeed he hath made
great preparation.

BENEDICK.
I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage; and so
I commit you—

CLAUDIO.
To the tuition of God: from my house, if I had it,—

DON PEDRO.
The sixth of July: your loving friend, Benedick.

BENEDICK.
Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is sometime
guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly basted on neither:
ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience: and so I
leave you.

[Exit.]

CLAUDIO.
My liege, your Highness now may do me good.

DON PEDRO.
My love is thine to teach: teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.

CLAUDIO.
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?

DON PEDRO.
No child but Hero; she’s his only heir.
Dost thou affect her, Claudio?

CLAUDIO.
O! my lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldier’s eye,
That lik’d, but had a rougher task in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love;
But now I am return’d, and that war-thoughts
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying, I lik’d her ere I went to wars.

DON PEDRO.
Thou wilt be like a lover presently,
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her, and with her father,
And thou shalt have her. Was’t not to this end
That thou began’st to twist so fine a story?

CLAUDIO.
How sweetly you do minister to love,
That know love’s grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salv’d it with a longer treatise.

DON PEDRO.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Look, what will serve is fit: ’tis once, thou lov’st,
And I will fit thee with the remedy.
I know we shall have revelling tonight:
I will assume thy part in some disguise,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio;
And in her bosom I’ll unclasp my heart,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
Then after to her father will I break;
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
In practice let us put it presently.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE II. A room in Leonato’s house.

Enter Leonato and Antonio,
meeting.

LEONATO.
How now, brother? Where is my cousin your son? Hath he provided
this music?

ANTONIO.
He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange
news that you yet dreamt not of.

LEONATO.
Are they good?

ANTONIO.
As the event stamps them: but they have a good cover; they show
well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached
alley in my orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the Prince
discovered to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter and meant to
acknowledge it this night in a dance; and if he found her accordant, he
meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of
it.

LEONATO.
 Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?

ANTONIO.
A good sharp fellow: I will send for him; and question him yourself.

LEONATO.
No, no; we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself: but I
will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for
an answer, if peradventure this be true. Go you and tell her of it.

[Several persons cross the stage.]

Cousins, you know what you have to do. O! I cry you mercy, friend; go you
with me, and I will use your skill. Good cousin, have a care this busy
time.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE III. Another room in Leonato’s house.

Enter Don John and Conrade.

CONRADE.
What the good-year, my lord! why are you thus out of measure sad?

DON JOHN.
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds; therefore the
sadness is without limit.

CONRADE.
You should hear reason.

DON JOHN.
And when I have heard it, what blessings brings it?

CONRADE.
If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.

DON JOHN.
I wonder that thou (being as thou say’st thou art, born
under Saturn) goest about to apply a moral medicine to a mortifying
mischief. I cannot hide what I am: I must be sad when I have cause, and
smile at no man’s jests; eat when I have stomach, and wait for no
man’s leisure; sleep when I am drowsy, and tend on no man’s
business; laugh when I am merry, and claw no man in his humour.

CONRADE.
Yea; but you must not make the full show of this till you may do
it without controlment. You have of late stood out against your brother,
and he hath ta’en you newly into his grace; where it is impossible
you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself:
it is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest.

DON JOHN.
I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace;
and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a
carriage to rob love from any: in this, though I cannot be said to be a
flattering honest man, it must not be denied but I am a plain-dealing
villain. I am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog;
therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my mouth, I
would bite; if I had my liberty, I would do my liking: in the meantime,
let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me.

CONRADE.
 Can you make no use of your discontent?

DON JOHN.
 I make all use of it, for I use it only. Who comes here?

Enter Borachio.

What news, Borachio?

BORACHIO.
I came yonder from a great supper: the Prince your brother is
royally entertained by Leonato; and I can give you intelligence of an
intended marriage.

DON JOHN.
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on? What is he for
a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?

BORACHIO.
Marry, it is your brother’s right hand.

DON JOHN.
Who? the most exquisite Claudio?

BORACHIO.
Even he.

DON JOHN.
A proper squire! And who, and who? which way looks he?

BORACHIO.
Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.

DON JOHN.
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?

BORACHIO.
Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty room,
comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference: I whipt
me behind the arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the Prince should
woo Hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count Claudio.

DON JOHN.
Come, come; let us thither: this may prove food to my
displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow: if I
can cross him any way, I bless myself every way. You are both sure, and
will assist me?

CONRADE.
 To the death, my lord.

DON JOHN.
Let us to the great supper: their cheer is the greater that I am
subdued. Would the cook were of my mind! Shall we go to prove what’s
to be done?

BORACHIO.
We’ll wait upon your Lordship.

[Exeunt.]




ACT II

SCENE I. A hall in Leonato’s house.


Enter Leonato, Antonio, Hero, Beatrice and
others.

LEONATO.
Was not Count John here at supper?

ANTONIO.
I saw him not.

BEATRICE.
How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am
heart-burned an hour after.

HERO.
He is of a very melancholy disposition.

BEATRICE.
He were an excellent man that were made just in the mid-way
between him and Benedick: the one is too like an image, and says nothing;
and the other too like my lady’s eldest son, evermore tattling.

LEONATO.
Then half Signior Benedick’s tongue in Count John’s
mouth, and half Count John’s melancholy in Signior Benedick’s
face—

BEATRICE.
With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his
purse, such a man would win any woman in the world if a’ could get
her good will.

LEONATO.
By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband, if thou
be so shrewd of thy tongue.

ANTONIO.
In faith, she’s too curst.

BEATRICE.
Too curst is more than curst: I shall lessen God’s sending
that way; for it is said, ‘God sends a curst cow short horns;’
but to a cow too curst he sends none.

LEONATO.
So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns?

BEATRICE.
Just, if he send me no husband; for the which blessing I am at
him upon my knees every morning and evening. Lord! I could not endure a
husband with a beard on his face: I had rather lie in the woollen.

LEONATO.
You may light on a husband that hath no beard.

BEATRICE.
What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel and make him
my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he
that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that is more than a youth is
not for me; and he that is less than a man, I am not for him: therefore I
will even take sixpence in earnest of the bear-ward, and lead his apes
into hell.

LEONATO.
Well then, go you into hell?

BEATRICE.
No; but to the gate; and there will the Devil meet me, like an
old cuckold, with horns on his head, and say, ‘Get you to heaven,
Beatrice, get you to heaven; here’s no place for you maids.’ So
deliver I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter for the heavens: he shows me
where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry as the day is long.

ANTONIO.
[To Hero.] Well, niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.

BEATRICE.
Yes, faith; it is my cousin’s duty to make curtsy,
and say, ‘Father, as it please you:’— but yet for all
that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make another
curtsy, and say, ‘Father, as it please me.’

LEONATO.
Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.

BEATRICE.
Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. Would it
not grieve a woman to be over-mastered with a piece of valiant dust? to
make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl? No, uncle, I’ll
none: Adam’s sons are my brethren; and truly, I hold it a sin to
match in my kindred.

LEONATO.
Daughter, remember what I told you: if the Prince do solicit you
in that kind, you know your answer.

BEATRICE.
The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in
good time: if the Prince be too important, tell him there is measure in
everything, and so dance out the answer. For, hear me, Hero: wooing,
wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a measure, and a cinquepace:
the first suit is hot and hasty, like a Scotch jig, and full as
fantastical; the wedding, mannerly modest, as a measure, full of state and
ancientry; and then comes Repentance, and with his bad legs, falls into
the cinquepace faster and faster, till he sink into his grave.

LEONATO.
Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.

BEATRICE.
I have a good eye, uncle: I can see a church by daylight.

LEONATO.
The revellers are entering, brother: make good room.

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, Balthasar, Don
John, Borachio, Margaret, Ursula and Others, masked.

DON PEDRO.
Lady, will you walk about with your friend?

HERO.
So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing, I am yours for
the walk; and especially when I walk away.

DON PEDRO.
With me in your company?

HERO.
I may say so, when I please.

DON PEDRO.
And when please you to say so?

HERO.
When I like your favour; for God defend the lute should be like the case!

DON PEDRO.
My visor is Philemon’s roof; within the house is Jove.

HERO.
Why, then, your visor should be thatch’d.

DON PEDRO.
Speak low, if you speak love.

[Takes her aside.]

BALTHASAR.
Well, I would you did like me.

MARGARET.
So would not I, for your own sake; for I have many ill qualities.

BALTHASAR.
Which is one?

MARGARET.
I say my prayers aloud.

BALTHASAR.
I love you the better; the hearers may cry Amen.

MARGARET.
God match me with a good dancer!

BALTHASAR.
Amen.

MARGARET.
And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! Answer, clerk.

BALTHASAR.
No more words: the clerk is answered.

URSULA.
I know you well enough: you are Signior Antonio.

ANTONIO.
At a word, I am not.

URSULA.
I know you by the waggling of your head.

ANTONIO.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.

URSULA.
You could never do him so ill-well, unless you were the very
man. Here’s his dry hand up and down: you are he, you are he.

ANTONIO.
At a word, I am not.

URSULA.
Come, come; do you think I do not know you by your excellent
wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to, mum, you are he: graces will
appear, and there’s an end.

BEATRICE.
Will you not tell me who told you so?

BENEDICK.
No, you shall pardon me.

BEATRICE.
Nor will you not tell me who you are?

BENEDICK.
Not now.

BEATRICE.
That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of
the ‘Hundred Merry Tales.’ Well, this was Signior
Benedick that said so.

BENEDICK.
What’s he?

BEATRICE.
I am sure you know him well enough.

BENEDICK.
Not I, believe me.

BEATRICE.
Did he never make you laugh?

BENEDICK.
I pray you, what is he?

BEATRICE.
Why, he is the Prince’s jester: a very dull fool; only his
gift is in devising impossible slanders: none but libertines delight in
him; and the commendation is not in his wit, but in his villainy; for he
both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him and beat him.
I am sure he is in the fleet: I would he had boarded me!

BENEDICK.
When I know the gentleman, I’ll tell him what you say.

BEATRICE.
Do, do: he’ll but break a comparison or two on me; which,
peradventure not marked or not laughed at, strikes him into melancholy;
and then there’s a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no
supper that night. [Music within.] We must follow the leaders.

BENEDICK.
In every good thing.

BEATRICE.
Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.

[Dance. Then exeunt all but Don John, Borachio
and Claudio.]

DON JOHN.
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath withdrawn her
father to break with him about it. The ladies follow her and but one visor
remains.

BORACHIO.
And that is Claudio: I know him by his bearing.

DON JOHN.
Are you not Signior Benedick?

CLAUDIO.
You know me well; I am he.

DON JOHN.
Signior, you are very near my brother in his love: he is
enamoured on Hero; I pray you, dissuade him from her; she is no equal for
his birth: you may do the part of an honest man in it.

CLAUDIO.
How know you he loves her?

DON JOHN.
I heard him swear his affection.

BORACHIO.
So did I too; and he swore he would marry her tonight.

DON JOHN.
Come, let us to the banquet.

[Exeunt Don John and Borachio.]

CLAUDIO.
Thus answer I in name of Benedick,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
’Tis certain so; the Prince wooss for himself.
Friendship is constant in all other things
Save in the office and affairs of love:
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues;
Let every eye negotiate for itself
And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, Hero!

Re-enter Benedick.

BENEDICK.
Count Claudio?

CLAUDIO.
Yea, the same.

BENEDICK.
Come, will you go with me?

CLAUDIO.
Whither?

BENEDICK.
Even to the next willow, about your own business, Count. What
fashion will you wear the garland of? About your neck, like a usurer’s
chain? or under your arm, like a lieutenant’s scarf? You must wear
it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.

CLAUDIO.
I wish him joy of her.

BENEDICK.
Why, that’s spoken like an honest drovier: so they sell bullocks.
But did you think the Prince would have served you thus?

CLAUDIO.
I pray you, leave me.

BENEDICK.
Ho! now you strike like the blind man: ’twas the boy that
stole your meat, and you’ll beat the post.

CLAUDIO.
If it will not be, I’ll leave you.

[Exit.]

BENEDICK.
Alas! poor hurt fowl. Now will he creep into sedges. But, that
my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The Prince’s fool!
Ha! it may be I go under that title because I am merry. Yea, but so I am
apt to do myself wrong; I am not so reputed: it is the base though bitter
disposition of Beatrice that puts the world into her person, and so gives
me out. Well, I’ll be revenged as I may.

Re-enter Don Pedro.

DON PEDRO.
Now, signior, where’s the Count? Did you see him?

BENEDICK.
Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame. I found him
here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. I told him, and I think I told
him true, that your Grace had got the good will of this young lady; and I
offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as
being forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be whipped.

DON PEDRO.
To be whipped! What’s his fault?

BENEDICK.
The flat transgression of a school-boy, who, being overjoy’d
with finding a bird’s nest, shows it his companion, and he steals
it.

DON PEDRO.
Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The transgression is in the stealer.

BENEDICK.
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland
too; for the garland he might have worn himself, and the rod he might have
bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stolen his bird’s nest.

DON PEDRO.
I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to the owner.

BENEDICK.
If their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.

DON PEDRO.
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you: the gentleman that
danced with her told her she is much wronged by you.

BENEDICK.
O! she misused me past the endurance of a block: an oak but with
one green leaf on it would have answered her: my very visor began to
assume life and scold with her. She told me, not thinking I had been
myself, that I was the Prince’s jester, that I was duller than a
great thaw; huddling jest upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon
me, that I stood like a man at a mark, with a whole army shooting at me.
She speaks poniards, and every word stabs: if her breath were as terrible
as her terminations, there were no living near her; she would infect to
the north star. I would not marry her, though she were endowed with all
that Adam had left him before he transgressed: she would have made
Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire
too. Come, talk not of her; you shall find her the infernal Ate in good
apparel. I would to God some scholar would conjure her, for certainly,
while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary; and
people sin upon purpose because they would go thither; so indeed, all
disquiet, horror and perturbation follow her.

Re-enter Claudio, Beatrice, Hero and Leonato.

DON PEDRO.
Look! here she comes.

BENEDICK.
Will your Grace command me any service to the world’s end?
I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise
to send me on; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch
of Asia; bring you the length of Prester John’s foot; fetch you a
hair off the Great Cham’s beard; do you any embassage to the
Pygmies, rather than hold three words’ conference with this harpy.
You have no employment for me?

DON PEDRO.
None, but to desire your good company.

BENEDICK.
O God, sir, here’s a dish I love not: I cannot endure my Lady Tongue.

[Exit.]

DON PEDRO.
Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of Signior Benedick.

BEATRICE.
Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile; and I gave him use for
it, a double heart for a single one: marry, once before he won it of me
with false dice, therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it.

DON PEDRO.
You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.

BEATRICE.
So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove the
mother of fools. I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.

DON PEDRO.
Why, how now, Count! wherefore are you sad?

CLAUDIO.
Not sad, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
How then? Sick?

CLAUDIO.
Neither, my lord.

BEATRICE.
The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but
civil Count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.

DON PEDRO.
I’ faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true; though, I’ll
be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false. Here, Claudio, I have wooed
in thy name, and fair Hero is won; I have broke with her father, and, his
good will obtained; name the day of marriage, and God give thee joy!

LEONATO.
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes: his
Grace hath made the match, and all grace say Amen to it!

BEATRICE.
Speak, Count, ’tis your cue.

CLAUDIO.
Silence is the perfectest herald of joy: I were but little happy,
if I could say how much. Lady, as you are mine, I am yours: I give away
myself for you and dote upon the exchange.

BEATRICE.
Speak, cousin; or, if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss,
and let not him speak neither.

DON PEDRO.
In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.

BEATRICE.
Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy
side of care. My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.

CLAUDIO.
And so she doth, cousin.

BEATRICE.
Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes everyone to the world but I,
and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband!

DON PEDRO.
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

BEATRICE.
I would rather have one of your father’s getting. Hath
your Grace ne’er a brother like you? Your father got excellent
husbands, if a maid could come by them.

DON PEDRO.
Will you have me, lady?

BEATRICE.
No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days:
your Grace is too costly to wear every day. But, I beseech your
Grace, pardon me; I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.

DON PEDRO.
Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes you;
for out of question, you were born in a merry hour.

BEATRICE.
No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there was a star
danced, and under that was I born. Cousins, God give you joy!

LEONATO.
Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?

BEATRICE.
I cry you mercy, uncle. By your Grace’s pardon.

[Exit.]

DON PEDRO.
By my troth, a pleasant spirited lady.

LEONATO.
There’s little of the melancholy element in her, my lord:
she is never sad but when she sleeps; and not ever sad then, for I have
heard my daughter say, she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked
herself with laughing.

DON PEDRO.
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.

LEONATO.
O! by no means: she mocks all her wooers out of suit.

DON PEDRO.
She were an excellent wife for Benedick.

LEONATO.
O Lord! my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk
themselves mad.

DON PEDRO.
Count Claudio, when mean you to go to church?

CLAUDIO.
Tomorrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches till love have all his rites.

LEONATO.
Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just seven-night;
and a time too brief too, to have all things answer my mind.

DON PEDRO.
Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing; but, I warrant
thee, Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us. I will in the interim
undertake one of Hercules’ labours, which is, to bring Signior
Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection the one with
the other. I would fain have it a match; and I doubt not but to fashion
it, if you three will but minister such assistance as I shall give you
direction.

LEONATO.
My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights’
watchings.

CLAUDIO.
And I, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
And you too, gentle Hero?

HERO.
I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good
husband.

DON PEDRO.
And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know. Thus
far can I praise him; he is of a noble strain, of approved valour, and
confirmed honesty. I will teach you how to humour your cousin, that she
shall fall in love with Benedick; and I, with your two helps, will so
practise on Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy
stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this, Cupid is
no longer an archer: his glory shall be ours, for we are the only
love-gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE II. Another room in Leonato’s house.

Enter Don John and Borachio.

DON JOHN.
It is so; the Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.

BORACHIO.
Yea, my lord; but I can cross it.

DON JOHN.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be medicinable to me: I
am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection
ranges evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this marriage?

BORACHIO.
Not honestly, my lord; but so covertly that no dishonesty shall
appear in me.

DON JOHN.
Show me briefly how.

BORACHIO.
I think I told your lordship, a year since, how much I am in the
favour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.

DON JOHN.
I remember.

BORACHIO.
I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to
look out at her lady’s chamber window.

DON JOHN.
 What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage?

BORACHIO.
The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the Prince
your brother; spare not to tell him, that he hath wronged his honour in
marrying the renowned Claudio,—whose estimation do you mightily hold
up,—to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.

DON JOHN.
What proof shall I make of that?

BORACHIO.
Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero,
and kill Leonato. Look you for any other issue?

DON JOHN.
Only to despite them, I will endeavour anything.

BORACHIO.
Go then; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count
Claudio alone: tell them that you know that Hero loves me; intend a kind
of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio, as—in love of your brother’s
honour, who hath made this match, and his friend’s reputation, who
is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid,—that you have
discovered thus. They will scarcely believe this without trial: offer them
instances, which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her
chamber window, hear me call Margaret Hero, hear Margaret term me Claudio;
and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding: for
in the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be absent;
and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero’s disloyalty, that
jealousy shall be called assurance, and all the preparation overthrown.

DON JOHN.
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practice. Be
cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.

BORACHIO.
Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.

DON JOHN.
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE III. Leonato’s Garden.

Enter Benedick.

BENEDICK.
Boy!

Enter a Boy.

BOY.
Signior?

BENEDICK.
In my chamber window lies a book; bring it hither to me in the orchard.

BOY.
I am here already, sir.

BENEDICK.
I know that; but I would have thee hence, and here again.

[Exit Boy.]

I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much another man is a fool when
he dedicates his behaviours to love, will, after he hath laughed at such
shallow follies in others, become the argument of his own scorn by falling
in love: and such a man is Claudio. I have known, when there was no music
with him but the drum and the fife; and now had he rather hear the tabor
and the pipe: I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see
a good armour; and now will he lie ten nights awake, carving the fashion
of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an
honest man and a soldier; and now is he turned orthography; his words are
a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. May I be so
converted, and see with these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not: I will not
be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster; but I’ll take my
oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such
a fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am well;
another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in one woman, one
woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that’s certain;
wise, or I’ll none; virtuous, or I’ll never cheapen her; fair,
or I’ll never look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not
I for an angel; of good discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair
shall be of what colour it please God. Ha! the Prince and Monsieur Love! I
will hide me in the arbour.

[Withdraws.]

Enter Don Pedro, Leonato and Claudio, followed by Balthasar
and Musicians.

DON PEDRO.
Come, shall we hear this music?

CLAUDIO.
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
As hush’d on purpose to grace harmony!

DON PEDRO.
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?

CLAUDIO.
O! very well, my lord: the music ended,
We’ll fit the kid-fox with a penny-worth.

DON PEDRO.
Come, Balthasar, we’ll hear that song again.

BALTHASAR.
O! good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
To slander music any more than once.

DON PEDRO.
It is the witness still of excellency,
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.

BALTHASAR.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing;
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy; yet he wooes;
Yet will he swear he loves.

DON PEDRO.
Nay, pray thee come;
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.

BALTHASAR.
Note this before my notes;
There’s not a note of mine that’s worth the noting.

DON PEDRO.
Why these are very crotchets that he speaks;
Notes, notes, forsooth, and nothing!

[Music.]

BENEDICK.
Now, divine air! now is his soul ravished! Is it not strange
that sheep’s guts should hale souls out of men’s bodies? Well,
a horn for my money, when all’s done.

BALTHASAR [sings.]
    Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,
     Men were deceivers ever;
    One foot in sea, and one on shore,
     To one thing constant never.
  Then sigh not so, but let them go,
 And be you blithe and bonny,
   Converting all your sounds of woe
Into Hey nonny, nonny.

   Sing no more ditties, sing no mo
Of dumps so dull and heavy;
   The fraud of men was ever so,
Since summer first was leavy.
 Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonny,
     Converting all your sounds of woe
  Into Hey nonny, nonny.

DON PEDRO.
By my troth, a good song.

BALTHASAR.
And an ill singer, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
Ha, no, no, faith; thou singest well enough for a shift.

BENEDICK.
[Aside] And he had been a dog that should have howled
thus, they would have hanged him; and I pray God his bad voice bode no
mischief. I had as lief have heard the night-raven, come what plague could
have come after it.

DON PEDRO. Yea, marry; dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee, get us
some excellent music, for tomorrow night we would have it at the
Lady Hero’s chamber window.

BALTHASAR.
 The best I can, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
 Do so: farewell.

[Exeunt Balthasar and Musicians.]

Come hither, Leonato: what was it you told me of today, that your niece
Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick?

CLAUDIO.
O! ay:—[Aside to Don Pedro] Stalk on, stalk on;
the fowl sits. I did never think that lady would have loved any man.

LEONATO.
No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she should so
dote on Signior Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviours
seemed ever to abhor.

BENEDICK.
[Aside] Is’t possible? Sits the wind in that corner?

LEONATO.
By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it but that
she loves him with an enraged affection: it is past the infinite of
thought.

DON PEDRO.
Maybe she doth but counterfeit.

CLAUDIO.
Faith, like enough.

LEONATO.
O God! counterfeit! There was never counterfeit of passion came
so near the life of passion as she discovers it.

DON PEDRO.
Why, what effects of passion shows she?

CLAUDIO.
 [Aside] Bait the hook well: this fish will bite.

LEONATO.
What effects, my lord? She will sit you; [To Claudio] You
heard my daughter tell you how.

CLAUDIO.
She did, indeed.

DON PEDRO.
How, how, I pray you? You amaze me: I would have thought her
spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.

LEONATO.
I would have sworn it had, my lord; especially against Benedick.

BENEDICK.
[Aside] I should think this a gull, but that the
white-bearded fellow speaks it: knavery cannot, sure, hide itself in such
reverence.

CLAUDIO.
[Aside] He hath ta’en the infection: hold it
up.

DON PEDRO.
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?

LEONATO.
No; and swears she never will: that’s her torment.

CLAUDIO.
’Tis true, indeed; so your daughter says: ‘Shall I,’
says she, ‘that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him
that I love him?’

LEONATO.
This says she now when she is beginning to write to him; for she’ll
be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock till she
have writ a sheet of paper: my daughter tells us all.

CLAUDIO.
Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your
daughter told us of.

LEONATO.
O! when she had writ it, and was reading it over, she found
Benedick and Beatrice between the sheet?

CLAUDIO.
That.

LEONATO.
O! she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence; railed at
herself, that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew
would flout her: ‘I measure him,’ says she, ‘by my own
spirit; for I should flout him, if he writ to me; yea, though I love him,
I should.’

CLAUDIO.
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart,
tears her hair, prays, curses; ‘O sweet Benedick! God give me
patience!’

LEONATO.
She doth indeed; my daughter says so; and the ecstasy hath so
much overborne her, that my daughter is sometimes afeard she will do a
desperate outrage to herself. It is very true.

DON PEDRO.
It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she
will not discover it.

CLAUDIO.
To what end? he would make but a sport of it and torment the poor
lady worse.

DON PEDRO.
And he should, it were an alms to hang him. She’s an
excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.

CLAUDIO.
And she is exceeding wise.

DON PEDRO.
In everything but in loving Benedick.

LEONATO.
O! my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body,
we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry for
her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.

DON PEDRO.
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me; I would have daffed
all other respects and made her half myself. I pray you, tell Benedick of
it, and hear what he will say.

LEONATO.
Were it good, think you?

CLAUDIO.
Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she will die if he
love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will
die if he woo her, rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed
crossness.

DON PEDRO.
She doth well: if she should make tender of her love, ’tis
very possible he’ll scorn it; for the man,—as you know all,—hath a
contemptible spirit.

CLAUDIO.
He is a very proper man.

DON PEDRO.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.

CLAUDIO.
’Fore God, and in my mind, very wise.

DON PEDRO.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.

CLAUDIO.
And I take him to be valiant.

DON PEDRO.
As Hector, I assure you: and in the managing of quarrels you
may say he is wise; for either he avoids them with great discretion, or
undertakes them with a most Christian-like fear.

LEONATO.
If he do fear God, a’ must necessarily keep peace: if he
break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.

DON PEDRO.
And so will he do; for the man doth fear God, howsoever it
seems not in him by some large jests he will make. Well, I am sorry for
your niece. Shall we go seek Benedick and tell him of her love?

CLAUDIO.
Never tell him, my lord: let her wear it out with good counsel.

LEONATO.
Nay, that’s impossible: she may wear her heart out first.

DON PEDRO.
Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter: let it cool
the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would modestly
examine himself, to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.

LEONATO.
My lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.

CLAUDIO.
[Aside] If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never
trust my expectation.

DON PEDRO.
[Aside] Let there be the same net spread for her; and
that must your daughter and her gentlewoman carry. The sport will be,
when they hold one an opinion of another’s dotage, and no such
matter: that’s the scene that I would see, which will be merely a
dumb show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.

[Exeunt Don Pedro, Claudio and Leonato.]

BENEDICK.
[Advancing from the arbour.] This can be no trick: the
conference was sadly borne. They have the truth of this from Hero. They
seem to pity the lady: it seems her affections have their full bent. Love
me? why, it must be requited. I hear how I am censured: they say I will
bear myself proudly, if I perceive the love come from her; they say too
that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did never
think to marry: I must not seem proud: happy are they that hear their
detractions, and can put them to mending. They say the lady is fair:
’tis a truth, I can bear them witness; and virtuous: ’tis so,
I cannot reprove it; and wise, but for loving me: by my troth, it is no
addition to her wit, nor no great argument of her folly, for I will be
horribly in love with her. I may chance have some odd quirks and remnants
of wit broken on me, because I have railed so long against marriage; but
doth not the appetite alter? A man loves the meat in his youth that he
cannot endure in his age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper
bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No; the
world must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think
I should live till I were married. Here comes Beatrice. By this day! she’s
a fair lady: I do spy some marks of love in her.

Enter Beatrice.

BEATRICE.
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.

BENEDICK.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.

BEATRICE.
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to
thank me: if it had been painful, I would not have come.

BENEDICK.
You take pleasure then in the message?

BEATRICE.
Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife’s point,
and choke a daw withal. You have no stomach, signior: fare you well.

[Exit.]

BENEDICK.
Ha! ‘Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to
dinner,’ there’s a double meaning in that. ‘I took no
more pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me,’ that’s
as much as to say, Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks. If
I do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I do not love her, I am a
Jew. I will go get her picture.

[Exit.]




ACT III

SCENE I. Leonato’s Garden.


Enter Hero, Margaret and Ursula.

HERO.
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour;
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio:
Whisper her ear, and tell her, I and Ursala
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her; say that thou overheard’st us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where honey-suckles, ripen’d by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter; like favourites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her,
To listen our propose. This is thy office;
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.

MARGARET.
I’ll make her come, I warrant you, presently.

[Exit.]

HERO.
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick:
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit.
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice: of this matter
Is little Cupid’s crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay.

Enter Beatrice behind.

Now begin;
For look where Beatrice, like a lapwing, runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.

URSULA.
The pleasant’st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice; who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.

HERO.
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.

[They advance to the bower.]

No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful;
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
As haggards of the rock.

URSULA.
But are you sure
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?

HERO.
So says the Prince, and my new-trothed lord.

URSULA.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?

HERO.
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
But I persuaded them, if they lov’d Benedick,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.

URSULA.
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?

HERO.
O god of love! I know he doth deserve
As much as may be yielded to a man;
But Nature never fram’d a woman’s heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice;
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly, that to her
All matter else seems weak. She cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endear’d.

URSULA.
Sure I think so;
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.

HERO.
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featur’d,
But she would spell him backward: if fair-fac’d,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antick,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agate very vilely cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.

URSULA.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.

HERO.
No; not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable.
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air: O! she would laugh me
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick, like cover’d fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.

URSULA.
Yet tell her of it: hear what she will say.

HERO.
No; rather I will go to Benedick,
And counsel him to fight against his passion.
And, truly, I’ll devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.

URSULA.
O! do not do your cousin such a wrong.
She cannot be so much without true judgment,—
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is priz’d to have,—as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.

HERO.
He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.

URSULA.
I pray you, be not angry with me, madam,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing, argument and valour,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.

HERO.
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.

URSULA.
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it.
When are you married, madam?

HERO.
Why, every day, tomorrow. Come, go in:
I’ll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
Which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.

URSULA.
She’s lim’d, I warrant you,
We have caught her, madam.

HERO.
If it prove so, then loving goes by haps:
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.

[Exeunt Hero and Ursula.]

BEATRICE.
[Advancing.] What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
Stand I condemn’d for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band;
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Believe it better than reportingly.

[Exit.]

SCENE II. A Room in Leonato’s House.

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick and Leonato.

DON PEDRO.
I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Arragon.

CLAUDIO.
I’ll bring you thither, my lord, if you’ll
vouchsafe me.

DON PEDRO.
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
marriage, as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it. I
will only be bold with Benedick for his company; for, from the crown of
his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth; he hath twice or thrice
cut Cupid’s bowstring, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him.
He hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper; for
what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.

BENEDICK.
Gallants, I am not as I have been.

LEONATO.
So say I: methinks you are sadder.

CLAUDIO.
I hope he be in love.

DON PEDRO.
Hang him, truant! there’s no true drop of blood in him
to be truly touched with love. If he be sad, he wants money.

BENEDICK.
I have the tooth-ache.

DON PEDRO.
Draw it.

BENEDICK.
Hang it.

CLAUDIO.
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.

DON PEDRO.
What! sigh for the tooth-ache?

LEONATO.
Where is but a humour or a worm?

BENEDICK.
Well, everyone can master a grief but he that has it.

CLAUDIO.
Yet say I, he is in love.

DON PEDRO.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy
that he hath to strange disguises; as to be a Dutchman today, a Frenchman
tomorrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as a German from the
waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from the hip upward, no doublet.
Unless he have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no
fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.

CLAUDIO.
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old
signs: a’ brushes his hat a mornings; what should that bode?

DON PEDRO.
Hath any man seen him at the barber’s?

CLAUDIO.
No, but the barber’s man hath been seen with him; and the
old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.

LEONATO.
Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.

DON PEDRO.
Nay, a’ rubs himself with civet: can you smell him out by that?

CLAUDIO.
That’s as much as to say the sweet youth’s in love.

DON PEDRO.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.

CLAUDIO.
And when was he wont to wash his face?

DON PEDRO.
Yea, or to paint himself? for the which, I hear what they say of him.

CLAUDIO.
Nay, but his jesting spirit; which is now crept into a
lute-string, and now governed by stops.

DON PEDRO.
Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude he is in love.

CLAUDIO.
Nay, but I know who loves him.

DON PEDRO.
That would I know too: I warrant, one that knows him not.

CLAUDIO.
Yes, and his ill conditions; and in despite of all, dies for him.

DON PEDRO.
She shall be buried with her face upwards.

BENEDICK.
Yet is this no charm for the tooth-ache. Old signior, walk aside
with me: I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which
these hobby-horses must not hear.

[Exeunt Benedick and Leonato.]

DON PEDRO.
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice.

CLAUDIO.
’Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played
their parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
another when they meet.

Enter Don John.

DON JOHN.
My lord and brother, God save you!

DON PEDRO.
Good den, brother.

DON JOHN.
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.

DON PEDRO.
In private?

DON JOHN.
If it please you; yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would
speak of concerns him.

DON PEDRO.
What’s the matter?

DON JOHN.
[To Claudio.] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?

DON PEDRO.
You know he does.

DON JOHN.
I know not that, when he knows what I know.

CLAUDIO.
If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.

DON JOHN.
You may think I love you not: let that appear hereafter, and aim
better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I think he holds
you well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing
marriage; surely suit ill-spent and labour ill bestowed!

DON PEDRO.
Why, what’s the matter?

DON JOHN.
I came hither to tell you; and circumstances shortened,—for she
has been too long a talking of,—the lady is disloyal.

CLAUDIO.
Who, Hero?

DON JOHN.
Even she: Leonato’s Hero, your Hero, every man’s Hero.

CLAUDIO.
Disloyal?

DON JOHN.
The word’s too good to paint out her wickedness; I could
say, she were worse: think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it.
Wonder not till further warrant: go but with me tonight, you shall see
her chamber window entered, even the night before her wedding-day: if you
love her then, tomorrow wed her; but it would better fit your honour to
change your mind.

CLAUDIO.
May this be so?

DON PEDRO.
I will not think it.

DON JOHN.
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know.
If you will follow me, I will show you enough; and when you have seen more
and heard more, proceed accordingly.

CLAUDIO.
If I see anything tonight why I should not marry her tomorrow,
in the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.

DON PEDRO.
And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee
to disgrace her.

DON JOHN.
I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses: bear
it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.

DON PEDRO.
O day untowardly turned!

CLAUDIO.
O mischief strangely thwarting!

DON JOHN.
O plague right well prevented! So will you say when you have seen
the sequel.

[Exeunt.]

Scene III. A Street.

Enter Dogberry and Verges,
with the Watch.

DOGBERRY.
Are you good men and true?

VERGES.
Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.

DOGBERRY.
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should
have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince’s watch.

VERGES.
Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.

DOGBERRY.
First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?

FIRST WATCH.
Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal; for they can write and read.

DOGBERRY.
Come hither, neighbour Seacoal. God hath blessed you with a good
name: to be a well-favoured man is the gift of Fortune; but to write and
read comes by Nature.

SECOND WATCH.
Both which, Master Constable,—

DOGBERRY.
You have: I knew it would be your answer. Well, for your favour,
sir, why, give God thanks, and make no boast of it; and for your writing
and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. You are
thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the
watch; therefore bear you the lanthorn. This is your charge: you shall
comprehend all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince’s
name.

SECOND WATCH.
How, if a’ will not stand?

DOGBERRY.
Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go; and presently
call the rest of the watch together, and thank God you are rid of a knave.

VERGES.
If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the Prince’s
subjects.

DOGBERRY.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince’s
subjects. You shall also make no noise in the streets: for, for the
watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.

SECOND WATCH.
We will rather sleep than talk: we know what belongs to a watch.

DOGBERRY.
Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I
cannot see how sleeping should offend; only have a care that your bills be
not stolen. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses, and bid those that
are drunk get them to bed.

SECOND WATCH.
How if they will not?

DOGBERRY.
Why then, let them alone till they are sober: if they make you
not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them
for.

SECOND WATCH.
Well, sir.

DOGBERRY.
If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your
office, to be no true man; and, for such kind of men, the less you meddle
or make with them, why, the more is for your honesty.

SECOND WATCH.
If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?

DOGBERRY.
Truly, by your office, you may; but I think they that touch
pitch will be defiled. The most peaceable way for you, if you do take a
thief, is to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your
company.

VERGES.
You have been always called a merciful man, partner.

DOGBERRY.
Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who
hath any honesty in him.

VERGES.
If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse
and bid her still it.

SECOND WATCH.
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?

DOGBERRY.
Why then, depart in peace, and let the child wake her with
crying; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes, will never
answer a calf when he bleats.

VERGES.
’Tis very true.

DOGBERRY.
This is the end of the charge. You constable, are to present the
Prince’s own person: if you meet the Prince in the night, you may
stay him.

VERGES.
Nay, by’r lady, that I think, a’ cannot.

DOGBERRY.
Five shillings to one on’t, with any man that knows the
statutes, he may stay him: marry, not without the Prince be willing; for,
indeed, the watch ought to offend no man, and it is an offence to stay a
man against his will.

VERGES.
By’r lady, I think it be so.

DOGBERRY.
Ha, ah, ha! Well, masters, good night: an there be any matter of
weight chances, call up me: keep your fellows’ counsels and your
own, and good night. Come, neighbour.

SECOND WATCH.
Well, masters, we hear our charge: let us go sit here upon
the church bench till two, and then all to bed.

DOGBERRY.
One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you, watch about
Signior Leonato’s door; for the wedding being there tomorrow,
there is a great coil tonight. Adieu; be vigitant, I beseech
you.

[Exeunt Dogberry and Verges.]

Enter Borachio and Conrade.

BORACHIO.
What, Conrade!

WATCH.
[Aside] Peace! stir not.

BORACHIO.
Conrade, I say!

CONRADE.
Here, man. I am at thy elbow.

BORACHIO.
Mass, and my elbow itched; I thought there would a scab follow.

CONRADE.
I will owe thee an answer for that; and now forward with thy tale.

BORACHIO.
Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles
rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.

WATCH.
[Aside] Some treason, masters; yet stand close.

BORACHIO.
Therefore know, I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.

CONRADE.
Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?

BORACHIO.
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should
be so rich; for when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may
make what price they will.

CONRADE.
I wonder at it.

BORACHIO.
That shows thou art unconfirmed. Thou knowest that the fashion
of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.

CONRADE.
Yes, it is apparel.

BORACHIO.
I mean, the fashion.

CONRADE.
Yes, the fashion is the fashion.

BORACHIO.
Tush! I may as well say the fool’s the fool. But seest
thou not what a deformed thief this fashion is?

WATCH.
[Aside] I know that Deformed; a’ has been a vile thief
this seven years; a’ goes up and down like a gentleman: I remember
his name.

BORACHIO.
Didst thou not hear somebody?

CONRADE.
No: ’twas the vane on the house.

BORACHIO.
Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is?
how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and
five-and-thirty? sometime fashioning them like Pharaoh’s soldiers in
the reechy painting; sometime like god Bel’s priests in the old
church window; sometime like the shaven Hercules in the smirched
worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?

CONRADE.
All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears out more apparel
than the man. But art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too, that
thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?

BORACHIO.
Not so neither; but know, that I have tonight wooed Margaret,
the Lady Hero’s gentlewoman, by the name of Hero: she leans me out
at her mistress’ chamber window, bids me a thousand times good
night,—I tell this tale vilely:—I should first tell thee how the Prince,
Claudio, and my master, planted and placed and possessed by my master Don
John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter.

CONRADE.
And thought they Margaret was Hero?

BORACHIO.
Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio; but the devil my
master, knew she was Margaret; and partly by his oaths, which first
possessed them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive them, but
chiefly by my villainy, which did confirm any slander that Don John had
made, away went Claudio enraged; swore he would meet her, as he was
appointed, next morning at the temple, and there, before the whole
congregation, shame her with what he saw o’er night, and send her
home again without a husband.

FIRST WATCH.
We charge you in the Prince’s name, stand!

SECOND WATCH.
Call up the right Master Constable. We have here recovered
the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the
commonwealth.

FIRST WATCH.
And one Deformed is one of them: I know him, a’ wears a lock.

CONRADE.
Masters, masters!

SECOND WATCH.
You’ll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.

CONRADE.
Masters,—

FIRST WATCH.
Never speak: we charge you let us obey you to go with us.

BORACHIO.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these
men’s bills.

CONRADE.
A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, we’ll obey you.

[Exeunt.]

Scene IV. A Room in Leonato’s House.

Enter Hero, Margaret and Ursula.

HERO.
Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire her to rise.

URSULA.
I will, lady.

HERO.
And bid her come hither.

URSULA.
Well.

[Exit.]

MARGARET.
Troth, I think your other rebato were better.

HERO.
No, pray thee, good Meg, I’ll wear this.

MARGARET.
By my troth’s not so good; and I warrant your cousin will say so.

HERO.
My cousin’s a fool, and thou art another: I’ll
wear none but this.

MARGARET.
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought
browner; and your gown’s a most rare fashion, i’ faith. I saw the
Duchess of Milan’s gown that they praise so.

HERO.
O! that exceeds, they say.

MARGARET.
By my troth ’s but a night-gown in respect of yours: cloth o’ gold, and
cuts, and laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side
sleeves, and skirts round, underborne with a bluish tinsel; but for a
fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on’t.

HERO.
God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is exceeding heavy.

MARGARET.
’Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.

HERO.
Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?

MARGARET.
Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not marriage honourable in a
beggar? Is not your lord honourable without marriage? I think you would
have me say, saving your reverence, ‘a husband:’ an bad thinking do not
wrest true speaking, I’ll offend nobody. Is there any harm in ‘the
heavier for a husband’? None, I think, and it be the right husband and
the right wife; otherwise ’tis light, and not heavy: ask my Lady
Beatrice else; here she comes.

Enter Beatrice.

HERO.
Good morrow, coz.

BEATRICE.
Good morrow, sweet Hero.

HERO.
Why, how now? do you speak in the sick tune?

BEATRICE.
I am out of all other tune, methinks.

MARGARET.
Clap’s into ‘Light o’ love’; that goes
without a burden: do you sing it, and I’ll dance it.

BEATRICE.
Ye, light o’ love with your heels! then, if your husband
have stables enough, you’ll see he shall lack no barnes.

MARGARET.
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.

BEATRICE.
’Tis almost five o’clock, cousin; ’tis time
you were ready. By my troth, I am exceeding ill. Heigh-ho!

MARGARET.
For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?

BEATRICE.
For the letter that begins them all, H.

MARGARET.
Well, and you be not turned Turk, there’s no more
sailing by the star.

BEATRICE.
What means the fool, trow?

MARGARET.
Nothing I; but God send everyone their heart’s desire!

HERO.
These gloves the Count sent me; they are an excellent perfume.

BEATRICE.
I am stuffed, cousin, I cannot smell.

MARGARET.
A maid, and stuffed! there’s goodly catching of cold.

BEATRICE.
O, God help me! God help me! how long have you professed
apprehension?

MARGARET.
Ever since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely!

BEATRICE.
It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your cap. By
my troth, I am sick.

MARGARET.
Get you some of this distilled Carduus benedictus, and lay it to
your heart: it is the only thing for a qualm.

HERO.
There thou prick’st her with a thistle.

BEATRICE.
Benedictus! why benedictus? you have some moral in this
benedictus.

MARGARET.
Moral! no, by my troth, I have no moral meaning; I meant, plain
holy thistle. You may think, perchance, that I think you are in love: nay,
by’r Lady, I am not such a fool to think what I list; nor I list not
to think what I can; nor, indeed, I cannot think, if I would think my
heart out of thinking, that you are in love, or that you will be in love,
or that you can be in love. Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he
become a man: he swore he would never marry; and yet now, in despite of
his heart, he eats his meat without grudging: and how you may be
converted, I know not; but methinks you look with your eyes as other women
do.

BEATRICE.
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?

MARGARET.
Not a false gallop.

Re-enter Ursula.

URSULA.
Madam, withdraw: the Prince, the Count, Signior Benedick, Don
John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.

HERO.
Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.

[Exeunt.]

Scene V. Another Room in Leonato’s House.

Enter Leonato and Dogberry
and Verges.

LEONATO.
What would you with me, honest neighbour?

DOGBERRY.
Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you, that decerns
you nearly.

LEONATO.
Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.

DOGBERRY.
Marry, this it is, sir.

VERGES.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.

LEONATO.
What is it, my good friends?

DOGBERRY.
Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter: an old man,
sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, God help, I would desire they were;
but, in faith, honest as the skin between his brows.

VERGES.
Yes, I thank God, I am as honest as any man living, that is an old
man and no honester than I.

DOGBERRY.
Comparisons are odorous: palabras, neighbour Verges.

LEONATO.
Neighbours, you are tedious.

DOGBERRY.
It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Duke’s
officers; but truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a king, I
could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.

LEONATO.
All thy tediousness on me! ah?

DOGBERRY.
Yea, and ’twere a thousand pound more than ’tis;
for I hear as good exclamation on your worship, as of any man in the
city, and though I be but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.

VERGES.
And so am I.

LEONATO.
I would fain know what you have to say.

VERGES.
Marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your worship’s
presence, ha’ ta’en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in
Messina.

DOGBERRY.
A good old man, sir; he will be talking; as they say, ‘when
the age is in, the wit is out.’ God help us! it is a world to see!
Well said, i’ faith, neighbour Verges: well, God’s a good man;
and two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest soul, i’
faith, sir; by my troth he is, as ever broke bread; but God is to be
worshipped: all men are not alike; alas! good neighbour.

LEONATO.
Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.

DOGBERRY.
Gifts that God gives.

LEONATO.
I must leave you.

DOGBERRY.
One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended two
aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined before
your worship.

LEONATO.
Take their examination yourself, and bring it me: I am now in
great haste, as may appear unto you.

DOGBERRY.
It shall be suffigance.

LEONATO.
Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.

LEONATO.
I’ll wait upon them: I am ready.

[Exeunt Leonato and Messenger.]

DOGBERRY.
Go, good partner, go get you to Francis Seacoal; bid him bring
his pen and inkhorn to the gaol: we are now to examination these men.

VERGES.
And we must do it wisely.

DOGBERRY.
We will spare for no wit, I warrant you; here’s that shall
drive some of them to a non-come: only get the learned writer to set down
our excommunication, and meet me at the gaol.

[Exeunt.]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Inside of a Church.


Enter Don Pedro, Don John, Leonato, Friar Francis,
Claudio, Benedick, Hero, Beatrice &c.

LEONATO.
Come, Friar Francis, be brief: only to the plain form of
marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.

FRIAR.
You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?

CLAUDIO.
No.

LEONATO.
To be married to her, friar; you come to marry her.

FRIAR.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this Count?

HERO.
I do.

FRIAR.
If either of you know any inward impediment, why you should not be
conjoined, I charge you, on your souls, to utter it.

CLAUDIO.
Know you any, Hero?

HERO.
None, my lord.

FRIAR.
Know you any, Count?

LEONATO.
I dare make his answer; none.

CLAUDIO.
O! what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not
knowing what they do!

BENEDICK.
How now! Interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as ah!
ha! he!

CLAUDIO.
Stand thee by, Friar. Father, by your leave:
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid, your daughter?

LEONATO.
As freely, son, as God did give her me.

CLAUDIO.
And what have I to give you back whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?

DON PEDRO.
Nothing, unless you render her again.

CLAUDIO.
Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
There, Leonato, take her back again:
Give not this rotten orange to your friend;
She’s but the sign and semblance of her honour.
Behold! how like a maid she blushes here.
O! what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal.
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.

LEONATO.
What do you mean, my lord?

CLAUDIO.
Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.

LEONATO.
Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
Have vanquish’d the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity,—

CLAUDIO.
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin: No, Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large;
But as a brother to his sister show’d
Bashful sincerity and comely love.

HERO.
And seem’d I ever otherwise to you?

CLAUDIO.
Out on thee! Seeming! I will write against it:
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pamper’d animals
That rage in savage sensuality.

HERO.
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?

LEONATO.
Sweet Prince, why speak not you?

DON PEDRO.
What should I speak?
I stand dishonour’d, that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common stale.

LEONATO.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?

DON JOHN.
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.

BENEDICK.
This looks not like a nuptial.

HERO.
True! O God!

CLAUDIO.
Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince’s brother?
Is this face Hero’s? Are our eyes our own?

LEONATO.
All this is so; but what of this, my lord?

CLAUDIO.
Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.

LEONATO.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.

HERO.
O, God defend me! how am I beset!
What kind of catechizing call you this?

CLAUDIO.
To make you answer truly to your name.

HERO.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
With any just reproach?

CLAUDIO.
Marry, that can Hero:
Hero itself can blot out Hero’s virtue.
What man was he talk’d with you yesternight
Out at your window, betwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.

HERO.
I talk’d with no man at that hour, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
Why, then are you no maiden.
Leonato, I am sorry you must hear: upon my honour,
Myself, my brother, and this grieved Count,
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window;
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confess’d the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.

DON JOHN.
Fie, fie! they are not to be nam’d, my lord,
Not to be spoke of;
There is not chastity enough in language
Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.

CLAUDIO.
O Hero! what a Hero hadst thou been,
If half thy outward graces had been plac’d
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell,
Thou pure impiety, and impious purity!
For thee I’ll lock up all the gates of love,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.

LEONATO.
Hath no man’s dagger here a point for me?

[Hero swoons.]

BEATRICE.
Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?

DON JOHN.
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.

[Exeunt Don Pedro, Don John and Claudio.]

BENEDICK.
How doth the lady?

BEATRICE.
Dead, I think! Help, uncle! Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior
Benedick! Friar!

LEONATO.
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand:
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wish’d for.

BEATRICE.
How now, cousin Hero?

FRIAR.
Have comfort, lady.

LEONATO.
Dost thou look up?

FRIAR.
Yea; wherefore should she not?

LEONATO.
Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live, Hero; do not ope thine eyes;
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life. Griev’d I, I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugal Nature’s frame?
O! one too much by thee. Why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggar’s issue at my gates,
Who smirched thus, and mir’d with infamy,
I might have said, ‘No part of it is mine;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins?’
But mine, and mine I lov’d, and mine I prais’d,
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her; why, she—O! she is fallen
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh.

BENEDICK.
Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part, I am so attir’d in wonder,
I know not what to say.

BEATRICE.
O! on my soul, my cousin is belied!

BENEDICK.
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?

BEATRICE.
No, truly, not; although, until last night,
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.

LEONATO.
Confirm’d, confirm’d! O! that is stronger made,
Which was before barr’d up with ribs of iron.
Would the two princes lie? and Claudio lie,
Who lov’d her so, that, speaking of her foulness,
Wash’d it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.

FRIAR.
Hear me a little;
For I have only been silent so long,
And given way unto this course of fortune,
By noting of the lady: I have mark’d
A thousand blushing apparitions
To start into her face; a thousand innocent shames
In angel whiteness bear away those blushes;
And in her eye there hath appear’d a fire,
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool;
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenure of my book; trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Under some biting error.

LEONATO.
Friar, it cannot be.
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
A sin of perjury: she not denies it.
Why seek’st thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?

FRIAR.
Lady, what man is he you are accus’d of?

HERO.
They know that do accuse me, I know none;
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy! O, my father!
Prove you that any man with me convers’d
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintain’d the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death.

FRIAR.
There is some strange misprision in the princes.

BENEDICK.
Two of them have the very bent of honour;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.

LEONATO.
I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honour,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awak’d in such a kind,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
Ability in means and choice of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.

FRIAR.
Pause awhile,
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here the princes left for dead;
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed:
Maintain a mourning ostentation;
And on your family’s old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.

LEONATO.
What shall become of this? What will this do?

FRIAR.
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse; that is some good.
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth.
She dying, as it must be so maintain’d,
Upon the instant that she was accus’d,
Shall be lamented, pitied and excus’d
Of every hearer; for it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lack’d and lost,
Why, then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come apparell’d in more precious habit,
More moving, delicate, and full of life
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she liv’d indeed: then shall he mourn,—
If ever love had interest in his liver,—
And wish he had not so accused her,
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be levell’d false,
The supposition of the lady’s death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy:
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,—
As best befits her wounded reputation,—
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.

BENEDICK.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you:
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.

LEONATO.
Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.

FRIAR.
’Tis well consented: presently away;
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
Come, lady, die to live: this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolong’d: have patience and endure.

[Exeunt Friar, Hero and Leonato.]

BENEDICK.
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?

BEATRICE.
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.

BENEDICK.
I will not desire that.

BEATRICE.
You have no reason; I do it freely.

BENEDICK.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.

BEATRICE.
Ah! how much might the man deserve of me that would right her.

BENEDICK.
Is there any way to show such friendship?

BEATRICE.
A very even way, but no such friend.

BENEDICK.
May a man do it?

BEATRICE.
It is a man’s office, but not yours.

BENEDICK.
I do love nothing in the world so well as you: is not that strange?

BEATRICE.
As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possible for
me to say I loved nothing so well as you; but believe me not, and yet
I lie not; I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry for my
cousin.

BENEDICK.
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.

BEATRICE.
Do not swear by it, and eat it.

BENEDICK.
I will swear by it that you love me; and I will make him eat it
that says I love not you.

BEATRICE.
Will you not eat your word?

BENEDICK.
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest I love thee.

BEATRICE.
Why then, God forgive me!

BENEDICK.
What offence, sweet Beatrice?

BEATRICE.
You have stayed me in a happy hour: I was about to protest I loved you.

BENEDICK.
And do it with all thy heart.

BEATRICE.
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.

BENEDICK.
Come, bid me do anything for thee.

BEATRICE.
Kill Claudio.

BENEDICK.
Ha! not for the wide world.

BEATRICE.
You kill me to deny it. Farewell.

BENEDICK.
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.

BEATRICE.
I am gone, though I am here: there is no love in you: nay, I
pray you, let me go.

BENEDICK.
Beatrice,—

BEATRICE.
In faith, I will go.

BENEDICK.
We’ll be friends first.

BEATRICE.
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.

BENEDICK.
Is Claudio thine enemy?

BEATRICE.
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered,
scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O! that I were a man. What! bear her in
hand until they come to take hands, and then, with public accusation,
uncovered slander, unmitigated rancour,—O God, that I were a man! I would
eat his heart in the market-place.

BENEDICK.
Hear me, Beatrice,—

BEATRICE.
Talk with a man out at a window! a proper saying!

BENEDICK.
Nay, but Beatrice,—

BEATRICE.
Sweet Hero! she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.

BENEDICK.
Beat—

BEATRICE.
Princes and Counties! Surely, a princely testimony, a goodly
Count Comfect; a sweet gallant, surely! O! that I were a man for his sake,
or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is melted
into curtsies, valour into compliment, and men are only turned into tongue,
and trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules, that only tells a lie
and swears it. I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a
woman with grieving.

BENEDICK.
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.

BEATRICE.
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.

BENEDICK.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?

BEATRICE.
Yea, as sure is I have a thought or a soul.

BENEDICK.
Enough! I am engaged, I will challenge him. I will kiss your
hand, and so leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear
account. As you hear of me, so think of me. Go, comfort your cousin: I
must say she is dead; and so, farewell.

[Exeunt.]

Scene II. A Prison.

Enter Dogberry, Verges, and Sexton, in gowns; and the Watch, with Conrade and
Borachio.

DOGBERRY.
Is our whole dissembly appeared?

VERGES.
O! a stool and a cushion for the sexton.

SEXTON.
Which be the malefactors?

DOGBERRY.
Marry, that am I and my partner.

VERGES.
Nay, that’s certain: we have the exhibition to examine.

SEXTON.
But which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them come
before Master Constable.

DOGBERRY.
Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your name, friend?

BORACHIO.
Borachio.

DOGBERRY.
Pray write down Borachio. Yours, sirrah?

CONRADE.
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.

DOGBERRY.
Write down Master gentleman Conrade. Masters, do you serve God?

BOTH.
Yea, sir, we hope.

DOGBERRY.
Write down that they hope they serve God: and write God first;
for God defend but God should go before such villains! Masters, it is
proved already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will
go near to be thought so shortly. How answer you for yourselves?

CONRADE.
Marry, sir, we say we are none.

DOGBERRY.
A marvellous witty fellow, I assure you; but I will go
about with him. Come you hither, sirrah; a word in your ear: sir, I
say to you, it is thought you are false knaves.

BORACHIO.
Sir, I say to you we are none.

DOGBERRY.
Well, stand aside. Fore God, they are both in a tale. Have you
writ down, that they are none?

SEXTON.
Master Constable, you go not the way to examine: you must call
forth the watch that are their accusers.

DOGBERRY.
Yea, marry, that’s the eftest way. Let the watch come forth.
Masters, I charge you, in the Prince’s name, accuse these men.

FIRST WATCH.
This man said, sir, that Don John, the Prince’s
brother, was a villain.

DOGBERRY.
Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat perjury, to
call a Prince’s brother villain.

BORACHIO.
Master Constable,—

DOGBERRY.
Pray thee, fellow, peace: I do not like thy look, I promise thee.

SEXTON.
What heard you him say else?

SECOND WATCH.
Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John
for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.

DOGBERRY.
Flat burglary as ever was committed.

VERGES.
Yea, by the mass, that it is.

SEXTON.
What else, fellow?

FIRST WATCH.
And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to disgrace
Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.

DOGBERRY.
O villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption
for this.

SEXTON.
What else?

SECOND WATCH.
This is all.

SEXTON.
And this is more, masters, than you can deny. Prince John is this
morning secretly stolen away: Hero was in this manner accused, in this
manner refused, and, upon the grief of this, suddenly died. Master
Constable, let these men be bound, and brought to Leonato’s: I will
go before and show him their examination.

[Exit.]

DOGBERRY.
Come, let them be opinioned.

VERGES.
Let them be in the hands—

CONRADE.
Off, coxcomb!

DOGBERRY.
God’s my life! where’s the sexton? let him write
down the Prince’s officer coxcomb. Come, bind them. Thou naughty
varlet!

CONRADE.
Away! you are an ass; you are an ass.

DOGBERRY.
Dost thou not suspect my place? Dost thou not suspect my years?
O that he were here to write me down an ass! but, masters, remember that I
am an ass; though it be not written down, yet forget not that I am an ass.
No, thou villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by
good witness. I am a wise fellow; and, which is more, an officer; and,
which is more, a householder; and, which is more, as pretty a piece of
flesh as any in Messina; and one that knows the law, go to; and a rich
fellow enough, go to; and a fellow that hath had losses; and one that hath
two gowns, and everything handsome about him. Bring him away. O that I had
been writ down an ass!

[Exeunt.]




ACT V

SCENE I. Before Leonato’s House.


Enter Leonato and Antonio.

ANTONIO.
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself
And ’tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.

LEONATO.
I pray thee, cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve: give not me counsel;
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine:
Bring me a father that so lov’d his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelm’d like mine,
And bid him speak of patience;
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile, and stroke his beard;
Bid sorrow wag, cry ‘hem’ when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs; make misfortune drunk
With candle-wasters; bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience.
But there is no such man; for, brother, men
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air and agony with words.
No, no; ’tis all men’s office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no man’s virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel:
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.

ANTONIO.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.

LEONATO.
I pray thee peace! I will be flesh and blood;
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods
And made a push at chance and sufferance.

ANTONIO.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself;
Make those that do offend you suffer too.

LEONATO.
There thou speak’st reason: nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince,
And all of them that thus dishonour her.

ANTONIO.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

Enter Don Pedro and Claudio.

DON PEDRO.
Good den, good den.

CLAUDIO.
Good day to both of you.

LEONATO.
Hear you, my lords,—

DON PEDRO.
We have some haste, Leonato.

LEONATO.
Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord:
Are you so hasty now?—well, all is one.

DON PEDRO.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.

ANTONIO.
If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.

CLAUDIO.
Who wrongs him?

LEONATO.
Marry, thou dost wrong me; thou dissembler, thou.
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
I fear thee not.

CLAUDIO.
Marry, beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear.
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

LEONATO.
Tush, tush, man! never fleer and jest at me:
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
As, under privilege of age, to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do,
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wrong’d mine innocent child and me
That I am forc’d to lay my reverence by,
And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child:
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors;
O! in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, fram’d by thy villainy!

CLAUDIO.
My villainy?

LEONATO.
Thine, Claudio; thine, I say.

DON PEDRO.
You say not right, old man.

LEONATO.
My lord, my lord,
 I’ll prove it on his body, if he dare,
Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.

CLAUDIO.
Away! I will not have to do with you.

LEONATO.
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill’d my child;
If thou kill’st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.

ANTONIO.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed:
But that’s no matter; let him kill one first:
Win me and wear me; let him answer me.
Come, follow me, boy; come, sir boy, come, follow me.
Sir boy, I’ll whip you from your foining fence;
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

LEONATO.
Brother,—

ANTONIO.
Content yourself. God knows I lov’d my niece;
And she is dead, slander’d to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops!

LEONATO.
Brother Anthony,—

ANTONIO.
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
Scambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go antickly, show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
And this is all!

LEONATO.
But, brother Anthony,—

ANTONIO.
Come, ’tis no matter:
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.

DON PEDRO.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughter’s death;
But, on my honour, she was charg’d with nothing
But what was true and very full of proof.

LEONATO.
My lord, my lord—

DON PEDRO.
I will not hear you.

LEONATO.
No? Come, brother, away. I will be heard.—

ANTONIO.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.

[Exeunt Leonato and Antonio.]

Enter Benedick.

DON PEDRO.
See, see; here comes the man we went to seek.

CLAUDIO.
Now, signior, what news?

BENEDICK.
Good day, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
Welcome, signior: you are almost come to part almost a fray.

CLAUDIO.
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old
men without teeth.

DON PEDRO.
Leonato and his brother. What think’st thou? Had we
fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.

BENEDICK.
In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came to seek you both.

CLAUDIO.
We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are high-proof
melancholy, and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy wit?

BENEDICK.
It is in my scabbard; shall I draw it?

DON PEDRO.
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?

CLAUDIO.
Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit. I
will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels; draw, to pleasure us.

DON PEDRO.
As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou sick, or angry?

CLAUDIO.
What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat, thou hast
mettle enough in thee to kill care.

BENEDICK.
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you charge it
against me. I pray you choose another subject.

CLAUDIO.
Nay then, give him another staff: this last was broke cross.

DON PEDRO.
By this light, he changes more and more: I think he be angry indeed.

CLAUDIO.
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.

BENEDICK.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?

CLAUDIO.
God bless me from a challenge!

BENEDICK.
[Aside to Claudio.] You are a villain, I jest not: I will
make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. Do me
right, or I will protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet lady, and
her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear from you.

CLAUDIO.
Well I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.

DON PEDRO.
What, a feast, a feast?

CLAUDIO.
I’ faith, I thank him; he hath bid me to a calf’s-head
and a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my knife’s
naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?

BENEDICK.
Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.

DON PEDRO.
I’ll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the
other day. I said, thou hadst a fine wit. ‘True,’ says
she, ‘a fine little one.’ ‘No,’ said I,
‘a great wit.’ ‘Right,’ said she, ‘a
great gross one.’ ‘Nay,’ said I, ‘a good wit.’
‘Just,’ said she, ‘it hurts nobody.’ ‘Nay,’
said I, ‘the gentleman is wise.’ ‘Certain,’
said she, ‘a wise gentleman.’ ‘Nay,’ said I,
‘he hath the tongues.’ ‘That I believe’ said
she, ‘for he swore a thing to me on Monday night, which he
forswore on Tuesday morning: there’s a double tongue; there’s
two tongues.’ Thus did she, an hour together, trans-shape thy
particular virtues; yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast
the properest man in Italy.

CLAUDIO.
For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.

DON PEDRO.
Yea, that she did; but yet, for all that, an if she did not
hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man’s daughter
told us all.

CLAUDIO.
All, all; and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.

DON PEDRO.
But when shall we set the savage bull’s horns on the
sensible Benedick’s head?

CLAUDIO.
Yea, and text underneath, ‘Here dwells Benedick the
married man!’

BENEDICK.
Fare you well, boy: you know my mind. I will leave you now to
your gossip-like humour; you break jests as braggarts do their blades,
which, God be thanked, hurt not. My lord, for your many courtesies I thank
you: I must discontinue your company. Your brother the bastard is fled
from Messina: you have, among you, killed a sweet and innocent lady. For
my Lord Lack-beard there, he and I shall meet; and till then, peace be
with him.

[Exit.]

DON PEDRO.
He is in earnest.

CLAUDIO.
In most profound earnest; and, I’ll warrant you, for
the love of Beatrice.

DON PEDRO.
And hath challenged thee?

CLAUDIO.
Most sincerely.

DON PEDRO.
What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose
and leaves off his wit!

CLAUDIO.
He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to such
a man.

DON PEDRO.
But, soft you; let me be: pluck up, my heart, and be sad! Did
he not say my brother was fled?

Enter Dogberry, Verges,  and the Watch, with
Conrade and Borachio.

DOGBERRY.
Come you, sir: if justice cannot tame you, she shall ne’er
weigh more reasons in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite
once, you must be looked to.

DON PEDRO.
How now! two of my brother’s men bound! Borachio, one!

CLAUDIO.
Hearken after their offence, my lord.

DON PEDRO.
Officers, what offence have these men done?

DOGBERRY.
Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they
have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly,
they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified unjust things; and to
conclude, they are lying knaves.

DON PEDRO.
First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee what’s
their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed; and, to conclude,
what you lay to their charge?

CLAUDIO.
Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and, by my troth,
there’s one meaning well suited.

DON PEDRO.
Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to
your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be understood.
What’s your offence?

BORACHIO.
Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer: do you hear
me, and let this Count kill me. I have deceived even your very eyes: what
your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to
light; who, in the night overheard me confessing to this man how Don John
your brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero; how you were brought
into the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero’s garments; how
you disgraced her, when you should marry her. My villainy they have upon
record; which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my
shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my master’s false accusation;
and, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a villain.

DON PEDRO.
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?

CLAUDIO.
I have drunk poison whiles he utter’d it.

DON PEDRO.
But did my brother set thee on to this?

BORACHIO.
Yea; and paid me richly for the practice of it.

DON PEDRO.
He is compos’d and fram’d of treachery:
And fled he is upon this villainy.

CLAUDIO.
Sweet Hero! now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I lov’d it first.

DOGBERRY.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs: by this time our sexton hath
reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And masters, do not forget to
specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an ass.

VERGES.
Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the sexton too.

Re-enter Leonato, Antonio and the Sexton.

LEONATO.
Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,
That, when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him. Which of these is he?

BORACHIO.
If you would know your wronger, look on me.

LEONATO.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill’d
Mine innocent child?

BORACHIO.
Yea, even I alone.

LEONATO.
No, not so, villain; thou beliest thyself:
Here stand a pair of honourable men;
A third is fled, that had a hand in it.
I thank you, princes, for my daughter’s death:
Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
’Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

CLAUDIO.
I know not how to pray your patience;
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin: yet sinn’d I not
But in mistaking.

DON PEDRO.
By my soul, nor I:
And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight
That he’ll enjoin me to.

LEONATO.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live;
That were impossible; but, I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died; and if your love
Can labour aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
And sing it to her bones: sing it tonight.
Tomorrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that’s dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us:
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.

CLAUDIO.
O noble sir,
Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me!
I do embrace your offer; and dispose
For henceforth of poor Claudio.

LEONATO.
Tomorrow then I will expect your coming;
Tonight I take my leave. This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who, I believe, was pack’d in all this wrong,
Hir’d to it by your brother.

BORACHIO.
No, by my soul she was not;
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me;
But always hath been just and virtuous
In anything that I do know by her.

DOGBERRY.
Moreover, sir,—which, indeed, is not under white and black,—
this plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass: I beseech you, let it
be remembered in his punishment. And also, the watch heard them talk of
one Deformed: they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it,
and borrows money in God’s name, the which he hath used so long and
never paid, that now men grow hard-hearted, and will lend nothing for God’s
sake. Pray you, examine him upon that point.

LEONATO.
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.

DOGBERRY.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent
youth, and I praise God for you.

LEONATO.
There’s for thy pains.

DOGBERRY.
God save the foundation!

LEONATO.
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.

DOGBERRY.
I leave an arrant knave with your worship; which I beseech your
worship to correct yourself, for the example of others. God keep your
worship! I wish your worship well; God restore you to health! I humbly
give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, God
prohibit it! Come, neighbour.

[Exeunt Dogberry and Verges.]

LEONATO.
Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.

ANTONIO.
Farewell, my lords: we look for you tomorrow.

DON PEDRO.
We will not fail.

CLAUDIO.
Tonight I’ll mourn with Hero.

[Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio.]

LEONATO.
[To the Watch.] Bring you these fellows on. We’ll talk with
Margaret,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE II. Leonato’s Garden.

Enter Benedick and Margaret,
meeting.

BENEDICK.
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by
helping me to the speech of Beatrice.

MARGARET.
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?

BENEDICK.
In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come over
it; for, in most comely truth, thou deservest it.

MARGARET.
To have no man come over me! why, shall I always keep below stairs?

BENEDICK.
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound’s mouth; it catches.

MARGARET.
And yours as blunt as the fencer’s foils, which hit, but hurt not.

BENEDICK.
A most manly wit, Margaret; it will not hurt a woman: and so, I
pray thee, call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.

MARGARET.
Give us the swords, we have bucklers of our own.

BENEDICK.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a
vice; and they are dangerous weapons for maids.

MARGARET.
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.

BENEDICK.
And therefore will come.

[Exit Margaret.]

    The god of love,
     That sits above,
   And knows me, and knows me,
How pitiful I deserve,—

I mean, in singing: but in loving, Leander the good swimmer, Troilus the
first employer of panders, and a whole book full of these quondam
carpet-mongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank
verse, why, they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self
in love. Marry, I cannot show it in rime; I have tried: I can find out no
rime to ‘lady’ but ‘baby’, an innocent rime; for
‘scorn,’ ‘horn’, a hard rime; for ‘school’,
‘fool’, a babbling rime; very ominous endings: no, I was not
born under a riming planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.

Enter Beatrice.

Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?

BEATRICE.
Yea, signior; and depart when you bid me.

BENEDICK.
O, stay but till then!

BEATRICE.
‘Then’ is spoken; fare you well now: and yet, ere I
go, let me go with that I came for; which is, with knowing what hath
passed between you and Claudio.

BENEDICK.
Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.

BEATRICE.
Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath,
and foul breath is noisome; therefore I will depart unkissed.

BENEDICK.
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible
is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge,
and either I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward.
And, I pray thee now, tell me, for which of my bad parts didst thou first
fall in love with me?

BEATRICE.
For them all together; which maintained so politic a state
of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with
them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?

BENEDICK.
‘Suffer love,’ a good epithet! I do suffer love
indeed, for I love thee against my will.

BEATRICE.
In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor heart! If you spite
it for my sake, I will spite it for yours; for I will never love that
which my friend hates.

BENEDICK.
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.

BEATRICE.
It appears not in this confession: there’s not one wise
man among twenty that will praise himself.

BENEDICK.
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in the time of
good neighbours. If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he
dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the
widow weeps.

BEATRICE.
 And how long is that think you?

BENEDICK.
Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum:
therefore is it most expedient for the wise,—if Don Worm, his conscience,
find no impediment to the contrary,—to be the trumpet of his own virtues,
as I am to myself. So much for praising myself, who, I myself will bear
witness, is praiseworthy. And now tell me, how doth your cousin?

BEATRICE.
Very ill.

BENEDICK.
And how do you?

BEATRICE.
Very ill too.

BENEDICK.
Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I leave you too, for
here comes one in haste.

Enter Ursula.

URSULA.
Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder’s old coil at
home: it is proved, my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused, the Prince and
Claudio mightily abused; and Don John is the author of all, who is fled
and gone. Will you come presently?

BEATRICE.
Will you go hear this news, signior?

BENEDICK.
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy
eyes; and moreover I will go with thee to thy uncle’s.

[Exeunt.]

SCENE III. The Inside of a Church.

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio and Attendants,
with music and tapers.

CLAUDIO.
Is this the monument of Leonato?

A LORD.
It is, my lord.

CLAUDIO.
[Reads from a scroll.]

Epitaph.

  Done to death by slanderous tongues
     Was the Hero that here lies:
    Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
 Gives her fame which never dies.
So the life that died with shame
 Lives in death with glorious fame.

Hang thou there upon the tomb,

Praising her when I am dumb.
Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.

Song.

 Pardon, goddess of the night,
   Those that slew thy virgin knight;
    For the which, with songs of woe,
     Round about her tomb they go.
   Midnight, assist our moan;
    Help us to sigh and groan,
  Heavily, heavily:
Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
 Till death be uttered,
  Heavily, heavily.

CLAUDIO.
Now, unto thy bones good night!
Yearly will I do this rite.

DON PEDRO.
Good morrow, masters: put your torches out.
The wolves have prey’d; and look, the gentle day,
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy East with spots of grey.
Thanks to you all, and leave us: fare you well.

CLAUDIO.
Good morrow, masters: each his several way.

DON PEDRO.
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds;
And then to Leonato’s we will go.

CLAUDIO.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed’s,
Than this for whom we rend’red up this woe!

[Exeunt.]

SCENE IV. A Room in Leonato’s House.

Enter Leonato, Antonio, Benedick, Beatrice,
Margaret, Ursula, Friar Francis and Hero.

FRIAR.
Did I not tell you she was innocent?

LEONATO.
So are the Prince and Claudio, who accus’d her
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
In the true course of all the question.

ANTONIO.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.

BENEDICK.
And so am I, being else by faith enforc’d
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

LEONATO.
Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither mask’d:
The Prince and Claudio promis’d by this hour
To visit me.

[Exeunt Ladies.]

You know your office, brother;
You must be father to your brother’s daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.

ANTONIO.
Which I will do with confirm’d countenance.

BENEDICK.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.

FRIAR.
To do what, signior?

BENEDICK.
To bind me, or undo me; one of them.
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.

LEONATO.
That eye my daughter lent her. ’Tis most true.

BENEDICK.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.

LEONATO.
The sight whereof I think, you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince. But what’s your will?

BENEDICK.
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical:
But, for my will, my will is your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin’d
In the state of honourable marriage:
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.

LEONATO.
My heart is with your liking.

FRIAR.
And my help. Here comes the Prince and Claudio.

Enter Don Pedro and Claudio,
with Attendants.

DON PEDRO.
Good morrow to this fair assembly.

LEONATO.
Good morrow, Prince; good morrow, Claudio:
We here attend you. Are you yet determin’d
Today to marry with my brother’s daughter?

CLAUDIO.
I’ll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.

LEONATO.
Call her forth, brother: here’s the friar ready.

[Exit Antonio.]

DON PEDRO.
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what’s the matter,
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?

CLAUDIO.
I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
Tush! fear not, man, we’ll tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.

BENEDICK.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low:
And some such strange bull leap’d your father’s cow,
And got a calf in that same noble feat,
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.

CLAUDIO.
For this I owe you: here comes other reckonings.

Re-enter Antonio, with the ladies masked.

Which is the lady I must seize upon?

ANTONIO.
This same is she, and I do give you her.

CLAUDIO.
Why then, she’s mine. Sweet, let me see your face.

LEONATO.
No, that you shall not, till you take her hand
Before this friar, and swear to marry her.

CLAUDIO.
Give me your hand: before this holy friar,
I am your husband, if you like of me.

HERO.
And when I liv’d, I was your other wife:
[Unmasking.] And when you lov’d, you were my other husband.

CLAUDIO.
Another Hero!

HERO.
Nothing certainer:
One Hero died defil’d, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.

DON PEDRO.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!

LEONATO.
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander liv’d.

FRIAR.
All this amazement can I qualify:
When after that the holy rites are ended,
I’ll tell you largely of fair Hero’s death:
Meantime, let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.

BENEDICK.
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?

BEATRICE.
[Unmasking.] I answer to that name. What is your will?

BENEDICK.
Do not you love me?

BEATRICE.
Why, no; no more than reason.

BENEDICK.
Why, then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio
Have been deceived; for they swore you did.

BEATRICE.
Do not you love me?

BENEDICK.
Troth, no; no more than reason.

BEATRICE.
Why, then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula,
Are much deceiv’d; for they did swear you did.

BENEDICK.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.

BEATRICE.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.

BENEDICK.
’Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?

BEATRICE.
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.

LEONATO.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.

CLAUDIO.
And I’ll be sworn upon ’t that he loves her;
For here’s a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashion’d to Beatrice.

HERO.
And here’s another,
Writ in my cousin’s hand, stolen from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedick.

BENEDICK.
A miracle! here’s our own hands against our hearts. Come,
I will have thee; but, by this light, I take thee for pity.

BEATRICE.
I would not deny you; but, by this good day, I yield upon great
persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told you were in a
consumption.

BENEDICK.
Peace! I will stop your mouth. [Kisses her.]

DON PEDRO.
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?

BENEDICK.
I’ll tell thee what, Prince; a college of witcrackers cannot flout me
out of my humour. Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram?
No; if man will be beaten with brains, a’ shall wear nothing handsome
about him. In brief, since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing
to any purpose that the world can say against it; and therefore never
flout at me for what I have said against it, for man is a giddy thing,
and this is my conclusion. For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have
beaten thee; but, in that thou art like to be my kinsman, live
unbruised, and love my cousin.

CLAUDIO.
I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice, that I might
have cudgelled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double-dealer;
which, out of question, thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look exceeding
narrowly to thee.

BENEDICK.
Come, come, we are friends. Let’s have a dance ere we are
married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives’ heels.

LEONATO.
We’ll have dancing afterward.

BENEDICK.
First, of my word; therefore play, music! Prince, thou art sad;
get thee a wife, get thee a wife: there is no staff more reverent than one
tipped with horn.

Enter Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My lord, your brother John is ta’en in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.

BENEDICK.
Think not on him till tomorrow: I’ll devise thee
brave punishments for him. Strike up, pipers!

[Dance. Exeunt.]




THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Venice. A street
 Scene II. Venice. Another street
 Scene III. Venice. A council chamber

 ACT II
 Scene I. A seaport in Cyprus. A Platform
 Scene II. A street
 Scene III. A Hall in the Castle

 ACT III
 Scene I. Cyprus. Before the Castle
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle
 Scene III. Cyprus. The Garden of the Castle
 Scene IV. Cyprus. Before the Castle

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Cyprus. Before the Castle
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle
 Scene III. Cyprus. Another Room in the Castle

 ACT V
 Scene I. Cyprus. A Street
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Bedchamber in the castle




Dramatis Personæ

DUKE OF VENICE
BRABANTIO, a Senator of Venice and Desdemona’s father
Other Senators
GRATIANO, Brother to Brabantio
LODOVICO, Kinsman to Brabantio
OTHELLO, a noble Moor in the service of Venice
CASSIO, his Lieutenant
IAGO, his Ancient
MONTANO, Othello’s predecessor in the government of Cyprus
RODERIGO, a Venetian Gentleman
CLOWN, Servant to Othello

DESDEMONA, Daughter to Brabantio and Wife to Othello
EMILIA, Wife to Iago
BIANCA, Mistress to Cassio

Officers, Gentlemen, Messenger, Musicians, Herald, Sailor, Attendants,
&c.

SCENE: The First Act in Venice; during the rest of the Play at a
Seaport in Cyprus.




ACT I

SCENE I. Venice. A street.


Enter Roderigo and Iago.

RODERIGO.
Tush, never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse,
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.

IAGO.
’Sblood, but you will not hear me.
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.

RODERIGO.
Thou told’st me, thou didst hold him in thy hate.

IAGO.
Despise me if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capp’d to him; and by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them, with a bombast circumstance,
Horribly stuff’d with epithets of war:
And in conclusion,
Nonsuits my mediators: for “Certes,” says he,
“I have already chose my officer.”
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost damn’d in a fair wife,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster, unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
As masterly as he: mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election,
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds,
Christian and heathen, must be belee’d and calm’d
By debitor and creditor, this counter-caster,
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I, God bless the mark, his Moorship’s ancient.

RODERIGO.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

IAGO.
Why, there’s no remedy. ’Tis the curse of service,
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to the first. Now sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affin’d
To love the Moor.

RODERIGO.
I would not follow him, then.

IAGO.
O, sir, content you.
I follow him to serve my turn upon him:
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly follow’d. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass,
For nought but provender, and when he’s old, cashier’d.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who, trimm’d in forms, and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them, and when they have lin’d their coats,
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, ’tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.

RODERIGO.
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,
If he can carry’t thus!

IAGO.
Call up her father,
Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies: though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such changes of vexation on’t,
As it may lose some color.

RODERIGO.
Here is her father’s house, I’ll call aloud.

IAGO.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.

RODERIGO.
What ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!

IAGO.
Awake! what ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves, thieves!

Brabantio appears above at a window.

BRABANTIO.
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

RODERIGO.
Signior, is all your family within?

IAGO.
Are your doors locked?

BRABANTIO.
Why, wherefore ask you this?

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you’re robb’d, for shame put on your gown,
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise,
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you:
Arise, I say.

BRABANTIO.
What, have you lost your wits?

RODERIGO.
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?

BRABANTIO.
Not I. What are you?

RODERIGO.
My name is Roderigo.

BRABANTIO.
The worser welcome.
I have charg’d thee not to haunt about my doors;
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee; and now in madness,
Being full of supper and distempering draughts,
Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come
To start my quiet.

RODERIGO.
Sir, sir, sir,—

BRABANTIO.
But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.

RODERIGO.
Patience, good sir.

BRABANTIO.
What tell’st thou me of robbing?
This is Venice. My house is not a grange.

RODERIGO.
Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you.

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God if the devil
bid you. Because we come to do you service, and you think we are
ruffians, you’ll have your daughter cover’d with a Barbary horse;
you’ll have your nephews neigh to you; you’ll have coursers for cousins
and gennets for germans.

BRABANTIO.
What profane wretch art thou?

IAGO.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are
now making the beast with two backs.

BRABANTIO.
Thou art a villain.

IAGO.
You are a senator.

BRABANTIO.
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.

RODERIGO.
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
If ’t be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
(As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o’ the night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor:
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my manners tell me,
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.
Your daughter (if you have not given her leave)
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself:
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.

BRABANTIO.
Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper! Call up all my people!
This accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light!

[_Exit from above._]

IAGO.
Farewell; for I must leave you:
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be produc’d, as if I stay I shall,
Against the Moor. For I do know the state,
However this may gall him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he’s embark’d
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Which even now stand in act, that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love,
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.

[_Exit._]

Enter Brabantio with Servants and torches.

BRABANTIO.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what’s to come of my despised time,
Is naught but bitterness. Now Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her? (O unhappy girl!)
With the Moor, say’st thou? (Who would be a father!)
How didst thou know ’twas she? (O, she deceives me
Past thought.) What said she to you? Get more tapers,
Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?

RODERIGO.
Truly I think they are.

BRABANTIO.
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds
By what you see them act. Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?

RODERIGO.
Yes, sir, I have indeed.

BRABANTIO.
Call up my brother. O, would you had had her!
Some one way, some another. Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

RODERIGO.
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard, and go along with me.

BRABANTIO.
Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call,
I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of night.
On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Venice. Another street.

Enter Othello, Iago and Attendants with torches.

IAGO.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o’ the conscience
To do no contriv’d murder; I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service: nine or ten times
I had thought to have yerk’d him here under the ribs.

OTHELLO.
’Tis better as it is.

IAGO.
Nay, but he prated,
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your honour,
That with the little godliness I have,
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,
Are you fast married? Be assur’d of this,
That the magnifico is much belov’d
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the duke’s; he will divorce you,
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
The law (with all his might to enforce it on)
Will give him cable.

OTHELLO.
Let him do his spite;
My services, which I have done the signiory,
Shall out-tongue his complaints. ’Tis yet to know,—
Which, when I know that boasting is an honour,
I shall promulgate,—I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege. And my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reach’d. For know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhoused free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come yond?

IAGO.
Those are the raised father and his friends:
You were best go in.

OTHELLO.
Not I; I must be found.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

IAGO.
By Janus, I think no.

Enter Cassio and Officers with torches.

OTHELLO.
The servants of the duke and my lieutenant.
The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
What is the news?

CASSIO.
The duke does greet you, general,
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance
Even on the instant.

OTHELLO.
What is the matter, think you?

CASSIO.
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another’s heels;
And many of the consuls, rais’d and met,
Are at the duke’s already. You have been hotly call’d for,
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.

OTHELLO.
’Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you.

[_Exit._]

CASSIO.
Ancient, what makes he here?

IAGO.
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack:
If it prove lawful prize, he’s made forever.

CASSIO.
I do not understand.

IAGO.
He’s married.

CASSIO.
To who?

Enter Othello.

IAGO.
Marry to—Come, captain, will you go?

OTHELLO.
Have with you.

CASSIO.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.

Enter Brabantio, Roderigo and Officers with torches and weapons.

IAGO.
It is Brabantio. General, be advis’d,
He comes to bad intent.

OTHELLO.
Holla, stand there!

RODERIGO.
Signior, it is the Moor.

BRABANTIO.
Down with him, thief!

[_They draw on both sides._]

IAGO.
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.

OTHELLO.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.

BRABANTIO.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow’d my daughter?
Damn’d as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
For I’ll refer me to all things of sense,
(If she in chains of magic were not bound)
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage, that she shunn’d
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight.
Judge me the world, if ’tis not gross in sense,
That thou hast practis’d on her with foul charms,
Abus’d her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I’ll have’t disputed on;
’Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practiser
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.—
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.

OTHELLO.
Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining and the rest:
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter. Where will you that I go
To answer this your charge?

BRABANTIO.
To prison, till fit time
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.

OTHELLO.
What if I do obey?
How may the duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?

OFFICER.
’Tis true, most worthy signior,
The duke’s in council, and your noble self,
I am sure is sent for.

BRABANTIO.
How? The duke in council?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine’s not an idle cause. The duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own.
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A council chamber.

The Duke and Senators sitting at a table; Officers attending.

DUKE.
There is no composition in these news
That gives them credit.

FIRST SENATOR.
Indeed, they are disproportion’d;
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.

DUKE.
And mine a hundred and forty.

SECOND SENATOR
And mine two hundred:
But though they jump not on a just account,
(As in these cases, where the aim reports,
’Tis oft with difference,) yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

DUKE.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgement:
I do not so secure me in the error,
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.

SAILOR.
[_Within._] What, ho! what, ho! what, ho!

OFFICER.
A messenger from the galleys.

Enter Sailor.

DUKE.
Now,—what’s the business?

SAILOR.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.

DUKE.
How say you by this change?

FIRST SENATOR.
This cannot be
By no assay of reason. ’Tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk;
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks the abilities
That Rhodes is dress’d in. If we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskilful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
To wake and wage a danger profitless.

DUKE.
Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.

OFFICER.
Here is more news.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

FIRST SENATOR.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?

MESSENGER.
Of thirty sail, and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.

DUKE.
’Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?

FIRST SENATOR.
He’s now in Florence.

DUKE.
Write from us to him; post-post-haste dispatch.

FIRST SENATOR.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

Enter Brabantio, Othello, Iago, Roderigo and Officers.

DUKE.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
[_To Brabantio._] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior,
We lack’d your counsel and your help tonight.

BRABANTIO.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me.
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of business
Hath rais’d me from my bed, nor doth the general care
Take hold on me; for my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate and o’erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still itself.

DUKE.
Why, what’s the matter?

BRABANTIO.
My daughter! O, my daughter!

DUKE and SENATORS.
Dead?

BRABANTIO.
Ay, to me.
She is abused, stol’n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so preposterously to err,
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
Sans witchcraft could not.

DUKE.
Whoe’er he be, that in this foul proceeding,
Hath thus beguil’d your daughter of herself,
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,
After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.

BRABANTIO.
Humbly I thank your grace.
Here is the man, this Moor, whom now it seems
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.

ALL.
We are very sorry for ’t.

DUKE.
[_To Othello._] What, in your own part, can you say to this?

BRABANTIO.
Nothing, but this is so.

OTHELLO.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approv’d good masters:
That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter,
It is most true; true, I have married her.
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little bless’d with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have us’d
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak,
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,
I will a round unvarnish’d tale deliver
Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic,
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his daughter.

BRABANTIO.
A maiden never bold:
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blush’d at herself; and she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,
To fall in love with what she fear’d to look on!
It is judgement maim’d and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell,
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
That with some mixtures powerful o’er the blood,
Or with some dram conjur’d to this effect,
He wrought upon her.

DUKE.
To vouch this is no proof;
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

FIRST SENATOR.
But, Othello, speak:
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?

OTHELLO.
I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.

DUKE.
Fetch Desdemona hither.

OTHELLO.
Ancient, conduct them, you best know the place.

[_Exeunt Iago and Attendants._]

And till she come, as truly as to heaven
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I’ll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love,
And she in mine.

DUKE.
Say it, Othello.

OTHELLO.
Her father lov’d me, oft invited me,
Still question’d me the story of my life,
From year to year—the battles, sieges, fortunes,
That I have pass’d.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To the very moment that he bade me tell it,
Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
Of moving accidents by flood and field;
Of hair-breadth scapes i’ th’ imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the insolent foe,
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,
And portance in my traveler’s history,
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak,—such was the process;
And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She’d come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffer’d. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, in faith, ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange;
’Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful.
She wish’d she had not heard it, yet she wish’d
That heaven had made her such a man: she thank’d me,
And bade me, if I had a friend that lov’d her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:
She lov’d me for the dangers I had pass’d,
And I lov’d her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have us’d.
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.

Enter  Desdemona, Iago and Attendants.

DUKE.
I think this tale would win my daughter too.
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.

BRABANTIO.
I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man!—Come hither, gentle mistress:
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?

DESDEMONA.
My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
To you I am bound for life and education.
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you. You are the lord of duty,
I am hitherto your daughter: but here’s my husband.
And so much duty as my mother show’d
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor my lord.

BRABANTIO.
God be with you! I have done.
Please it your grace, on to the state affairs.
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.—
Come hither, Moor:
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee.—For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.—I have done, my lord.

DUKE.
Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step may help these lovers
Into your favour.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mockery makes.
The robb’d that smiles steals something from the thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

BRABANTIO.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile;
He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
But words are words; I never yet did hear
That the bruis’d heart was pierced through the ear.
I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.

DUKE.
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, the
fortitude of the place is best known to you. And though we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign
mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must
therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with
this more stubborn and boisterous expedition.

OTHELLO.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down: I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness, and do undertake
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.

DUKE.
If you please,
Be’t at her father’s.

BRABANTIO.
I’ll not have it so.

OTHELLO.
Nor I.

DESDEMONA.
Nor I. I would not there reside,
To put my father in impatient thoughts,
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,
And let me find a charter in your voice
T’ assist my simpleness.

DUKE.
What would you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
That I did love the Moor to live with him,
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world: my heart’s subdued
Even to the very quality of my lord.
I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,
And to his honours and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

OTHELLO.
Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat, the young affects
In me defunct, and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
For she is with me. No, when light-wing’d toys
Of feather’d Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and offic’d instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation.

DUKE.
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going. The affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it.

FIRST SENATOR.
You must away tonight.

OTHELLO.
With all my heart.

DUKE.
At nine i’ the morning here we’ll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind,
And he shall our commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.

OTHELLO.
So please your grace, my ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust,
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good grace shall think
To be sent after me.

DUKE.
Let it be so.
Good night to everyone. [_To Brabantio._] And, noble signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

FIRST SENATOR.
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.

BRABANTIO.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:
She has deceiv’d her father, and may thee.

[_Exeunt Duke, Senators, Officers, &c._]

OTHELLO.
My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.—
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction,
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.

[_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._]

RODERIGO.
Iago—

IAGO.
What sayst thou, noble heart?

RODERIGO.
What will I do, thinkest thou?

IAGO.
Why, go to bed and sleep.

RODERIGO.
I will incontinently drown myself.

IAGO.
If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman!

RODERIGO.
It is silliness to live, when to live is torment; and then have we a
prescription to die when death is our physician.

IAGO.
O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years,
and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never
found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say I would drown
myself for the love of a guinea-hen, I would change my humanity with a
baboon.

RODERIGO.
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not
in my virtue to amend it.

IAGO.
Virtue! a fig! ’Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies
are gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners. So that if we will
plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it
with one gender of herbs or distract it with many, either to have it
sterile with idleness or manured with industry, why, the power and
corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance of our
lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the
blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most preposterous
conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal
stings, our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love, to
be a sect, or scion.

RODERIGO.
It cannot be.

IAGO.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be
a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies. I have professed me
thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of
perdurable toughness; I could never better stead thee than now. Put
money in thy purse; follow thou the wars; defeat thy favour with an
usurped beard; I say, put money in thy purse. It cannot be that
Desdemona should long continue her love to the Moor,—put money in thy
purse,—nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement, and thou shalt
see an answerable sequestration—put but money in thy purse. These Moors
are changeable in their wills. Fill thy purse with money. The food that
to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as acerb
as the coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with
his body, she will find the error of her choice. She must have change,
she must. Therefore put money in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn
thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money
thou canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian
and a supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the
tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her; therefore make money. A pox of
drowning thyself! It is clean out of the way: seek thou rather to be
hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.

RODERIGO.
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes if I depend on the issue?

IAGO.
Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I
retell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted;
thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against
him: if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a
sport. There are many events in the womb of time which will be
delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more of this
tomorrow. Adieu.

RODERIGO.
Where shall we meet i’ the morning?

IAGO.
At my lodging.

RODERIGO.
I’ll be with thee betimes.

IAGO.
Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
What say you?

IAGO.
No more of drowning, do you hear?

RODERIGO.
I am changed. I’ll sell all my land.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.
For I mine own gain’d knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets
He has done my office. I know not if ’t be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now,
To get his place, and to plume up my will
In double knavery. How, how? Let’s see.
After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose,
To be suspected, fram’d to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by the nose
As asses are.
I have’t. It is engender’d. Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.

[_Exit._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A seaport in Cyprus. A Platform.


Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.

MONTANO.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Nothing at all, it is a high-wrought flood.
I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main
Descry a sail.

MONTANO.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land.
A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements.
If it hath ruffian’d so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shak’d surge, with high and monstrous main,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole;
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed flood.

MONTANO.
If that the Turkish fleet
Be not enshelter’d, and embay’d, they are drown’d.
It is impossible to bear it out.

Enter a third Gentleman.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
News, lads! Our wars are done.
The desperate tempest hath so bang’d the Turks
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.

MONTANO.
How? Is this true?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
The ship is here put in,
A Veronessa; Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

MONTANO.
I am glad on’t. ’Tis a worthy governor.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.

MONTANO.
Pray heavens he be;
For I have serv’d him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let’s to the sea-side, ho!
As well to see the vessel that’s come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
An indistinct regard.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Come, let’s do so;
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.

Enter Cassio.

CASSIO.
Thanks you, the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defence against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.

MONTANO.
Is he well shipp’d?

CASSIO.
His bark is stoutly timber’d, and his pilot
Of very expert and approv’d allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.

[_Within._] A sail, a sail, a sail!

Enter a Messenger.

CASSIO.
What noise?

MESSENGER.
The town is empty; on the brow o’ the sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A sail!”

CASSIO.
My hopes do shape him for the governor.

[_A shot._]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.
Our friends at least.

CASSIO.
I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who ’tis that is arriv’d.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I shall.

[_Exit._]

MONTANO.
But, good lieutenant, is your general wiv’d?

CASSIO.
Most fortunately: he hath achiev’d a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in the essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.

Enter second Gentleman.

How now? Who has put in?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.

CASSIO.
He has had most favourable and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The gutter’d rocks, and congregated sands,
Traitors ensteep’d to clog the guiltless keel,
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

MONTANO.
What is she?

CASSIO.
She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago;
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A se’nnight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms,
Give renew’d fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort!

Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia.

O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheel thee round!

DESDEMONA.
I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell me of my lord?

CASSIO.
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he’s well, and will be shortly here.

DESDEMONA.
O, but I fear—How lost you company?

[_Within._] A sail, a sail!

CASSIO.
The great contention of the sea and skies
Parted our fellowship. But, hark! a sail.

[_Guns within._]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They give their greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend.

CASSIO.
See for the news.

[_Exit Gentleman._]

Good ancient, you are welcome. [_To Emilia._] Welcome, mistress.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners; ’tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

[_Kissing her._]

IAGO.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, she has no speech.

IAGO.
In faith, too much.
I find it still when I have list to sleep.
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.

EMILIA.
You have little cause to say so.

IAGO.
Come on, come on; you are pictures out of doors,
Bells in your parlours, wild-cats in your kitchens,
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.

DESDEMONA.
O, fie upon thee, slanderer!

IAGO.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

EMILIA.
You shall not write my praise.

IAGO.
No, let me not.

DESDEMONA.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?

IAGO.
O gentle lady, do not put me to’t,
For I am nothing if not critical.

DESDEMONA.
Come on, assay.—There’s one gone to the harbour?

IAGO.
Ay, madam.

DESDEMONA.
I am not merry, but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.—
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

IAGO.
I am about it, but indeed, my invention
Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze,
It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours,
And thus she is deliver’d.
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
The one’s for use, the other useth it.

DESDEMONA.
Well prais’d! How if she be black and witty?

IAGO.
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She’ll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

DESDEMONA.
Worse and worse.

EMILIA.
How if fair and foolish?

IAGO.
She never yet was foolish that was fair,
For even her folly help’d her to an heir.

DESDEMONA.
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i’ the alehouse. What
miserable praise hast thou for her that’s foul and foolish?

IAGO.
There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

DESDEMONA.
O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise
couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the
authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice
itself?

IAGO.
She that was ever fair and never proud,
Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
Never lack’d gold and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said, “Now I may”;
She that, being anger’d, her revenge being nigh,
Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;
She that in wisdom never was so frail
To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail;
She that could think and ne’er disclose her mind,
See suitors following and not look behind;
She was a wight, if ever such wight were—

DESDEMONA.
To do what?

IAGO.
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

DESDEMONA.
O most lame and impotent conclusion!—Do not learn of him, Emilia,
though he be thy husband.—How say you, Cassio? is he not a most profane
and liberal counsellor?

CASSIO.
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than in
the scholar.

IAGO.
[_Aside._] He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper. With as
little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile
upon her, do. I will gyve thee in thine own courtship. You say true,
’tis so, indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your
lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers
so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in. Very good;
well kissed, an excellent courtesy! ’Tis so, indeed. Yet again your
fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!

[_Trumpets within._]

The Moor! I know his trumpet.

CASSIO.
’Tis truly so.

DESDEMONA.
Let’s meet him, and receive him.

CASSIO.
Lo, where he comes!

Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
O my fair warrior!

DESDEMONA.
My dear Othello!

OTHELLO.
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have waken’d death!
And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus-high, and duck again as low
As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die,
’Twere now to be most happy, for I fear
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.

DESDEMONA.
The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!

OTHELLO.
Amen to that, sweet powers!
I cannot speak enough of this content.
It stops me here; it is too much of joy:
And this, and this, the greatest discords be [_They kiss._]
That e’er our hearts shall make!

IAGO.
[_Aside._] O, you are well tun’d now,
But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.

OTHELLO.
Come, let us to the castle.—
News, friends, our wars are done, the Turks are drown’d.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Honey, you shall be well desir’d in Cyprus;
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts.—I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel;
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.—Come, Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.

[_Exeunt Othello, Desdemona and Attendants._]

IAGO.
Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come hither. If thou be’st
valiant—as, they say, base men being in love have then a nobility in
their natures more than is native to them—list me. The lieutenant
tonight watches on the court of guard: first, I must tell thee this:
Desdemona is directly in love with him.

RODERIGO.
With him? Why, ’tis not possible.

IAGO.
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what
violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging, and telling her
fantastical lies. And will she love him still for prating? Let not thy
discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight shall
she have to look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act
of sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to give satiety a
fresh appetite, loveliness in favour, sympathy in years, manners, and
beauties; all which the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these
required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself abused,
begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor, very nature
will instruct her in it, and compel her to some second choice. Now sir,
this granted (as it is a most pregnant and unforced position) who
stands so eminently in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? a
knave very voluble; no further conscionable than in putting on the mere
form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt
and most hidden loose affection? Why, none, why, none! A slipper and
subtle knave, a finder out of occasions; that has an eye can stamp and
counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself: a
devilish knave! Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all
those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A
pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.

RODERIGO.
I cannot believe that in her, she is full of most blessed condition.

IAGO.
Blest fig’s end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes: if she had been
blessed, she would never have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst
thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?

RODERIGO.
Yes, that I did. But that was but courtesy.

IAGO.
Lechery, by this hand. An index and obscure prologue to the history of
lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips that their
breaths embrac’d together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! When these
mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main
exercise, the incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by
me. I have brought you from Venice. Watch you tonight. For the command,
I’ll lay’t upon you. Cassio knows you not. I’ll not be far from you. Do
you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or
tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which
the time shall more favourably minister.

RODERIGO.
Well.

IAGO.
Sir, he is rash, and very sudden in choler, and haply with his
truncheon may strike at you: provoke him that he may, for even out of
that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall
come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall
then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed,
without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.

RODERIGO.
I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.

IAGO.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel: I must fetch his
necessaries ashore. Farewell.

RODERIGO.
Adieu.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
That she loves him, ’tis apt, and of great credit:
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature;
And, I dare think, he’ll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leap’d into my seat. The thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am even’d with him, wife for wife,
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
(For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too)
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confus’d.
Knavery’s plain face is never seen till us’d.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A street.

Enter Othello’s Herald with a proclamation.

HERALD.
It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that upon
certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the
Turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph: some to dance, some
to make bonfires, each man to what sport and revels his addition leads
him. For besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices are
open, and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of
five till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus
and our noble general Othello!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Hall in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
Let’s teach ourselves that honourable stop,
Not to outsport discretion.

CASSIO.
Iago hath direction what to do.
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to’t.

OTHELLO.
Iago is most honest.
Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you. [_To Desdemona._] Come, my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you.—
Good night.

[_Exeunt Othello, Desdemona and Attendants._]

Enter Iago.

CASSIO.
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.

IAGO.
Not this hour, lieutenant. ’Tis not yet ten o’ th’ clock. Our general
cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona; who let us not
therefore blame: he hath not yet made wanton the night with her; and
she is sport for Jove.

CASSIO.
She’s a most exquisite lady.

IAGO.
And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.

CASSIO.
Indeed, she is a most fresh and delicate creature.

IAGO.
What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.

CASSIO.
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.

IAGO.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarm to love?

CASSIO.
She is indeed perfection.

IAGO.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of
wine; and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain
have a measure to the health of black Othello.

CASSIO.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for
drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.

IAGO.
O, they are our friends; but one cup: I’ll drink for you.

CASSIO.
I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified too,
and behold, what innovation it makes here: I am unfortunate in the
infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.

IAGO.
What, man! ’Tis a night of revels. The gallants desire it.

CASSIO.
Where are they?

IAGO.
Here at the door. I pray you, call them in.

CASSIO.
I’ll do’t; but it dislikes me.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
He’ll be as full of quarrel and offence
As my young mistress’ dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo,
Whom love hath turn’d almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight carous’d
Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch:
Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
That hold their honours in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight fluster’d with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Now, ’mongst this flock of drunkards,
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come:
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

Enter Cassio, Montano and Gentlemen; followed by Servant with wine.

CASSIO.
’Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.

MONTANO.
Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a soldier.

IAGO.
Some wine, ho!
[_Sings._]

    _And let me the cannikin clink, clink,
    And let me the cannikin clink, clink:
        A soldier’s a man,
        O, man’s life’s but a span,
    Why then let a soldier drink._

Some wine, boys!

CASSIO.
’Fore God, an excellent song.

IAGO.
I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting:
your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander,—drink, ho!—are
nothing to your English.

CASSIO.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?

IAGO.
Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not
to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next
pottle can be filled.

CASSIO.
To the health of our general!

MONTANO.
I am for it, lieutenant; and I’ll do you justice.

IAGO.
O sweet England!

[_Sings._]

    _King Stephen was a worthy peer,
        His breeches cost him but a crown;
    He held them sixpence all too dear,
        With that he call’d the tailor lown.
    He was a wight of high renown,
        And thou art but of low degree:
    ’Tis pride that pulls the country down,
        Then take thine auld cloak about thee._

Some wine, ho!

CASSIO.
’Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

IAGO.
Will you hear ’t again?

CASSIO.
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things.
Well, God’s above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be
souls must not be saved.

IAGO.
It’s true, good lieutenant.

CASSIO.
For mine own part, no offence to the general, nor any man of quality, I
hope to be saved.

IAGO.
And so do I too, lieutenant.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to be saved
before the ancient. Let’s have no more of this; let’s to our affairs.
Forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. Do not
think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my right
hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough,
and I speak well enough.

ALL.
Excellent well.

CASSIO.
Why, very well then. You must not think, then, that I am drunk.

[_Exit._]

MONTANO.
To the platform, masters. Come, let’s set the watch.

IAGO.
You see this fellow that is gone before,
He is a soldier fit to stand by Cæsar
And give direction: and do but see his vice,
’Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as th’ other. ’Tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.

MONTANO.
But is he often thus?

IAGO.
’Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:
He’ll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.

MONTANO.
It were well
The general were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?

Enter Roderigo.

IAGO.
[_Aside to him._] How now, Roderigo?
I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

MONTANO.
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
It were an honest action to say so
To the Moor.

IAGO.
Not I, for this fair island.
I do love Cassio well and would do much
To cure him of this evil. But, hark! What noise?

[_Cry within_: “Help! help!”]

Enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo.

CASSIO.
Zounds, you rogue, you rascal!

MONTANO.
What’s the matter, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
A knave teach me my duty! I’ll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.

RODERIGO.
Beat me?

CASSIO.
Dost thou prate, rogue?

[_Striking Roderigo._]

MONTANO.
Nay, good lieutenant;
I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

CASSIO.
Let me go, sir,
Or I’ll knock you o’er the mazard.

MONTANO.
Come, come, you’re drunk.

CASSIO.
Drunk?

[_They fight._]

IAGO.
[_Aside to Roderigo._] Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

Nay, good lieutenant, God’s will, gentlemen.
Help, ho!—Lieutenant,—sir,—Montano,—sir:—
Help, masters! Here’s a goodly watch indeed!

[_A bell rings._]

Who’s that which rings the bell?—Diablo, ho!
The town will rise. God’s will, lieutenant, hold,
You will be sham’d forever.

Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
What is the matter here?

MONTANO.
Zounds, I bleed still, I am hurt to the death.

OTHELLO.
Hold, for your lives!

IAGO.
Hold, ho! lieutenant,—sir,—Montano,—gentlemen,—
Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
Hold! The general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame!

OTHELLO.
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?
Are we turn’d Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.

IAGO.
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now,
As if some planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!

OTHELLO.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?

CASSIO.
I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.

OTHELLO.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted, and your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure: what’s the matter,
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.

MONTANO.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer, Iago, can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends me,
Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
By me that’s said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.

OTHELLO.
Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgement collied,
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on,
And he that is approv’d in this offence,
Though he had twinn’d with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,
Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
’Tis monstrous. Iago, who began’t?

MONTANO.
If partially affin’d, or leagu’d in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.

IAGO.
Touch me not so near.
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determin’d sword,
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamour (as it so fell out)
The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose: and I return’d the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
I ne’er might say before. When I came back,
(For this was brief) I found them close together,
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget;
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, receiv’d
From him that fled some strange indignity,
Which patience could not pass.

OTHELLO.
I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be officer of mine.

Enter Desdemona, attended.

Look, if my gentle love be not rais’d up!
I’ll make thee an example.

DESDEMONA.
What’s the matter?

OTHELLO.
All’s well now, sweeting; come away to bed.
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon.
Lead him off.


[_Montano is led off._]

Iago, look with care about the town,
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
Come, Desdemona: ’tis the soldiers’ life
To have their balmy slumbers wak’d with strife.

[_Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio._]

IAGO.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
Ay, past all surgery.

IAGO.
Marry, Heaven forbid!

CASSIO.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my reputation! I
have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My
reputation, Iago, my reputation!

IAGO.
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound;
there is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle
and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without
deserving. You have lost no reputation at all, unless you repute
yourself such a loser. What, man, there are ways to recover the general
again: you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy
than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenceless dog to
affright an imperious lion: sue to him again, and he’s yours.

CASSIO.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander
with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and
speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse fustian with
one’s own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name
to be known by, let us call thee devil!

IAGO.
What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he done to you?

CASSIO.
I know not.

IAGO.
Is’t possible?

CASSIO.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel, but
nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an enemy in their mouths
to steal away their brains! That we should with joy, pleasance, revel,
and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!

IAGO.
Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?

CASSIO.
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil wrath.
One unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly despise myself.

IAGO.
Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the
condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this had not
befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.

CASSIO.
I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me I am a drunkard!
Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To
be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast! O
strange! Every inordinate cup is unbless’d, and the ingredient is a
devil.

IAGO.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used.
Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I
love you.

CASSIO.
I have well approved it, sir.—I drunk!

IAGO.
You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time, man. I’ll tell you what
you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general; I may say so in
this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the
contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. Confess
yourself freely to her. Importune her help to put you in your place
again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition,
she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is
requested. This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to
splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of
your love shall grow stronger than it was before.

CASSIO.
You advise me well.

IAGO.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

CASSIO.
I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech the
virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me; I am desperate of my fortunes
if they check me here.

IAGO.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the watch.

CASSIO.
Good night, honest Iago.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
And what’s he then, that says I play the villain?
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit. She’s fram’d as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor, were’t to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
His soul is so enfetter’d to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then, a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now: for whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear,
That she repeals him for her body’s lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.

Enter Roderigo.

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts, but one
that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent, I have been tonight
exceedingly well cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall have
so much experience for my pains, and so, with no money at all and a
little more wit, return again to Venice.

IAGO.
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know’st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier’d Cassio;
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself awhile. By the mass, ’tis morning;
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

Two things are to be done,
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.
I’ll set her on;
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way.
Dull not device by coldness and delay.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.


Enter Cassio and some Musicians.

CASSIO.
Masters, play here, I will content your pains,
Something that’s brief; and bid “Good morrow, general.”

[_Music._]

Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
Why, masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they speak i’
the nose thus?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
How, sir, how?

CLOWN.
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.

CLOWN.
O, thereby hangs a tail.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

CLOWN.
Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters, here’s
money for you: and the general so likes your music, that he desires
you, for love’s sake, to make no more noise with it.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Well, sir, we will not.

CLOWN.
If you have any music that may not be heard, to’t again. But, as they
say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
We have none such, sir.

CLOWN.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away. Go, vanish into air,
away!

[_Exeunt Musicians._]

CASSIO.
Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?

CLOWN.
No, I hear not your honest friend. I hear you.

CASSIO.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There’s a poor piece of gold for thee:
if the gentlewoman that attends the general’s wife be stirring, tell
her there’s one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt
thou do this?

CLOWN.
She is stirring, sir; if she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify
unto her.

CASSIO.
Do, good my friend.

[_Exit Clown._]

Enter Iago.

In happy time, Iago.

IAGO.
You have not been a-bed, then?

CASSIO.
Why, no. The day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.

IAGO.
I’ll send her to you presently,
And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank you for’t.

[_Exit Iago._]

I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.

Enter Emilia.

EMILIA.
Good morrow, good lieutenant; I am sorry
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
The general and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.

CASSIO.
Yet, I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.

EMILIA.
Pray you, come in.
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

CASSIO.
I am much bound to you.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Iago and Gentlemen.

OTHELLO.
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
And by him do my duties to the senate.
That done, I will be walking on the works,
Repair there to me.

IAGO.
Well, my good lord, I’ll do’t.

OTHELLO.
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see’t?

GENTLEMEN.
We’ll wait upon your lordship.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Cyprus. The Garden of the Castle.

Enter Desdemona, Cassio and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.

EMILIA.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.

DESDEMONA.
O, that’s an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.

CASSIO.
Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He’s never anything but your true servant.

DESDEMONA.
I know’t. I thank you. You do love my lord.
You have known him long; and be you well assur’d
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent, and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.

DESDEMONA.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest,
I’ll watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
I’ll intermingle everything he does
With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.

Enter Othello and Iago.

EMILIA.
Madam, here comes my lord.

CASSIO.
Madam, I’ll take my leave.

DESDEMONA.
Why, stay, and hear me speak.

CASSIO.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.

DESDEMONA.
Well, do your discretion.

[_Exit Cassio._]

IAGO.
Ha, I like not that.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say?

IAGO.
Nothing, my lord; or if—I know not what.

OTHELLO.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

IAGO.
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it,
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing you coming.

OTHELLO.
I do believe ’twas he.

DESDEMONA.
How now, my lord?
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

OTHELLO.
Who is’t you mean?

DESDEMONA.
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgement in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.

OTHELLO.
Went he hence now?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, sooth; so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.

OTHELLO.
Not now, sweet Desdemon, some other time.

DESDEMONA.
But shall’t be shortly?

OTHELLO.
The sooner, sweet, for you.

DESDEMONA.
Shall’t be tonight at supper?

OTHELLO.
No, not tonight.

DESDEMONA.
Tomorrow dinner then?

OTHELLO.
I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.

DESDEMONA.
Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wednesday morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason,
(Save that, they say, the wars must make examples
Out of their best) is not almost a fault
To incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
What you would ask me, that I should deny,
Or stand so mammering on. What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta’en your part, to have so much to do
To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much.

OTHELLO.
Prithee no more. Let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.

DESDEMONA.
Why, this is not a boon;
’Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person: nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.

OTHELLO.
I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.

DESDEMONA.
Shall I deny you? No, farewell, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, my Desdemona. I’ll come to thee straight.

DESDEMONA.
Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you.
Whate’er you be, I am obedient.

[_Exit with Emilia._]

OTHELLO.
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

IAGO.
My noble lord,—

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say, Iago?

IAGO.
Did Michael Cassio, when you woo’d my lady,
Know of your love?

OTHELLO.
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?

IAGO.
But for a satisfaction of my thought.
No further harm.

OTHELLO.
Why of thy thought, Iago?

IAGO.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

OTHELLO.
O yes, and went between us very oft.

IAGO.
Indeed?

OTHELLO.
Indeed? Ay, indeed. Discern’st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?

IAGO.
Honest, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Honest? ay, honest.

IAGO.
My lord, for aught I know.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou think?

IAGO.
Think, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Think, my lord? By heaven, he echoes me,
As if there were some monster in his thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something.
I heard thee say even now, thou lik’st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst, “Indeed?”
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.

IAGO.
My lord, you know I love you.

OTHELLO.
I think thou dost;
And for I know thou’rt full of love and honesty
And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that’s just,
They’re close dilations, working from the heart,
That passion cannot rule.

IAGO.
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

OTHELLO.
I think so too.

IAGO.
Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!

OTHELLO.
Certain, men should be what they seem.

IAGO.
Why then, I think Cassio’s an honest man.

OTHELLO.
Nay, yet there’s more in this:
I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.

IAGO.
Good my lord, pardon me.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false:
As where’s that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has a breast so pure
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit
With meditations lawful?

OTHELLO.
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think’st him wrong’d and mak’st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.

IAGO.
I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
As, I confess, it is my nature’s plague
To spy into abuses, and of my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not,—that your wisdom
From one that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice; nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou mean?

IAGO.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash. ’Tis something, nothing;
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands.
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts.

IAGO.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.

OTHELLO.
Ha?

IAGO.
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
It is the green-ey’d monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o’er
Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!

OTHELLO.
O misery!

IAGO.
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!

OTHELLO.
Why, why is this?
Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No. To be once in doubt
Is once to be resolv’d: exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. ’Tis not to make me jealous,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
I’ll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy!

IAGO.
I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit: therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure.
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abus’d. Look to’t.
I know our country disposition well;
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands. Their best conscience
Is not to leave undone, but keep unknown.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou say so?

IAGO.
She did deceive her father, marrying you;
And when she seem’d to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

OTHELLO.
And so she did.

IAGO.
Why, go to then.
She that so young could give out such a seeming,
To seal her father’s eyes up close as oak,
He thought ’twas witchcraft. But I am much to blame.
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.

OTHELLO.
I am bound to thee for ever.

IAGO.
I see this hath a little dash’d your spirits.

OTHELLO.
Not a jot, not a jot.

IAGO.
Trust me, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love. But I do see you’re mov’d.
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.

OTHELLO.
I will not.

IAGO.
Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
Which my thoughts aim’d not. Cassio’s my worthy friend.
My lord, I see you’re mov’d.

OTHELLO.
No, not much mov’d.
I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.

IAGO.
Long live she so! And long live you to think so!

OTHELLO.
And yet, how nature erring from itself—

IAGO.
Ay, there’s the point. As, to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposed matches,
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends;
Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural.
But pardon me: I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,
May fall to match you with her country forms,
And happily repent.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.

IAGO.
[_Going._] My lord, I take my leave.

OTHELLO.
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

IAGO.
[_Returning._] My lord, I would I might entreat your honour
To scan this thing no further. Leave it to time:
Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
For sure he fills it up with great ability,
Yet if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means.
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity,
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.

OTHELLO.
Fear not my government.

IAGO.
I once more take my leave.

[_Exit._]

OTHELLO.
This fellow’s of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
I’d whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declin’d
Into the vale of years,—yet that’s not much—
She’s gone, I am abus’d, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others’ uses. Yet, ’tis the plague of great ones,
Prerogativ’d are they less than the base,
’Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Desdemona comes.
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
I’ll not believe’t.

Enter Desdemona and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.

OTHELLO.
I am to blame.

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?

OTHELLO.
I have a pain upon my forehead here.

DESDEMONA.
Faith, that’s with watching, ’twill away again;
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.

OTHELLO.
Your napkin is too little;

[_He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it._]

Let it alone. Come, I’ll go in with you.

DESDEMONA.
I am very sorry that you are not well.

[_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._]

EMILIA.
I am glad I have found this napkin;
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Woo’d me to steal it. But she so loves the token,
For he conjur’d her she should ever keep it,
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta’en out,
And give’t Iago. What he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I,
I nothing but to please his fantasy.

Enter Iago.

IAGO.
How now? What do you here alone?

EMILIA.
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.

IAGO.
A thing for me? It is a common thing—

EMILIA.
Ha?

IAGO.
To have a foolish wife.

EMILIA.
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same handkerchief?

IAGO.
What handkerchief?

EMILIA.
What handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.

IAGO.
Hast stol’n it from her?

EMILIA.
No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
And, to the advantage, I being here, took ’t up.
Look, here it is.

IAGO.
A good wench, give it me.

EMILIA.
What will you do with’t, that you have been so earnest
To have me filch it?

IAGO.
[_Snatching it._] Why, what’s that to you?

EMILIA.
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give ’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad
When she shall lack it.

IAGO.
Be not acknown on’t, I have use for it.
Go, leave me.

[_Exit Emilia._]

I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood
Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.

Enter Othello.

Look, where he comes. Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou ow’dst yesterday.

OTHELLO.
Ha! ha! false to me?

IAGO.
Why, how now, general? No more of that.

OTHELLO.
Avaunt! be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
I swear ’tis better to be much abus’d
Than but to know’t a little.

IAGO.
How now, my lord?

OTHELLO.
What sense had I of her stol’n hours of lust?
I saw’t not, thought it not, it harm’d not me.
I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips.
He that is robb’d, not wanting what is stol’n,
Let him not know’t, and he’s not robb’d at all.

IAGO.
I am sorry to hear this.

OTHELLO.
I had been happy if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, for ever
Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars
That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Jove’s dread clamours counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone!

IAGO.
Is’t possible, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or, by the worth of man’s eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my wak’d wrath.

IAGO.
Is’t come to this?

OTHELLO.
Make me to see’t, or at the least so prove it,
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!

IAGO.
My noble lord,—

OTHELLO.
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more. Abandon all remorse;
On horror’s head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amaz’d;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.

IAGO.
O grace! O heaven defend me!
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
God be wi’ you. Take mine office.—O wretched fool,
That liv’st to make thine honesty a vice!
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.

IAGO.
I should be wise; for honesty’s a fool,
And loses that it works for.

OTHELLO.
By the world,
I think my wife be honest, and think she is not.
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not.
I’ll have some proof: her name, that was as fresh
As Dian’s visage, is now begrim’d and black
As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,
Poison or fire, or suffocating streams,
I’ll not endure ’t. Would I were satisfied!

IAGO.
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion.
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?

OTHELLO.
Would? Nay, I will.

IAGO.
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,
Behold her topp’d?

OTHELLO.
Death and damnation! O!

IAGO.
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances,
Which lead directly to the door of truth,
Will give you satisfaction, you may have’t.

OTHELLO.
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.

IAGO.
I do not like the office,
But sith I am enter’d in this cause so far,
Prick’d to ’t by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep.
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs.
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say, “Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves;”
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry “O sweet creature!” and then kiss me hard,
As if he pluck’d up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips, then laid his leg
Over my thigh, and sigh’d and kiss’d, and then
Cried “Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!”

OTHELLO.
O monstrous! monstrous!

IAGO.
Nay, this was but his dream.

OTHELLO.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
’Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

IAGO.
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.

OTHELLO.
I’ll tear her all to pieces.

IAGO.
Nay, but be wise. Yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?

OTHELLO.
I gave her such a one, ’twas my first gift.

IAGO.
I know not that: but such a handkerchief
(I am sure it was your wife’s) did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

OTHELLO.
If it be that,—

IAGO.
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

OTHELLO.
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge!
Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago;
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
’Tis gone.
Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For ’tis of aspics’ tongues!

IAGO.
Yet be content.

OTHELLO.
O, blood, Iago, blood!

IAGO.
Patience, I say. Your mind perhaps may change.

OTHELLO.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont;
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. Now by yond marble heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow [_Kneels._]
I here engage my words.

IAGO.
Do not rise yet. [_Kneels._]
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrong’d Othello’s service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.

[_They rise._]

OTHELLO.
I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to ’t.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio’s not alive.

IAGO.
My friend is dead. ’Tis done at your request.
But let her live.

OTHELLO.
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn her!
Come, go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.

IAGO.
I am your own for ever.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Cyprus. Before the Castle.

Enter Desdemona, Emilia and Clown.

DESDEMONA.
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?

CLOWN.
I dare not say he lies anywhere.

DESDEMONA.
Why, man?

CLOWN.
He’s a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies is stabbing.

DESDEMONA.
Go to. Where lodges he?

CLOWN.
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.

DESDEMONA.
Can anything be made of this?

CLOWN.
I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodging, and say he
lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.

DESDEMONA.
Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?

CLOWN.
I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions and by them
answer.

DESDEMONA.
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my lord on his
behalf, and hope all will be well.

CLOWN.
To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and therefore I will
attempt the doing it.

[_Exit._]

DESDEMONA.
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?

EMILIA.
I know not, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.

EMILIA.
Is he not jealous?

DESDEMONA.
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humours from him.

EMILIA.
Look, where he comes.

Enter Othello.

DESDEMONA.
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be call’d to him. How is’t with you, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Well, my good lady. [_Aside._] O, hardness to dissemble!
How do you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Well, my good lord.

OTHELLO.
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.

DESDEMONA.
It yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.

OTHELLO.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here’s a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand,
A frank one.

DESDEMONA.
You may indeed say so,
For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.

OTHELLO.
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands,
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

DESDEMONA.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.

OTHELLO.
What promise, chuck?

DESDEMONA.
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

OTHELLO.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.
Lend me thy handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
Here, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That which I gave you.

DESDEMONA.
I have it not about me.

OTHELLO.
Not?

DESDEMONA.
No, faith, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That is a fault. That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give.
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
’Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love. But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it, my father’s eye
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies: she, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on’t,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose’t or give’t away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.

DESDEMONA.
Is’t possible?

OTHELLO.
’Tis true. There’s magic in the web of it.
A sibyl, that had number’d in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sew’d the work;
The worms were hallow’d that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy, which the skillful
Conserv’d of maiden’s hearts.

DESDEMONA.
Indeed? Is’t true?

OTHELLO.
Most veritable, therefore look to ’t well.

DESDEMONA.
Then would to God that I had never seen ’t!

OTHELLO.
Ha? wherefore?

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?

OTHELLO.
Is’t lost? is’t gone? speak, is it out of the way?

DESDEMONA.
Heaven bless us!

OTHELLO.
Say you?

DESDEMONA.
It is not lost, but what and if it were?

OTHELLO.
How?

DESDEMONA.
I say it is not lost.

OTHELLO.
Fetch’t, let me see ’t.

DESDEMONA.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you, let Cassio be receiv’d again.

OTHELLO.
Fetch me the handkerchief! My mind misgives.

DESDEMONA.
Come, come.
You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
I pray, talk me of Cassio.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shar’d dangers with you,—

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
In sooth, you are to blame.

OTHELLO.
Away!

[_Exit._]

EMILIA.
Is not this man jealous?

DESDEMONA.
I ne’er saw this before.
Sure there’s some wonder in this handkerchief,
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

EMILIA.
’Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but stomachs and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
They belch us.

Enter Cassio and Iago.

Look you, Cassio and my husband.

IAGO.
There is no other way; ’tis she must do ’t,
And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.

DESDEMONA.
How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?

CASSIO.
Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the office of my heart,
Entirely honour. I would not be delay’d.
If my offence be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purpos’d merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forc’d content,
And shut myself up in some other course
To fortune’s alms.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
My advocation is not now in tune;
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favour as in humour alter’d.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.

IAGO.
Is my lord angry?

EMILIA.
He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.

IAGO.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puff’d his own brother, and can he be angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There’s matter in’t indeed if he be angry.

DESDEMONA.
I prithee do so.

[_Exit Iago._]

Something sure of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatch’d practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases
Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. ’Tis even so.
For let our finger ache, and it indues
Our other healthful members even to that sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was (unhandsome warrior as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find I had suborn’d the witness,
And he’s indicted falsely.

EMILIA.
Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think,
And no conception nor no jealous toy
Concerning you.

DESDEMONA.
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!

EMILIA.
But jealous souls will not be answer’d so;
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they are jealous: ’tis a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven keep that monster from Othello’s mind!

EMILIA.
Lady, amen.

DESDEMONA.
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout:
If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit,
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank your ladyship.

[_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._]

Enter Bianca.

BIANCA.
Save you, friend Cassio!

CASSIO.
What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
I’ faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

BIANCA.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights?
Eight score eight hours, and lovers’ absent hours,
More tedious than the dial eight score times?
O weary reckoning!

CASSIO.
Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been press’d,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,

[_Giving her Desdemona’s handkerchief._]

Take me this work out.

BIANCA.
O Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is’t come to this? Well, well.

CASSIO.
Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.
No, in good troth, Bianca.

BIANCA.
Why, whose is it?

CASSIO.
I know not neither. I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well. Ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I’d have it copied.
Take it, and do ’t, and leave me for this time.

BIANCA.
Leave you, wherefore?

CASSIO.
I do attend here on the general,
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me woman’d.

BIANCA.
Why, I pray you?

CASSIO.
Not that I love you not.

BIANCA.
But that you do not love me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.

CASSIO.
’Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here. But I’ll see you soon.

BIANCA.
’Tis very good; I must be circumstanc’d.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.


Enter Othello and Iago.

IAGO.
Will you think so?

OTHELLO.
Think so, Iago?

IAGO.
What,
To kiss in private?

OTHELLO.
An unauthoriz’d kiss.

IAGO.
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

OTHELLO.
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.

IAGO.
So they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief—

OTHELLO.
What then?

IAGO.
Why then, ’tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow’t on any man.

OTHELLO.
She is protectress of her honour too.
May she give that?

IAGO.
Her honour is an essence that’s not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not:
But for the handkerchief—

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou said’st (O, it comes o’er my memory,
As doth the raven o’er the infected house,
Boding to all) he had my handkerchief.

IAGO.
Ay, what of that?

OTHELLO.
That’s not so good now.

IAGO.
What
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab.)

OTHELLO.
Hath he said anything?

IAGO.
He hath, my lord, but be you well assur’d,
No more than he’ll unswear.

OTHELLO.
What hath he said?

IAGO.
Faith, that he did—I know not what he did.

OTHELLO.
What? What?

IAGO.
Lie.

OTHELLO.
With her?

IAGO.
With her, on her, what you will.

OTHELLO.
Lie with her! lie on her!—We say lie on her when they belie her.—Lie
with her! that’s fulsome. Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief! To
confess, and be hanged for his labour. First, to be hanged, and then to
confess. I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself in such
shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake
me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is’t
possible?—Confess?—handkerchief?—O devil!—

[_Falls in a trance._]

IAGO.
Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught,
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho! my lord!
My lord, I say! Othello!

Enter Cassio.

How now, Cassio!

CASSIO.
What’s the matter?

IAGO.
My lord is fallen into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.

CASSIO.
Rub him about the temples.

IAGO.
No, forbear;
The lethargy must have his quiet course.
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:
Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
He will recover straight. When he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.

[_Exit Cassio._]

How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?

OTHELLO.
Dost thou mock me?

IAGO.
I mock you? No, by heaven.
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!

OTHELLO.
A horned man’s a monster and a beast.

IAGO.
There’s many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.

OTHELLO.
Did he confess it?

IAGO.
Good sir, be a man.
Think every bearded fellow that’s but yok’d
May draw with you. There’s millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.
O, ’tis the spite of hell, the fiend’s arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

OTHELLO.
O, thou art wise, ’tis certain.

IAGO.
Stand you awhile apart,
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here o’erwhelmed with your grief,
(A passion most unsuiting such a man)
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And laid good ’scuse upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return, and here speak with me,
The which he promis’d. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew,
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife:
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou hear, Iago?
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But,—dost thou hear?—most bloody.

IAGO.
That’s not amiss.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?

[_Othello withdraws._]

Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A housewife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creature
That dotes on Cassio, (as ’tis the strumpet’s plague
To beguile many and be beguil’d by one.)
He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.

Enter Cassio.

As he shall smile Othello shall go mad,
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behaviour
Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.

IAGO.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on’t.
[_Speaking lower._] Now, if this suit lay in Bianca’s power,
How quickly should you speed!

CASSIO.
Alas, poor caitiff!

OTHELLO.
[_Aside._] Look how he laughs already!

IAGO.
I never knew a woman love man so.

CASSIO.
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i’ faith, she loves me.

OTHELLO.
[_Aside._] Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.

IAGO.
Do you hear, Cassio?

OTHELLO.
Now he importunes him
To tell it o’er. Go to, well said, well said.

IAGO.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?

CASSIO.
Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?

CASSIO.
I marry her? What? A customer? I prithee, bear some charity to my wit,
do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
So, so, so, so. They laugh that wins.

IAGO.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.

CASSIO.
Prithee say true.

IAGO.
I am a very villain else.

OTHELLO.
Have you scored me? Well.

CASSIO.
This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is persuaded I will marry her,
out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.

OTHELLO.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.

CASSIO.
She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other
day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes
the bauble, and falls thus about my neck.

OTHELLO.
Crying, “O dear Cassio!” as it were: his gesture imports it.

CASSIO.
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls me. Ha, ha,
ha!

OTHELLO.
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O, I see that nose of
yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

CASSIO.
Well, I must leave her company.

IAGO.
Before me! look where she comes.

Enter Bianca.

CASSIO.
’Tis such another fitchew! Marry, a perfum’d one.
What do you mean by this haunting of me?

BIANCA.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same
handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must
take out the work? A likely piece of work, that you should find it in
your chamber and not know who left it there! This is some minx’s token,
and I must take out the work? There, give it your hobby-horse.
Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on’t.

CASSIO.
How now, my sweet Bianca? How now, how now?

OTHELLO.
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!

BIANCA.
If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when
you are next prepared for.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
After her, after her.

CASSIO.
Faith, I must; she’ll rail in the street else.

IAGO.
Will you sup there?

CASSIO.
Faith, I intend so.

IAGO.
Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.

CASSIO.
Prithee come, will you?

IAGO.
Go to; say no more.

[_Exit Cassio._]

OTHELLO.
[_Coming forward._] How shall I murder him, Iago?

IAGO.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

OTHELLO.
O Iago!

IAGO.
And did you see the handkerchief?

OTHELLO.
Was that mine?

IAGO.
Yours, by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your
wife! she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.

OTHELLO.
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman, a fair woman, a
sweet woman!

IAGO.
Nay, you must forget that.

OTHELLO.
Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned tonight, for she shall not
live. No, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my
hand. O, the world hath not a sweeter creature. She might lie by an
emperor’s side, and command him tasks.

IAGO.
Nay, that’s not your way.

OTHELLO.
Hang her, I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an
admirable musician! O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! Of
so high and plenteous wit and invention!

IAGO.
She’s the worse for all this.

OTHELLO.
O, a thousand, a thousand times: and then of so gentle a condition!

IAGO.
Ay, too gentle.

OTHELLO.
Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of
it, Iago!

IAGO.
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if
it touch not you, it comes near nobody.

OTHELLO.
I will chop her into messes. Cuckold me!

IAGO.
O, ’tis foul in her.

OTHELLO.
With mine officer!

IAGO.
That’s fouler.

OTHELLO.
Get me some poison, Iago; this night. I’ll not expostulate with her,
lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again. This night, Iago.

IAGO.
Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath
contaminated.

OTHELLO.
Good, good. The justice of it pleases. Very good.

IAGO.
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by
midnight.

OTHELLO.
Excellent good. [_A trumpet within._] What trumpet is that same?

Enter Lodovico, Desdemona and Attendant.

IAGO.
Something from Venice, sure. ’Tis Lodovico
Come from the duke. See, your wife is with him.

LODOVICO.
Save you, worthy general!

OTHELLO.
With all my heart, sir.

LODOVICO.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.

[_Gives him a packet._]

OTHELLO.
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

[_Opens the packet and reads._]

DESDEMONA.
And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?

IAGO.
I am very glad to see you, signior.
Welcome to Cyprus.

LODOVICO.
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?

IAGO.
Lives, sir.

DESDEMONA.
Cousin, there’s fall’n between him and my lord
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.

OTHELLO.
Are you sure of that?

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
[_Reads._] “This fail you not to do, as you will—”

LODOVICO.
He did not call; he’s busy in the paper.
Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?

DESDEMONA.
A most unhappy one. I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

OTHELLO.
Fire and brimstone!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Are you wise?

DESDEMONA.
What, is he angry?

LODOVICO.
May be the letter mov’d him;
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.

DESDEMONA.
Trust me, I am glad on’t.

OTHELLO.
Indeed!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
I am glad to see you mad.

DESDEMONA.
Why, sweet Othello?

OTHELLO.
Devil!

[_Striking her._]

DESDEMONA.
I have not deserv’d this.

LODOVICO.
My lord, this would not be believ’d in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw’t: ’tis very much.
Make her amends. She weeps.

OTHELLO.
O devil, devil!
If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!

DESDEMONA.
I will not stay to offend you.

[_Going._]

LODOVICO.
Truly, an obedient lady.
I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

OTHELLO.
Mistress!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
What would you with her, sir?

LODOVICO.
Who, I, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep;
And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient,
Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this, sir,—O well-painted passion!
I am commanded home.—Get you away;
I’ll send for you anon.—Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice.—Hence, avaunt!

[_Exit Desdemona._]

Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight,
I do entreat that we may sup together.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!

[_Exit._]

LODOVICO.
Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?

IAGO.
He is much chang’d.

LODOVICO.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?

IAGO.
He’s that he is. I may not breathe my censure
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were!

LODOVICO.
What, strike his wife?

IAGO.
Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst!

LODOVICO.
Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood,
And new-create this fault?

IAGO.
Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
And mark how he continues.

LODOVICO.
I am sorry that I am deceiv’d in him.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello and Emilia.

OTHELLO.
You have seen nothing, then?

EMILIA.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

OTHELLO.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

EMILIA.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

OTHELLO.
What, did they never whisper?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Nor send you out o’ the way?

EMILIA.
Never.

OTHELLO.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That’s strange.

EMILIA.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There’s no man happy. The purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.

OTHELLO.
Bid her come hither. Go.

[_Exit Emilia._]

She says enough. Yet she’s a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets.
And yet she’ll kneel and pray. I have seen her do ’t.

Enter Desdemona and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
My lord, what is your will?

OTHELLO.
Pray, chuck, come hither.

DESDEMONA.
What is your pleasure?

OTHELLO.
Let me see your eyes.
Look in my face.

DESDEMONA.
What horrible fancy’s this?

OTHELLO.
[_To Emilia._] Some of your function, mistress,
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door.
Cough, or cry hem, if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery. Nay, dispatch.

[_Exit Emilia._]

DESDEMONA.
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.

OTHELLO.
Why, what art thou?

DESDEMONA.
Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.

OTHELLO.
Come, swear it, damn thyself,
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damn’d.
Swear thou art honest.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven doth truly know it.

OTHELLO.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

DESDEMONA.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?

OTHELLO.
O Desdemona, away! away! away!

DESDEMONA.
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
Why, I have lost him too.

OTHELLO.
Had it pleas’d heaven
To try me with affliction, had they rain’d
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steep’d me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience. But, alas, to make me
A fixed figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at.
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well:
But there, where I have garner’d up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life,
The fountain from the which my current runs,
Or else dries up, to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in!—turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipp’d cherubin,
Ay, there, look grim as hell!

DESDEMONA.
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

OTHELLO.
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell’st so sweet,
That the sense aches at thee,
Would thou hadst ne’er been born!

DESDEMONA.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

OTHELLO.
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write “whore” upon? What committed?
Committed! O thou public commoner!
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed!
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
Is hush’d within the hollow mine of earth,
And will not hear it. What committed!
Impudent strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
By heaven, you do me wrong.

OTHELLO.
Are not you a strumpet?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

OTHELLO.
What, not a whore?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I shall be sav’d.

OTHELLO.
Is’t possible?

DESDEMONA.
O, heaven forgive us!

OTHELLO.
I cry you mercy then.
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.—You, mistress,

Enter Emilia.

That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate of hell. You, you, ay, you!
We have done our course; there’s money for your pains.
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.

[_Exit._]

EMILIA.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?

DESDEMONA.
Faith, half asleep.

EMILIA.
Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?

DESDEMONA.
With who?

EMILIA.
Why, with my lord, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Who is thy lord?

EMILIA.
He that is yours, sweet lady.

DESDEMONA.
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia,
I cannot weep, nor answer have I none
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember,
And call thy husband hither.

EMILIA.
Here’s a change indeed!

[_Exit._]

DESDEMONA.
’Tis meet I should be us’d so, very meet.
How have I been behav’d, that he might stick
The small’st opinion on my least misuse?

Enter Iago and Emilia.

IAGO.
What is your pleasure, madam? How is’t with you?

DESDEMONA.
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.

IAGO.
What’s the matter, lady?

EMILIA.
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhor’d her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear.

DESDEMONA.
Am I that name, Iago?

IAGO.
What name, fair lady?

DESDEMONA.
Such as she says my lord did say I was.

EMILIA.
He call’d her whore: a beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.

IAGO.
Why did he so?

DESDEMONA.
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.

IAGO.
Do not weep, do not weep: alas the day!

EMILIA.
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father, and her country, and her friends,
To be call’d whore? would it not make one weep?

DESDEMONA.
It is my wretched fortune.

IAGO.
Beshrew him for’t!
How comes this trick upon him?

DESDEMONA.
Nay, heaven doth know.

EMILIA.
I will be hang’d, if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devis’d this slander. I’ll be hang’d else.

IAGO.
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.

DESDEMONA.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!

EMILIA.
A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that such companions thou’dst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world
Even from the east to the west!

IAGO.
Speak within door.

EMILIA.
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turn’d your wit the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

IAGO.
You are a fool. Go to.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him. For by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel.
If e’er my will did trespass ’gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
Delighted them in any other form,
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will, (though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement) love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much;
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore,”
It does abhor me now I speak the word;
To do the act that might the addition earn
Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.

IAGO.
I pray you, be content. ’Tis but his humour.
The business of the state does him offence,
And he does chide with you.

DESDEMONA.
If ’twere no other,—

IAGO.
’Tis but so, I warrant.

[_Trumpets within._]

Hark, how these instruments summon to supper.
The messengers of Venice stay the meat.
Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.

[_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._]

Enter Roderigo.

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.

IAGO.
What in the contrary?

RODERIGO.
Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it
seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency than suppliest me with
the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am
I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly
suffered.

IAGO.
Will you hear me, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and performances are no
kin together.

IAGO.
You charge me most unjustly.

RODERIGO.
With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels
you have had from me to deliver to Desdemona would half have corrupted
a votarist: you have told me she hath received them, and returned me
expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I
find none.

IAGO.
Well, go to, very well.

RODERIGO.
Very well, go to, I cannot go to, man, nor ’tis not very well. Nay, I
say ’tis very scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.

IAGO.
Very well.

RODERIGO.
I tell you ’tis not very well. I will make myself known to Desdemona.
If she will return me my jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction
of you.

IAGO.
You have said now.

RODERIGO.
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.

IAGO.
Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even from this instant do
build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give me thy hand,
Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I
protest, I have dealt most directly in thy affair.

RODERIGO.
It hath not appeared.

IAGO.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without
wit and judgement. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed,
which I have greater reason to believe now than ever,—I mean purpose,
courage, and valour,—this night show it. If thou the next night
following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery
and devise engines for my life.

RODERIGO.
Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?

IAGO.
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in
Othello’s place.

RODERIGO.
Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.

IAGO.
O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him the fair
Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident: wherein
none can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.

RODERIGO.
How do you mean “removing” of him?

IAGO.
Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place: knocking out his
brains.

RODERIGO.
And that you would have me to do?

IAGO.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with
a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his
honourable fortune. If you will watch his going thence, which I will
fashion to fall out between twelve and one, you may take him at your
pleasure: I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall
between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will
show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself
bound to put it on him. It is now high supper-time, and the night grows
to waste. About it.

RODERIGO.
I will hear further reason for this.

IAGO.
And you shall be satisfied.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Cyprus. Another Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia and Attendants.

LODOVICO.
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

OTHELLO.
O, pardon me; ’twill do me good to walk.

LODOVICO.
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.

DESDEMONA.
Your honour is most welcome.

OTHELLO.
Will you walk, sir?—
O, Desdemona,—

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Get you to bed on th’ instant, I will be return’d forthwith. Dismiss
your attendant there. Look ’t be done.

DESDEMONA.
I will, my lord.

[_Exeunt Othello, Lodovico and Attendants._]

EMILIA.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.

DESDEMONA.
He says he will return incontinent,
He hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.

EMILIA.
Dismiss me?

DESDEMONA.
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.

EMILIA.
I would you had never seen him!

DESDEMONA.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,—
Prithee, unpin me,—have grace and favour in them.

EMILIA.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.

DESDEMONA.
All’s one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.

EMILIA.
Come, come, you talk.

DESDEMONA.
My mother had a maid call’d Barbary,
She was in love, and he she lov’d prov’d mad
And did forsake her. She had a song of “willow”,
An old thing ’twas, but it express’d her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee dispatch.

EMILIA.
Shall I go fetch your night-gown?

DESDEMONA.
No, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a proper man.

EMILIA.
A very handsome man.

DESDEMONA.
He speaks well.

EMILIA.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a
touch of his nether lip.

DESDEMONA.
[_Singing._]
    _The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
        Sing all a green willow.
    Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
        Sing willow, willow, willow.
    The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur’d her moans,
        Sing willow, willow, willow;
    Her salt tears fell from her, and soften’d the stones;—_

Lay by these:—

[_Sings._]
        _Sing willow, willow, willow._

Prithee hie thee. He’ll come anon.

[_Sings._]
    _Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve,—_

Nay, that’s not next. Hark! who is’t that knocks?

EMILIA.
It’s the wind.

DESDEMONA.
[_Sings._]
    _I call’d my love false love; but what said he then?
        Sing willow, willow, willow:
    If I court mo women, you’ll couch with mo men._

So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?

EMILIA.
’Tis neither here nor there.

DESDEMONA.
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think,—tell me, Emilia,—
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?

EMILIA.
There be some such, no question.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
Why, would not you?

DESDEMONA.
No, by this heavenly light!

EMILIA.
Nor I neither by this heavenly light,
I might do’t as well i’ the dark.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price
For a small vice.

DESDEMONA.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.

EMILIA.
In troth, I think I should, and undo’t when I had done. Marry, I would
not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition; but, for the
whole world—why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a
monarch? I should venture purgatory for ’t.

DESDEMONA.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong for the whole world.

EMILIA.
Why, the wrong is but a wrong i’ the world; and having the world for
your labour, ’tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make
it right.

DESDEMONA.
I do not think there is any such woman.

EMILIA.
Yes, a dozen; and as many to the vantage as would store the world they
played for.
But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite.
Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them: they see, and smell
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is’t frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well: else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.

DESDEMONA.
Good night, good night. Heaven me such usage send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Cyprus. A Street.


Enter Iago and Roderigo.

IAGO.
Here, stand behind this bulk. Straight will he come.
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick, fear nothing; I’ll be at thy elbow.
It makes us, or it mars us, think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.

RODERIGO.
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in ’t.

IAGO.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.

[_Retires to a little distance._]

RODERIGO.
I have no great devotion to the deed;
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
’Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword; he dies.

[_Goes to his stand._]

IAGO.
I have rubb’d this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobb’d from him,
As gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril.
No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.

Enter Cassio.

RODERIGO.
I know his gait; ’tis he. Villain, thou diest!

[_Rushes out, and makes a pass at Cassio._]

CASSIO.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou know’st.
I will make proof of thine.

[_Draws, and wounds Roderigo._]

RODERIGO.
O, I am slain!

[_Iago rushes from his post, cuts Cassio behind in the leg, and exit._]

CASSIO.
I am maim’d forever. Help, ho! murder, murder!

[_Falls._]

Enter Othello.

OTHELLO.
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.

RODERIGO.
O, villain that I am!

OTHELLO.
It is even so.

CASSIO.
O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!

OTHELLO.
’Tis he. O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong!
Thou teachest me,—minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unbless’d fate hies. Strumpet, I come!
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
Thy bed, lust-stain’d, shall with lust’s blood be spotted.

[_Exit._]

Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.

CASSIO.
What, ho! No watch? No passage? murder, murder!

GRATIANO.
’Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.

CASSIO.
O, help!

LODOVICO.
Hark!

RODERIGO.
O wretched villain!

LODOVICO.
Two or three groan. It is a heavy night.
These may be counterfeits. Let’s think’t unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.

RODERIGO.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.

Enter Iago with a light.

LODOVICO.
Hark!

GRATIANO.
Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

IAGO.
Who’s there? Whose noise is this that cries on murder?

LODOVICO.
We do not know.

IAGO.
Did not you hear a cry?

CASSIO.
Here, here! for heaven’s sake, help me!

IAGO.
What’s the matter?

GRATIANO.
This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.

LODOVICO.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.

IAGO.
What are you here that cry so grievously?

CASSIO.
Iago? O, I am spoil’d, undone by villains!
Give me some help.

IAGO.
O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?

CASSIO.
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away.

IAGO.
O treacherous villains!
[_To Lodovico and Gratiano._] What are you there?
Come in and give some help.

RODERIGO.
O, help me here!

CASSIO.
That’s one of them.

IAGO.
O murderous slave! O villain!

[_Stabs Roderigo._]

RODERIGO.
O damn’d Iago! O inhuman dog!

IAGO.
Kill men i’ the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?
How silent is this town! Ho! murder! murder!
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?

LODOVICO.
As you shall prove us, praise us.

IAGO.
Signior Lodovico?

LODOVICO.
He, sir.

IAGO.
I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.

GRATIANO.
Cassio!

IAGO.
How is’t, brother?

CASSIO.
My leg is cut in two.

IAGO.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Light, gentlemen, I’ll bind it with my shirt.

Enter Bianca.

BIANCA.
What is the matter, ho? Who is’t that cried?

IAGO.
Who is’t that cried?

BIANCA.
O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?

CASSIO.
No.

GRATIANO.
I am sorry to find you thus; I have been to seek you.

IAGO.
Lend me a garter. So.—O, for a chair,
To bear him easily hence!

BIANCA.
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? No. Yes, sure; O heaven! Roderigo.

GRATIANO.
What, of Venice?

IAGO.
Even he, sir. Did you know him?

GRATIANO.
Know him? Ay.

IAGO.
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
That so neglected you.

GRATIANO.
I am glad to see you.

IAGO.
How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!

GRATIANO.
Roderigo!

IAGO.
He, he, ’tis he.

[_A chair brought in._]

O, that’s well said; the chair.
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon. [_To Bianca_] For you, mistress,
Save you your labour. He that lies slain here, Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?

CASSIO.
None in the world. Nor do I know the man.

IAGO.
[_To Bianca._] What, look you pale?—O, bear him out o’ the air.

[_Cassio and Roderigo are borne off._]

Stay you, good gentlemen.—Look you pale, mistress?
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.

Enter Emilia.

EMILIA.
’Las, what’s the matter? What’s the matter, husband?

IAGO.
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo, and fellows that are ’scap’d.
He’s almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

EMILIA.
Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!

IAGO.
This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supp’d tonight.
What, do you shake at that?

BIANCA.
He supp’d at my house, but I therefore shake not.

IAGO.
O, did he so? I charge you go with me.

EMILIA.
Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!

BIANCA.
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.

EMILIA.
As I? Foh! fie upon thee!

IAGO.
Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dress’d.
Come, mistress, you must tell’s another tale.
Emilia, run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath happ’d.
Will you go on afore? [_Aside._] This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Bedchamber in the castle.

Desdemona in bed asleep; a light burning.

Enter Othello.

OTHELLO.
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!
It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy light,
Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have pluck’d thy rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It must needs wither. I’ll smell it on the tree.

[_Kissing her._]

O, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after. One more, and this the last.
So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly,
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.

DESDEMONA.
Who’s there? Othello?

OTHELLO.
Ay, Desdemona.

DESDEMONA.
Will you come to bed, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Have you pray’d tonight, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, my lord.

OTHELLO.
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconcil’d as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.

DESDEMONA.
Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that?

OTHELLO.
Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by.
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit,
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

DESDEMONA.
Talk you of killing?

OTHELLO.
Ay, I do.

DESDEMONA.
Then heaven have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
Amen, with all my heart!

DESDEMONA.
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

OTHELLO.
Hum!

DESDEMONA.
And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then
When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.

OTHELLO.
Think on thy sins.

DESDEMONA.
They are loves I bear to you.

OTHELLO.
Ay, and for that thou diest.

DESDEMONA.
That death’s unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.

OTHELLO.
Peace, and be still!

DESDEMONA.
I will so. What’s the matter?

OTHELLO.
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee,
Thou gav’st to Cassio.

DESDEMONA.
No, by my life and soul!
Send for the man and ask him.

OTHELLO.
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury,
Thou’rt on thy death-bed.

DESDEMONA.
Ay, but not yet to die.

OTHELLO.
Yes, presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin.
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

DESDEMONA.
Then, Lord have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
I say, amen.

DESDEMONA.
And have you mercy too! I never did
Offend you in my life,	 never lov’d Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in ’s hand.
O perjur’d woman, thou dost stone my heart,
And mak’st me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice.
I saw the handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
He found it then.
I never gave it him. Send for him hither.
Let him confess a truth.

OTHELLO.
He hath confess’d.

DESDEMONA.
What, my lord?

OTHELLO.
That he hath us’d thee.

DESDEMONA.
How? Unlawfully?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

DESDEMONA.
He will not say so.

OTHELLO.
No, his mouth is stopp’d.
Honest Iago hath ta’en order for ’t.

DESDEMONA.
O, my fear interprets! What, is he dead?

OTHELLO.
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, he is betray’d, and I undone!

OTHELLO.
Out, strumpet! Weep’st thou for him to my face?

DESDEMONA.
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

OTHELLO.
Down, strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight!

OTHELLO.
Nay, if you strive,—

DESDEMONA.
But half an hour!

OTHELLO.
Being done, there is no pause.

DESDEMONA.
But while I say one prayer!

OTHELLO.
It is too late.

[_Smothers her._]

EMILIA.
[_Within._] My lord, my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
What noise is this? Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful,
I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
So, so.

EMILIA.
[_Within._] What, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
Who’s there?

EMILIA.
[_Within._] O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!

OTHELLO.
Yes. ’Tis Emilia, by and by. She’s dead.
’Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death;
The noise was high.—Ha! no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were’t good?
I think she stirs again; no. What’s best to do?
If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife.
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
O, insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.

EMILIA.
[_Within._] I do beseech you
That I may speak with you, O, good my lord!

OTHELLO.
I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia.
Soft, by and by; let me the curtains draw.
Where art thou?

[_Unlocks the door._]

Enter Emilia.

What’s the matter with thee now?

EMILIA.
O, my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done!

OTHELLO.
What, now?

EMILIA.
But now, my lord.

OTHELLO.
It is the very error of the moon,
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.

EMILIA.
Cassio, my lord, hath kill’d a young Venetian
Call’d Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
Roderigo kill’d?
And Cassio kill’d?

EMILIA.
No, Cassio is not kill’d.

OTHELLO.
Not Cassio kill’d! Then murder’s out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

DESDEMONA.
O, falsely, falsely murder’d!

EMILIA.
Alas, what cry is that?

OTHELLO.
That? What?

EMILIA.
Out, and alas! That was my lady’s voice.
Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again,
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!

DESDEMONA.
A guiltless death I die.

EMILIA.
O, who hath done this deed?

DESDEMONA.
Nobody; I myself. Farewell.
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell!

[_She dies._]

OTHELLO.
Why, how should she be murder’d?

EMILIA.
Alas, who knows?

OTHELLO.
You heard her say herself, it was not I.

EMILIA.
She said so. I must needs report the truth.

OTHELLO.
She’s like a liar, gone to burning hell.
’Twas I that kill’d her.

EMILIA.
O, the more angel she,
And you the blacker devil!

OTHELLO.
She turn’d to folly, and she was a whore.

EMILIA.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.

OTHELLO.
She was false as water.

EMILIA.
Thou art rash as fire, to say
That she was false: O, she was heavenly true!

OTHELLO.
Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.
O, I were damn’d beneath all depth in hell,
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
Thy husband.

EMILIA.
That she was false to wedlock?

OTHELLO.
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I’d not have sold her for it.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
Ay, ’twas he that told me first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.

EMILIA.
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!
My husband say that she was false?

OTHELLO.
He, woman;
I say thy husband: dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.

EMILIA.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart.
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

OTHELLO.
Ha!

EMILIA.
Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.

OTHELLO.
Peace, you were best.

EMILIA.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed
(I care not for thy sword) I’ll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! help, ho! help!
The Moor hath kill’d my mistress! Murder, murder!

Enter Montano, Gratiano and Iago.

MONTANO.
What is the matter? How now, general?

EMILIA.
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

EMILIA.
Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man.
He says thou told’st him that his wife was false.
I know thou didst not, thou’rt not such a villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.

IAGO.
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.

EMILIA.
But did you ever tell him she was false?

IAGO.
I did.

EMILIA.
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
Upon my soul, a lie; a wicked lie.
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?

IAGO.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.

EMILIA.
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak.
My mistress here lies murder’d in her bed.

ALL.
O heavens forfend!

EMILIA.
And your reports have set the murder on.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stare not, masters, it is true indeed.

GRATIANO.
’Tis a strange truth.

MONTANO.
O monstrous act!

EMILIA.
Villany, villany, villany!
I think upon’t, I think I smell’t; O villany!
I thought so then. I’ll kill myself for grief.
O villany, villany!

IAGO.
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.

EMILIA.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
’Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home.

OTHELLO.
O! O! O!

[_Hanging over his wife._]

EMILIA.
Nay, lay thee down and roar;
For thou hast kill’d the sweetest innocent
That e’er did lift up eye.

OTHELLO.
[_Rising._] O, she was foul!
I scarce did know you, uncle, there lies your niece,
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp’d.
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

GRATIANO.
Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy father’s dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.

OTHELLO.
’Tis pitiful. But yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed; Cassio confess’d it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.

EMILIA.
O heaven! O heavenly powers!

IAGO.
Come, hold your peace.

EMILIA.
’Twill out, ’twill out. I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the north.
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.

IAGO.
Be wise, and get you home.

EMILIA.
I will not.

[_Iago offers to stab his wife._]

GRATIANO.
Fie!
Your sword upon a woman?

EMILIA.
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak’st of
I found by fortune and did give my husband;
For often with a solemn earnestness,
More than indeed belong’d to such a trifle,
He begg’d of me to steal it.

IAGO.
Villanous whore!

EMILIA.
She give it Cassio! no, alas, I found it,
And I did give’t my husband.

IAGO.
Filth, thou liest!

EMILIA.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.
O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool
Do with so good a wife?

OTHELLO
Are there not stones in heaven
But what serve for thunder? Precious villain!

[_Iago stabs Emilia and then runs out._]

GRATIANO.
The woman falls. Sure, he hath kill’d his wife.

EMILIA.
Ay, ay. O, lay me by my mistress’ side.

GRATIANO.
He’s gone, but his wife’s kill’d.

MONTANO.
’Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
Which I have here recover’d from the Moor.
Come, guard the door without, let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain,
For ’tis a damned slave.

[_Exit Montano and Gratiano._]

OTHELLO.
I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honour outlive honesty?
Let it go all.

EMILIA.
What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
And die in music.
[_Sings._] _Willow, willow, willow._
Moor, she was chaste. She lov’d thee, cruel Moor,
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
So speaking as I think, I die, I die.

[_She dies._]

OTHELLO.
I have another weapon in this chamber,
It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper.
O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.

GRATIANO.
[_Within._] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

OTHELLO.
Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

OTHELLO.
Behold, I have a weapon.
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier’s thigh: I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop. But, O vain boast!
Who can control his fate? ’Tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon’d.
Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt,
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismay’d? ’Tis a lost fear.
Man but a rush against Othello’s breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr’d wench,
Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl!
Even like thy chastity.
O cursed, cursed slave! Whip me, ye devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulphur,
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemon! Dead, Desdemon! dead! Oh, oh!

Enter Lodovico, Montano, Cassio carried in a chair, and Officers with
Iago prisoner.

LODOVICO.
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?

OTHELLO.
That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.

LODOVICO.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.

OTHELLO.
I look down towards his feet; but that’s a fable.
If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee.

[_Wounds Iago._]

LODOVICO.
Wrench his sword from him.

IAGO.
I bleed, sir, but not kill’d.

OTHELLO.
I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live,
For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.

LODOVICO.
O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
Fall’n in the practice of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?

OTHELLO.
Why, anything;
An honourable murderer, if you will.
For naught did I in hate, but all in honour.

LODOVICO.
This wretch hath part confess’d his villany.
Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

CASSIO.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.

OTHELLO.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnar’d my soul and body?

IAGO.
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know.
From this time forth I never will speak word.

LODOVICO.
What, not to pray?

GRATIANO.
Torments will ope your lips.

OTHELLO.
Well, thou dost best.

LODOVICO.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall’n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another. The one of them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
O villain!

CASSIO.
Most heathenish and most gross!

LODOVICO.
Now here’s another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain,
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.

OTHELLO.
O the pernicious caitiff!
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife’s?

CASSIO.
I found it in my chamber.
And he himself confess’d but even now,
That there he dropp’d it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.

OTHELLO.
O fool! fool! fool!

CASSIO.
There is besides in Roderigo’s letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.

LODOVICO.
You must forsake this room, and go with us.
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.

OTHELLO.
Soft you; a word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they know’t.
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplex’d in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdu’d eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this.
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turban’d Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduc’d the state,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him, thus.

[_Stabs himself._]

LODOVICO.
O bloody period!

GRATIANO.
All that’s spoke is marr’d.

OTHELLO.
I kiss’d thee ere I kill’d thee. No way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.

[_Falling upon Desdemona._]

CASSIO.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.

LODOVICO.
[_To Iago._] O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.
This is thy work. The object poisons sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain.
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it!
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.

[_Exeunt._]




PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE




Contents


ACT I
Chorus. Before the palace of Antioch
Scene I. Antioch. A room in the palace
Scene II. Tyre. A room in the palace
Scene III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the Palace
Scene IV. Tarsus. A room in the Governor’s house

ACT II
Chorus. Chorus
Scene I. Pentapolis. An open place by the seaside
Scene II. The same. A public way, or platform leading to the lists
Scene III. The same. A hall of state: a banquet prepared
Scene IV. Tyre. A room in the Governor’s house
Scene V. Pentapolis. A room in the palace

ACT III
Chorus. Chorus
Scene I. On shipboard
Scene II. Ephesus. A room in Cerimon’s house
Scene III. Tarsus. A room in Cleon’s house
Scene IV. Ephesus. A room in Cerimon’s house

ACT IV
Chorus. Chorus
Scene I. Tarsus. An open place near the seashore
Scene II. Mytilene. A room in a brothel
Scene III. Tarsus. A room in Cleon’s house
Scene IV. Before the monument of Marina at Tarsus
Scene V. Mytilene. A street before the brothel
Scene VI. The same. A room in the brothel

ACT V
Chorus. Chorus
Scene I. On board Pericles’ ship, off Mytilene
Scene II. Before the temple of Diana at Ephesus
Scene III. The temple of Diana at Ephesus




 Dramatis Personæ

ANTIOCHUS, king of Antioch.
PERICLES, prince of Tyre.
HELICANUS, ESCANES, two lords of Tyre.
SIMONIDES, king of Pentapolis.
CLEON, governor of Tarsus.
LYSIMACHUS, governor of Mytilene.
CERIMON, a lord of Ephesus.
THALIARD, a lord of Antioch.
PHILEMON, servant to Cerimon.
LEONINE, servant to Dionyza.
Marshal.
A Pandar.
BOULT, his servant.
The Daughter of Antiochus.
DIONYZA, wife to Cleon.
THAISA, daughter to Simonides.
MARINA, daughter to Pericles and Thaisa.
LYCHORIDA, nurse to Marina.
A Bawd.
Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Sailors, Pirates, Fishermen, and Messengers.
DIANA.
GOWER, as Chorus.

SCENE: Dispersedly in various countries.




ACT I


 Enter Gower.

 Before the palace of Antioch.

To sing a song that old was sung,
From ashes ancient Gower is come;
Assuming man’s infirmities,
To glad your ear, and please your eyes.
It hath been sung at festivals,
On ember-eves and holy-ales;
And lords and ladies in their lives
Have read it for restoratives:
The purchase is to make men glorious,
_Et bonum quo antiquius eo melius._
If you, born in these latter times,
When wit’s more ripe, accept my rhymes,
And that to hear an old man sing
May to your wishes pleasure bring,
I life would wish, and that I might
Waste it for you, like taper-light.
This Antioch, then, Antiochus the Great
Built up, this city, for his chiefest seat;
The fairest in all Syria.
I tell you what mine authors say:
This king unto him took a fere,
Who died and left a female heir,
So buxom, blithe, and full of face,
As heaven had lent her all his grace;
With whom the father liking took,
And her to incest did provoke.
Bad child; worse father! to entice his own
To evil should be done by none:
But custom what they did begin
Was with long use account’d no sin.
The beauty of this sinful dame
Made many princes thither frame,
To seek her as a bedfellow,
In marriage pleasures playfellow:
Which to prevent he made a law,
To keep her still, and men in awe,
That whoso ask’d her for his wife,
His riddle told not, lost his life:
So for her many a wight did die,
As yon grim looks do testify.
What now ensues, to the judgement your eye
I give, my cause who best can justify.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE I. Antioch. A room in the palace.

 Enter Antiochus, Prince Pericles and followers.

ANTIOCHUS.
Young prince of Tyre, you have at large received
The danger of the task you undertake.

PERICLES.
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soul
Emboldened with the glory of her praise,
Think death no hazard in this enterprise.

ANTIOCHUS.
Music! Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,
For the embracements even of Jove himself;
At whose conception, till Lucina reigned,
Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence,
The senate house of planets all did sit,
To knit in her their best perfections.

 Music. Enter the Daughter of Antiochus.

PERICLES.
See where she comes, apparell’d like the spring,
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king
Of every virtue gives renown to men!
Her face the book of praises, where is read
Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence
Sorrow were ever razed, and testy wrath
Could never be her mild companion.
You gods that made me man, and sway in love,
That have inflamed desire in my breast
To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,
Or die in the adventure, be my helps,
As I am son and servant to your will,
To compass such a boundless happiness!

ANTIOCHUS.
Prince Pericles,—

PERICLES.
That would be son to great Antiochus.

ANTIOCHUS.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touch’d;
For death-like dragons here affright thee hard:
Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view
Her countless glory, which desert must gain;
And which, without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die.
Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,
Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale,
That without covering, save yon field of stars,
Here they stand Martyrs, slain in Cupid’s wars;
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist
For going on death’s net, whom none resist.

PERICLES.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught
My frail mortality to know itself,
And by those fearful objects to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must;
For death remember’d should be like a mirror,
Who tells us life’s but breath, to trust it error.
I’ll make my will then, and, as sick men do
Who know the world, see heaven, but, feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you
And all good men, as every prince should do;
My riches to the earth from whence they came;
[_To the daughter of Antiochus._] But my unspotted fire of love to you.
Thus ready for the way of life or death,
I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.

ANTIOCHUS.
Scorning advice, read the conclusion, then:
Which read and not expounded, ’tis decreed,
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.

DAUGHTER.
Of all ’ssayed yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!
Of all ’ssayed yet, I wish thee happiness!

PERICLES
Like a bold champion, I assume the lists,
Nor ask advice of any other thought
But faithfulness and courage.

 [_He reads the riddle._]

     _I am no viper, yet I feed
     On mother’s flesh which did me breed.
     I sought a husband, in which labour
     I found that kindness in a father:
     He’s father, son, and husband mild;
     I mother, wife, and yet his child.
     How they may be, and yet in two,
     As you will live resolve it you._

Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers
That give heaven countless eyes to view men’s acts,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,

 [_Takes hold of the hand of the Princess._]

Were not this glorious casket stored with ill:
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt;
For he’s no man on whom perfections wait
That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate,
You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings;
Who, finger’d to make man his lawful music,
Would draw heaven down, and all the gods to hearken;
But being play’d upon before your time,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.
Good sooth, I care not for you.

ANTIOCHUS.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life,
For that’s an article within our law,
As dangerous as the rest. Your time’s expired:
Either expound now, or receive your sentence.

PERICLES.
Great king,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act;
’Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.
Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
He’s more secure to keep it shut than shown:
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind,
Blows dust in others’ eyes, to spread itself;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear.
To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts
Copp’d hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng’d
By man’s oppression; and the poor worm doth die for’t.
Kind are earth’s gods; in vice their law’s their will;
And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?
It is enough you know; and it is fit,
What being more known grows worse, to smother it.
All love the womb that their first bred,
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.

ANTIOCHUS.
[_Aside_] Heaven, that I had thy head! He has found the meaning:
But I will gloze with him.—Young prince of Tyre.
Though by the tenour of our strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to cancel of your days;
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise:
Forty days longer we do respite you;
If by which time our secret be undone,
This mercy shows we’ll joy in such a son:
And until then your entertain shall be
As doth befit our honour and your worth.

 [_Exeunt all but Pericles._]

PERICLES.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,
When what is done is like an hypocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight!
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certain you were not so bad
As with foul incest to abuse your soul;
Where now you’re both a father and a son,
By your untimely claspings with your child,
Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father;
And she an eater of her mother’s flesh,
By the defiling of her parent’s bed;
And both like serpents are, who though they feed
On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.
Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men
Blush not in actions blacker than the night,
Will ’schew no course to keep them from the light.
One sin, I know, another doth provoke;
Murder’s as near to lust as flame to smoke:
Poison and treason are the hands of sin,
Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame:
Then, lest my life be cropp’d to keep you clear,
By flight I’ll shun the danger which I fear.

 [_Exit._]

 Re-enter Antiochus.

ANTIOCHUS.
He hath found the meaning,
For which we mean to have his head.
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner;
And therefore instantly this prince must die;
For by his fall my honour must keep high.
Who attends us there?

 Enter Thaliard.

THALIARD.
Doth your highness call?

ANTIOCHUS.
Thaliard, you are of our chamber,
And our mind partakes her private actions
To your secrecy; and for your faithfulness
We will advance you. Thaliard,
Behold, here’s poison, and here’s gold;
We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him:
It fits thee not to ask the reason why,
Because we bid it. Say, is it done?

THALIARD.
My lord, ’tis done.

ANTIOCHUS.
Enough.

 Enter a Messenger.

Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.

MESSENGER.
My lord, Prince Pericles is fled.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIOCHUS.
As thou wilt live, fly after: and like an arrow shot
From a well-experienced archer hits the mark
His eye doth level at, so thou ne’er return
Unless thou say ‘Prince Pericles is dead.’

THALIARD.
My lord, if I can get him within my pistol’s length, I’ll make him sure
enough: so, farewell to your highness.

ANTIOCHUS.
Thaliard! adieu!

 [_Exit Thaliard._]

Till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succour to my head.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE II. Tyre. A room in the palace.

 Enter Pericles with his Lords.

PERICLES.
[_To Lords without._] Let none disturb us.—Why should this change of
thoughts,
The sad companion, dull-eyed melancholy,
Be my so used a guest as not an hour
In the day’s glorious walk or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me quiet?
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them,
And danger, which I fear’d, is at Antioch,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here:
Yet neither pleasure’s art can joy my spirits,
Nor yet the other’s distance comfort me.
Then it is thus: the passions of the mind,
That have their first conception by misdread,
Have after-nourishment and life by care;
And what was first but fear what might be done,
Grows elder now and cares it be not done.
And so with me: the great Antiochus,
’Gainst whom I am too little to contend,
Since he’s so great can make his will his act,
Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence;
Nor boots it me to say I honour him.
If he suspect I may dishonour him:
And what may make him blush in being known,
He’ll stop the course by which it might be known;
With hostile forces he’ll o’erspread the land,
And with the ostent of war will look so huge,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state;
Our men be vanquish’d ere they do resist,
And subjects punish’d that ne’er thought offence:
Which care of them, not pity of myself,
Who am no more but as the tops of trees,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pine and soul to languish,
And punish that before that he would punish.

 Enter Helicanus with other Lords.

FIRST LORD.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!

SECOND LORD.
And keep your mind, till you return to us,
Peaceful and comfortable!

HELICANUS.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.
They do abuse the king that flatter him:
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;
The thing the which is flatter’d, but a spark,
To which that spark gives heat and stronger glowing:
Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,
Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err.
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim peace,
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please;
I cannot be much lower than my knees.

PERICLES.
All leave us else, but let your cares o’erlook
What shipping and what lading’s in our haven,
And then return to us.

 [_Exeunt Lords._]

Helicanus, thou
Hast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?

HELICANUS.
An angry brow, dread lord.

PERICLES.
If there be such a dart in princes’ frowns,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?

HELICANUS.
How dares the plants look up to heaven, from whence
They have their nourishment?

PERICLES.
Thou know’st I have power
To take thy life from thee.

HELICANUS. [_Kneeling._]
I have ground the axe myself;
Do but you strike the blow.

PERICLES.
Rise, prithee, rise.
Sit down: thou art no flatterer:
I thank thee for it; and heaven forbid
That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid!
Fit counsellor and servant for a prince,
Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant,
What wouldst thou have me do?

HELICANUS.
To bear with patience
Such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.

PERICLES.
Thou speak’st like a physician, Helicanus,
That ministers a potion unto me
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.
Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,
Where, as thou know’st, against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty,
From whence an issue I might propagate,
Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder;
The rest—hark in thine ear—as black as incest,
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seem’d not to strike, but smooth: but thou know’st this,
’Tis time to fear when tyrants seems to kiss.
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled,
Under the covering of a careful night,
Who seem’d my good protector; and, being here,
Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.
I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants’ fears
Decrease not, but grow faster than the years:
And should he doubt, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the listening air
How many worthy princes’ bloods were shed,
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,
To lop that doubt, he’ll fill this land with arms,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him;
When all, for mine, if I may call offence,
Must feel war’s blow, who spares not innocence:
Which love to all, of which thyself art one,
Who now reprovest me for it,—

HELICANUS.
Alas, sir!

PERICLES.
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came;
And finding little comfort to relieve them,
I thought it princely charity to grieve them.

HELICANUS.
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak,
Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public war or private treason
Will take away your life.
Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,
Till that his rage and anger be forgot,
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.
Your rule direct to any; if to me,
Day serves not light more faithful than I’ll be.

PERICLES.
I do not doubt thy faith;
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?

HELCANUS.
We’ll mingle our bloods together in the earth,
From whence we had our being and our birth.

PERICLES.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus
Intend my travel, where I’ll hear from thee;
And by whose letters I’ll dispose myself.
The care I had and have of subjects’ good
On thee I lay, whose wisdom’s strength can bear it.
I’ll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath:
Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both:
But in our orbs we’ll live so round and safe,
That time of both this truth shall ne’er convince,
Thou show’dst a subject’s shine, I a true prince.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the Palace.

 Enter Thaliard.

THALIARD.
So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I kill King Pericles;
and if I do it not, I am sure to be hanged at home: ’tis dangerous.
Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that,
being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired he might know none
of his secrets: now do I see he had some reason for’t; for if a king
bid a man be a villain, he’s bound by the indenture of his oath to be
one. Husht, here come the lords of Tyre.

 Enter Helicanus and Escanes with other Lords of Tyre.

HELICANUS.
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,
Further to question me of your king’s departure:
His seal’d commission, left in trust with me,
Doth speak sufficiently he’s gone to travel.

THALIARD.
[_Aside._] How? the king gone?

HELICANUS.
If further yet you will be satisfied,
Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,
He would depart, I’ll give some light unto you.
Being at Antioch—

THALIARD.
[_Aside._] What from Antioch?

HELICANUS.
Royal Antiochus—on what cause I know not
Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so:
And doubting lest that he had err’d or sinn’d,
To show his sorrow, he’d correct himself;
So puts himself unto the shipman’s toil,
With whom each minute threatens life or death.

THALIARD.
[_Aside._] Well, I perceive
I shall not be hang’d now, although I would;
But since he’s gone, the king’s seas must please
He ’scaped the land, to perish at the sea.
I’ll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!

HELICANUS.
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.

THALIARD.
From him I come
With message unto princely Pericles;
But since my landing I have understood
Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels,
My message must return from whence it came.

HELICANUS.
We have no reason to desire it,
Commended to our master, not to us:
Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire,
As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE IV. Tarsus. A room in the Governor’s house.

 Enter Cleon, the governor of Tarsus, with Dionyza and others.

CLEON.
My Dionyza, shall we rest us here,
And by relating tales of others’ griefs,
See if ’twill teach us to forget our own?

DIONYZA.
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;
For who digs hills because they do aspire
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.
O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are;
Here they’re but felt, and seen with mischief’s eyes,
But like to groves, being topp’d, they higher rise.

CLEON.
O Dionyza,
Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep
Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep,
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder;
That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want,
They may awake their helps to comfort them.
I’ll then discourse our woes, felt several years,
And wanting breath to speak, help me with tears.

DIONYZA.
I’ll do my best, sir.

CLEON.
This Tarsus, o’er which I have the government,
A city on whom plenty held full hand,
For riches strew’d herself even in the streets;
Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss’d the clouds,
And strangers ne’er beheld but wonder’d at;
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn’d,
Like one another’s glass to trim them by:
Their tables were stored full to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed on as delight;
All poverty was scorn’d, and pride so great,
The name of help grew odious to repeat.

DIONYZA.
O, ’tis too true.

CLEON.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change,
These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air,
Were all too little to content and please,
Although they gave their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defiled for want of use,
They are now starved for want of exercise:
Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
Would now be glad of bread and beg for it:
Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes,
Thought nought too curious, are ready now
To eat those little darlings whom they loved.
So sharp are hunger’s teeth, that man and wife
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life:
Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping;
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Is not this true?

DIONYZA.
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.

CLEON.
O, let those cities that of plenty’s cup
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superflous riots, hear these tears!
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.

 Enter a Lord.

LORD.
Where’s the lord governor?

CLEON.
Here.
Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring’st in haste,
For comfort is too far for us to expect.

LORD.
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,
A portly sail of ships make hitherward.

CLEON.
I thought as much.
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,
That may succeed as his inheritor;
And so in ours: some neighbouring nation,
Taking advantage of our misery,
That stuff’d the hollow vessels with their power,
To beat us down, the which are down already;
And make a conquest of unhappy me,
Whereas no glory’s got to overcome.

LORD.
That’s the least fear; for, by the semblance
Of their white flags display’d, they bring us peace,
And come to us as favourers, not as foes.

CLEON.
Thou speak’st like him’s untutor’d to repeat:
Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.
But bring they what they will and what they can,
What need we fear?
The ground’s the lowest, and we are half way there.
Go tell their general we attend him here,
To know for what he comes, and whence he comes,
And what he craves.

LORD.
I go, my lord.

 [_Exit._]

CLEON.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;
If wars, we are unable to resist.

 Enter Pericles with Attendants.

PERICLES.
Lord governor, for so we hear you are,
Let not our ships and number of our men
Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,
And seen the desolation of your streets:
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
But to relieve them of their heavy load;
And these our ships, you happily may think
Are like the Trojan horse was stuff’d within
With bloody veins, expecting overthrow,
Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,
And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.

ALL.
The gods of Greece protect you!
And we’ll pray for you.

PERICLES.
Arise, I pray you, rise:
We do not look for reverence, but for love,
And harbourage for ourself, our ships and men.

CLEON.
The which when any shall not gratify,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,
The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils!
Till when,—the which I hope shall ne’er be seen,—
Your grace is welcome to our town and us.

PERICLES.
Which welcome we’ll accept; feast here awhile,
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II


 Enter Gower.

GOWER.
Here have you seen a mighty king
His child, iwis, to incest bring;
A better prince and benign lord,
That will prove awful both in deed and word.
Be quiet then as men should be,
Till he hath pass’d necessity.
I’ll show you those in troubles reign,
Losing a mite, a mountain gain.
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison,
Is still at Tarsus, where each man
Thinks all is writ he speken can;
And to remember what he does,
Build his statue to make him glorious:
But tidings to the contrary
Are brought your eyes; what need speak I?

 Dumb-show. Enter at one door Pericles talking with Cleon; all the
 train with them. Enter at another door a Gentleman with a letter to
 Pericles; Pericles shows the letter to Cleon; gives the Messenger a
 reward, and knights him. Exit Pericles at one door, and Cleon at
 another.

Good Helicane, that stay’d at home.
Not to eat honey like a drone
From others’ labours; for though he strive
To killen bad, keep good alive;
And to fulfil his prince’ desire,
Sends word of all that haps in Tyre:
How Thaliard came full bent with sin
And had intent to murder him;
And that in Tarsus was not best
Longer for him to make his rest.
He, doing so, put forth to seas,
Where when men been, there’s seldom ease;
For now the wind begins to blow;
Thunder above and deeps below
Make such unquiet, that the ship
Should house him safe is wreck’d and split;
And he, good prince, having all lost,
By waves from coast to coast is tost:
All perishen of man, of pelf,
Ne aught escapen but himself;
Till Fortune, tired with doing bad,
Threw him ashore, to give him glad:
And here he comes. What shall be next,
Pardon old Gower,—this longs the text.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE I. Pentapolis. An open place by the seaside.

 Enter Pericles, wet.

PERICLES.
Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!
Wind, rain, and thunder, remember earthly man
Is but a substance that must yield to you;
And I, as fits my nature, do obey you:
Alas, the sea hath cast me on the rocks,
Wash’d me from shore to shore, and left me breath
Nothing to think on but ensuing death:
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes;
And having thrown him from your watery grave,
Here to have death in peace is all he’ll crave.

 Enter three Fishermen.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
What, ho, Pilch!

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Ha, come and bring away the nets!

FIRST FISHERMAN.
What, Patch-breech, I say!

THIRD FISHERMAN.
What say you, master?

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Look how thou stirrest now! Come away, or I’ll fetch thee with a
wanion.

THIRD FISHERMAN.
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that were cast away before
us even now.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what pitiful cries they
made to us to help them, when, well-a-day, we could scarce help
ourselves.

THIRD FISHERMAN.
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the porpus how he bounced
and tumbled? They say they’re half fish, half flesh: a plague on them,
they ne’er come but I look to be washed. Master, I marvel how the
fishes live in the sea.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the little ones: I can
compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale; a’ plays and
tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at last devours them all
at a mouthful. Such whales have I heard on o’ the land, who never leave
gaping till they swallowed the whole parish, church, steeple, bells and
all.

PERICLES.
[_Aside._] A pretty moral.

THIRD FISHERMAN.
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have been that day in
the belfry.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Why, man?

THIRD FISHERMAN.
Because he should have swallowed me too; and when I had been in his
belly, I would have kept such a jangling of the bells, that he should
never have left, till he cast bells, steeple, church and parish up
again. But if the good King Simonides were of my mind,—

PERICLES.
[_Aside._] Simonides?

THIRD FISHERMAN.
We would purge the land of these drones, that rob the bee of her honey.

PERICLES.
[_Aside._] How from the finny subject of the sea
These fishers tell the infirmities of men;
And from their watery empire recollect
All that may men approve or men detect!
Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Honest! good fellow, what’s that? If it be a day fits you, search out
of the calendar, and nobody look after it.

PERICLES.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in our way!

PERICLES.
A man whom both the waters and the wind,
In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball
For them to play upon, entreats you pity him;
He asks of you, that never used to beg.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here’s them in our country of Greece gets
more with begging than we can do with working.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?

PERICLES.
I never practised it.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here’s nothing to be got
now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for’t.

PERICLES.
What I have been I have forgot to know;
But what I am, want teaches me to think on:
A man throng’d up with cold: my veins are chill,
And have no more of life than may suffice
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help;
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray see me buried.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid’t, and I have a gown here; come, put it
on; keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt
go home, and we’ll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting-days, and
moreo’er puddings and flap-jacks, and thou shalt be welcome.

PERICLES.
I thank you, sir.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg?

PERICLES.
I did but crave.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
But crave! Then I’ll turn craver too, and so I shall ’scape whipping.

PERICLES.
Why, are your beggars whipped, then?

SECOND FISHERMAN.
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your beggars were whipped, I
would wish no better office than to be beadle. But, master, I’ll go
draw up the net.

 [_Exit with Third Fisherman._]

PERICLES.
[_Aside._] How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?

PERICLES.
Not well.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Why, I’ll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and our King, the good
Simonides.

PERICLES.
The good Simonides, do you call him?

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for his peaceable reign and
good government.

PERICLES.
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects the name of good
government. How far is his court distant from this shore?

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Marry sir, half a day’s journey: and I’ll tell you, he hath a fair
daughter, and tomorrow is her birth-day; and there are princes and
knights come from all parts of the world to joust and tourney for her
love.

PERICLES.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wish to make one there.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a man cannot get, he may
lawfully deal for—his wife’s soul.

 Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Help, master, help! here’s a fish hangs in the net, like a poor man’s
right in the law; ’twill hardly come out. Ha! bots on’t, ’tis come at
last, and ’tis turned to a rusty armour.

PERICLES.
An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it.
Thanks, Fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses,
Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself,
And though it was mine own, part of my heritage,
Which my dead father did bequeath to me,
With this strict charge, even as he left his life.
‘Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield
’Twixt me and death;’—and pointed to this brace;—
‘For that it saved me, keep it; in like necessity—
The which the gods protect thee from!—may defend thee.’
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it;
Till the rough seas, that spares not any man,
Took it in rage, though calm’d have given’t again:
I thank thee for’t: my shipwreck now’s no ill,
Since I have here my father gave in his will.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
What mean you sir?

PERICLES.
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,
For it was sometime target to a king;
I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly,
And for his sake I wish the having of it;
And that you’d guide me to your sovereign court,
Where with it I may appear a gentleman;
And if that ever my low fortune’s better,
I’ll pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?

PERICLES.
I’ll show the virtue I have borne in arms.

FIRST FISHERMAN.
Why, d’ye take it, and the gods give thee good on’t!

SECOND FISHERMAN.
Ay, but hark you, my friend; ’twas we that made up this garment through
the rough seams of the waters: there are certain condolements, certain
vails. I hope, sir, if you thrive, you’ll remember from whence you had
them.

PERICLES.
Believe’t I will.
By your furtherance I am clothed in steel;
And spite of all the rapture of the sea,
This jewel holds his building on my arm:
Unto thy value I will mount myself
Upon a courser, whose delightful steps
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.
Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided
Of a pair of bases.

SECOND FISHERMAN.
We’ll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to make thee a pair;
and I’ll bring thee to the court myself.

PERICLES.
Then honour be but a goal to my will,
This day I’ll rise, or else add ill to ill.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE II. The same. A public way, or platform leading to the lists. A
pavilion by the side of it for the reception of the King, Princess,
Lords, etc.

 Enter Simonides, Thaisa, Lords and Attendants.

SIMONIDES.
Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?

FIRST LORD.
They are, my liege;
And stay your coming to present themselves.

SIMONIDES.
Return them, we are ready; and our daughter,
In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,
Sits here, like beauty’s child, whom Nature gat
For men to see, and seeing wonder at.

 [_Exit a Lord._]

THAISA.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express
My commendations great, whose merit’s less.

SIMONIDES.
It’s fit it should be so; for princes are
A model, which heaven makes like to itself:
As jewels lose their glory if neglected,
So princes their renowns if not respected.
’Tis now your honour, daughter, to entertain
The labour of each knight in his device.

THAISA.
Which, to preserve mine honour, I’ll perform.

 The first Knight passes by, and his Squire presents his shield to
 Thaisa.

SIMONIDES.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?

THAISA.
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun:
The word, _Lux tua vita mihi._

SIMONIDES.
He loves you well that holds his life of you.

 The second Knight passes by, and his Squire presents his shield to
 Thaisa.

Who is the second that presents himself?

THAISA.
A prince of Macedon, my royal father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is an arm’d knight that’s conquer’d by a lady;
The motto thus, in Spanish, _Piu por dulzura que por forza._

 The third Knight passes by, and his Squire presents his shield to
 Thaisa.

SIMONIDES.
And what’s the third?

THAISA.
The third of Antioch;
And his device, a wreath of chivalry;
The word, _Me pompae provexit apex._

 The fourth Knight passes by, and his Squire presents his shield to
 Thaisa.

SIMONIDES.
What is the fourth?

THAISA.
A burning torch that’s turned upside down;
The word, _Quod me alit me extinguit._

SIMONIDES.
Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,
Which can as well inflame as it can kill.

 The fifth Knight passes by, and his Squire presents his shield to
 Thaisa.

THAISA.
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,
Holding out gold that’s by the touchstone tried;
The motto thus, _Sic spectanda fides._

 The sixth Knight, Pericles, passes in rusty armour with bases, and
 unaccompanied. He presents his device directly to Thaisa.

SIMONIDES.
And what’s the sixth and last, the which the knight himself
With such a graceful courtesy deliver’d?

THAISA.
He seems to be a stranger; but his present is
A wither’d branch, that’s only green at top;
The motto, _In hac spe vivo._

SIMONIDES.
A pretty moral;
From the dejected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.

FIRST LORD.
He had need mean better than his outward show
Can any way speak in his just commend;
For by his rusty outside he appears
To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.

SECOND LORD.
He well may be a stranger, for he comes
To an honour’d triumph strangely furnished.

THIRD LORD.
And on set purpose let his armour rust
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.

SIMONIDES.
Opinion’s but a fool, that makes us scan
The outward habit by the inward man.
But stay, the knights are coming.
We will withdraw into the gallery.

 [_Exeunt. Great shouts within, and all cry_ ‘The mean Knight!’]



SCENE III. The same. A hall of state: a banquet prepared.

 Enter Simonides, Thaisa, Lords, Attendants and Knights, from tilting.

SIMONIDES.
Knights,
To say you’re welcome were superfluous.
To place upon the volume of your deeds,
As in a title-page, your worth in arms,
Were more than you expect, or more than’s fit,
Since every worth in show commends itself.
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast:
You are princes and my guests.

THAISA.
But you, my knight and guest;
To whom this wreath of victory I give,
And crown you king of this day’s happiness.

PERICLES.
’Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.

SIMONIDES.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours;
And here, I hope, is none that envies it.
In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed,
To make some good, but others to exceed;
And you are her labour’d scholar. Come queen of the feast,—
For, daughter, so you are,—here take your place:
Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.

KNIGHTS.
We are honour’d much by good Simonides.

SIMONIDES.
Your presence glads our days; honour we love;
For who hates honour hates the gods above.

MARSHALL.
Sir, yonder is your place.

PERICLES.
Some other is more fit.

FIRST KNIGHT.
Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemen
Have neither in our hearts nor outward eyes
Envied the great, nor shall the low despise.

PERICLES.
You are right courteous knights.

SIMONIDES.
Sit, sir, sit.
By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,
These cates resist me, he but thought upon.

THAISA.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury,
Wishing him my meat. Sure, he’s a gallant gentleman.

SIMONIDES.
He’s but a country gentleman;
Has done no more than other knights have done;
Has broken a staff or so; so let it pass.

THAISA.
To me he seems like diamond to glass.

PERICLES.
Yon king’s to me like to my father’s picture,
Which tells me in that glory once he was;
Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne,
And he the sun, for them to reverence;
None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights,
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy:
Where now his son’s like a glow-worm in the night,
The which hath fire in darkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that time’s the king of men,
He’s both their parent, and he is their grave,
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.

SIMONIDES.
What, are you merry, knights?

KNIGHTS.
Who can be other in this royal presence?

SIMONIDES.
Here, with a cup that’s stored unto the brim,—
As you do love, fill to your mistress’ lips,—
We drink this health to you.

KNIGHTS.
We thank your grace.

SIMONIDES.
Yet pause awhile. Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainment in our court
Had not a show might countervail his worth.
Note it not you, Thaisa?

THAISA.
What is’t to me, my father?

SIMONIDES.
O attend, my daughter:
Princes in this should live like gods above,
Who freely give to everyone that comes to honour them:
And princes not doing so are like to gnats,
Which make a sound, but kill’d are wonder’d at.
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,
Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.

THAISA.
Alas, my father, it befits not me
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:
He may my proffer take for an offence,
Since men take women’s gifts for impudence.

SIMONIDES.
How? Do as I bid you, or you’ll move me else.

THAISA.
[_Aside._] Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.

SIMONIDES.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,
Of whence he is, his name and parentage.

THAISA.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.

PERICLES.
I thank him.

THAISA.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.

PERICLES.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.

THAISA.
And further he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage.

PERICLES.
A gentleman of Tyre; my name, Pericles;
My education been in arts and arms;
Who, looking for adventures in the world,
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,
And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.

THAISA.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Who only by misfortune of the seas
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.

SIMONIDES.
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.
Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,
And waste the time, which looks for other revels.
Even in your armours, as you are address’d,
Will well become a soldier’s dance.
I will not have excuse, with saying this,
‘Loud music is too harsh for ladies’ heads’
Since they love men in arms as well as beds.

 [_The Knights dance._]

So, this was well ask’d, ’twas so well perform’d.
Come, sir; here is a lady which wants breathing too:
And I have heard you knights of Tyre
Are excellent in making ladies trip;
And that their measures are as excellent.

PERICLES.
In those that practise them they are, my lord.

SIMONIDES.
O, that’s as much as you would be denied
Of your fair courtesy.

 [_The Knights and Ladies dance._]

Unclasp, unclasp:
Thanks gentlemen, to all; all have done well.
[_To Pericles._] But you the best. Pages and lights to conduct
These knights unto their several lodgings.
[_To Pericles._] Yours, sir, we have given order to be next our own.

PERICLES.
I am at your grace’s pleasure.

SIMONIDES.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love;
And that’s the mark I know you level at:
Therefore each one betake him to his rest;
Tomorrow all for speeding do their best.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE IV. Tyre. A room in the Governor’s house.

 Enter Helicanus and Escanes.

HELICANUS.
No, Escanes, know this of me,
Antiochus from incest lived not free:
For which the most high gods not minding longer
To withhold the vengeance that they had in store
Due to this heinous capital offence,
Even in the height and pride of all his glory,
When he was seated in a chariot
Of an inestimable value, and his daughter with him,
A fire from heaven came and shrivell’d up
Their bodies, even to loathing, for they so stunk,
That all those eyes adored them ere their fall
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.

ESCANES.
’Twas very strange

HELICANUS.
And yet but justice; for though this king were great;
His greatness was no guard to bar heaven’s shaft,
But sin had his reward.

ESCANES.
’Tis very true.

 Enter two or three Lords.

FIRST LORD.
See, not a man in private conference
Or council has respect with him but he.

SECOND LORD.
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.

THIRD LORD.
And cursed be he that will not second it.

FIRST LORD.
Follow me, then. Lord Helicane, a word.

HELICANUS.
With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.

FIRST LORD.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,
And now at length they overflow their banks.

HELICANUS.
Your griefs! for what? Wrong not your prince you love.

FIRST LORD.
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane;
But if the prince do live, let us salute him.
Or know what ground’s made happy by his breath.
If in the world he live, we’ll seek him out;
If in his grave he rest, we’ll find him there.
We’ll be resolved he lives to govern us,
Or dead, give’s cause to mourn his funeral,
And leave us to our free election.

SECOND LORD.
Whose death’s indeed the strongest in our censure:
And knowing this kingdom is without a head,—
Like goodly buildings left without a roof
Soon fall to ruin,—your noble self,
That best know how to rule and how to reign,
We thus submit unto,—our sovereign.

ALL.
Live, noble Helicane!

HELICANUS.
For honour’s cause, forbear your suffrages:
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.
Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
Where’s hourly trouble for a minute’s ease.
A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you
To forbear the absence of your king;
If in which time expired, he not return,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.
But if I cannot win you to this love,
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth;
Whom if you find, and win unto return,
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.

FIRST LORD.
To wisdom he’s a fool that will not yield;
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,
We with our travels will endeavour us.

HELICANUS.
Then you love us, we you, and we’ll clasp hands:
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE V. Pentapolis. A room in the palace.

 Enter Simonides reading a letter at one door; the Knights meet him.

FIRST KNIGHT.
Good morrow to the good Simonides.

SIMONIDES.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,
That for this twelvemonth she’ll not undertake
A married life.
Her reason to herself is only known,
Which yet from her by no means can I get.

SECOND KNIGHT.
May we not get access to her, my lord?

SIMONIDES.
Faith, by no means; she hath so strictly tied
Her to her chamber, that ’tis impossible.
One twelve moons more she’ll wear Diana’s livery;
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow’d,
And on her virgin honour will not break it.

THIRD KNIGHT.
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.

 [_Exeunt Knights._]

SIMONIDES.
So, they are well dispatch’d; now to my daughter’s letter:
She tells me here, she’ll wed the stranger knight,
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
’Tis well, mistress; your choice agrees with mine;
I like that well: nay, how absolute she’s in’t,
Not minding whether I dislike or no!
Well, I do commend her choice;
And will no longer have it be delay’d.
Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.

 Enter Pericles.

PERICLES.
All fortune to the good Simonides!

SIMONIDES.
To you as much. Sir, I am beholding to you
For your sweet music this last night: I do
Protest my ears were never better fed
With such delightful pleasing harmony.

PERICLES.
It is your grace’s pleasure to commend;
Not my desert.

SIMONIDES.
Sir, you are music’s master.

PERICLES.
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.

SIMONIDES.
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of my daughter, sir?

PERICLES.
A most virtuous princess.

SIMONIDES.
And she is fair too, is she not?

PERICLES.
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.

SIMONIDES.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you;
Ay, so well, that you must be her master,
And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.

PERICLES.
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.

SIMONIDES.
She thinks not so; peruse this writing else.

PERICLES.
[_Aside._] What’s here? A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre!
’Tis the king’s subtlety to have my life.
O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,
A stranger and distressed gentleman,
That never aim’d so high to love your daughter,
But bent all offices to honour her.

SIMONIDES.
Thou hast bewitch’d my daughter,
And thou art a villain.

PERICLES.
By the gods, I have not:
Never did thought of mine levy offence;
Nor never did my actions yet commence
A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.

SIMONIDES.
Traitor, thou liest.

PERICLES.
Traitor?

SIMONIDES.
Ay, traitor.

PERICLES.
Even in his throat—unless it be the king—
That calls me traitor, I return the lie.

SIMONIDES.
[_Aside._] Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.

PERICLES.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,
That never relish’d of a base descent.
I came unto your court for honour’s cause,
And not to be a rebel to her state;
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
This sword shall prove he’s honour’s enemy.

SIMONIDES.
No?
Here comes my daughter, she can witness it.

 Enter Thaisa.

PERICLES.
Then, as you are as virtuous as fair,
Resolve your angry father, if my tongue
Did e’er solicit, or my hand subscribe
To any syllable that made love to you.

THAISA.
Why, sir, say if you had,
Who takes offence at that would make me glad?

SIMONIDES.
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?
[_Aside._] I am glad on’t with all my heart.—
I’ll tame you; I’ll bring you in subjection.
Will you, not having my consent,
Bestow your love and your affections
Upon a stranger? [_Aside._] Who, for aught I know
May be, nor can I think the contrary,
As great in blood as I myself.—
Therefore hear you, mistress; either frame
Your will to mine, and you, sir, hear you,
Either be ruled by me, or I will make you—
Man and wife. Nay, come, your hands,
And lips must seal it too: and being join’d,
I’ll thus your hopes destroy; and for further grief,
God give you joy! What, are you both pleased?

THAISA.
Yes, if you love me, sir.

PERICLES.
Even as my life my blood that fosters it.

SIMONIDES.
What, are you both agreed?

BOTH.
Yes, if’t please your majesty.

SIMONIDES.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed;
And then with what haste you can, get you to bed.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III


 Enter Gower.

GOWER.
Now sleep yslaked hath the rouse;
No din but snores about the house,
Made louder by the o’erfed breast
Of this most pompous marriage feast.
The cat, with eyne of burning coal,
Now couches fore the mouse’s hole;
And crickets sing at the oven’s mouth,
Are the blither for their drouth.
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed,
Where, by the loss of maidenhead,
A babe is moulded. Be attent,
And time that is so briefly spent
With your fine fancies quaintly eche:
What’s dumb in show I’ll plain with speech.

 Dumb-show. Enter, Pericles and Simonides at one door with Attendants;
 a Messenger meets them, kneels, and gives Pericles a letter: Pericles
 shows it Simonides; the Lords kneel to him. Then enter Thaisa with
 child, with Lychorida, a nurse. The King shows her the letter; she
 rejoices: she and Pericles take leave of her father, and depart, with
 Lychorida and their Attendants. Then exeunt Simonides and the rest.

By many a dern and painful perch
Of Pericles the careful search,
By the four opposing coigns
Which the world together joins,
Is made with all due diligence
That horse and sail and high expense
Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre,
Fame answering the most strange enquire,
To th’ court of King Simonides
Are letters brought, the tenour these:
Antiochus and his daughter dead;
The men of Tyrus on the head
Of Helicanus would set on
The crown of Tyre, but he will none:
The mutiny he there hastes t’oppress;
Says to ’em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twice six moons,
He, obedient to their dooms,
Will take the crown. The sum of this,
Brought hither to Pentapolis
Y-ravished the regions round,
And everyone with claps can sound,
‘Our heir apparent is a king!
Who dreamt, who thought of such a thing?’
Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre:
His queen with child makes her desire—
Which who shall cross?—along to go:
Omit we all their dole and woe:
Lychorida, her nurse, she takes,
And so to sea. Their vessel shakes
On Neptune’s billow; half the flood
Hath their keel cut: but fortune’s mood
Varies again; the grisled north
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
That, as a duck for life that dives,
So up and down the poor ship drives:
The lady shrieks, and well-a-near
Does fall in travail with her fear:
And what ensues in this fell storm
Shall for itself itself perform.
I nill relate, action may
Conveniently the rest convey;
Which might not what by me is told.
In your imagination hold
This stage the ship, upon whose deck
The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE I.

 Enter Pericles, on shipboard.

PERICLES.
Thou god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell; and thou that hast
Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,
Having call’d them from the deep! O, still
Thy deafening, dreadful thunders; gently quench
Thy nimble, sulphurous flashes! O, how, Lychorida,
How does my queen? Thou stormest venomously;
Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman’s whistle
Is as a whisper in the ears of death,
Unheard. Lychorida! - Lucina, O!
Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle
To those that cry by night, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing boat; make swift the pangs
Of my queen’s travails! Now, Lychorida!

 Enter Lychorida with an infant.

LYCHORIDA.
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I
Am like to do: take in your arms this piece
Of your dead queen.

PERICLES.
How? how, Lychorida?

LYCHORIDA.
Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm.
Here’s all that is left living of your queen,
A little daughter: for the sake of it,
Be manly, and take comfort.

PERICLES.
O you gods!
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,
And snatch them straight away? We here below
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Vie honour with you.

LYCHORIDA.
Patience, good sir.
Even for this charge.

PERICLES.
Now, mild may be thy life!
For a more blustrous birth had never babe:
Quiet and gentle thy conditions! for
Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world
That ever was prince’s child. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding a nativity
As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make,
To herald thee from the womb.
Even at the first thy loss is more than can
Thy portage quit, with all thou canst find here,
Now, the good gods throw their best eyes upon’t!

 Enter two Sailors

FIRST SAILOR.
What courage, sir? God save you!

PERICLES.
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw;
It hath done to me the worst. Yet, for the love
Of this poor infant, this fresh new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.

FIRST SAILOR.
Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou? Blow, and split
thyself.

SECOND SAILOR.
But sea-room, and the brine and cloudy billow kiss the moon, I care
not.

FIRST SAILOR.
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high, the wind is loud
and will not lie till the ship be cleared of the dead.

PERICLES.
That’s your superstition.

FIRST SAILOR.
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it has been still observed; and we are
strong in custom. Therefore briefly yield her; for she must overboard
straight.

PERICLES.
As you think meet. Most wretched queen!

LYCHORIDA.
Here she lies, sir.

PERICLES.
A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear;
No light, no fire: th’unfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly; nor have I time
To give thee hallow’d to thy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcely coffin’d, in the ooze;
Where, for a monument upon thy bones,
And e’er-remaining lamps, the belching whale
And humming water must o’erwhelm thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida.
Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper,
My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffer: lay the babe
Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.

 [_Exit Lychorida._]

SECOND SAILOR.
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulked and bitumed ready.

PERICLES.
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?

SECOND SAILOR.
We are near Tarsus.

PERICLES.
Thither, gentle mariner,
Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?

SECOND SAILOR.
By break of day, if the wind cease.

PERICLES.
O, make for Tarsus!
There will I visit Cleon, for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus. There I’ll leave it
At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner:
I’ll bring the body presently.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE II. Ephesus. A room in Cerimon’s house.

 Enter Cerimon, with a Servant, and some Persons who have been
 shipwrecked.

CERIMON.
Philemon, ho!

 Enter Philemon.

PHILEMON.
Doth my lord call?

CERIMON.
Get fire and meat for these poor men:
’T has been a turbulent and stormy night.

SERVANT.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,
Till now, I ne’er endured.

CERIMON.
Your master will be dead ere you return;
There’s nothing can be minister’d to nature
That can recover him. [_To Philemon._] Give this to the ’pothecary,
And tell me how it works.

 [_Exeunt all but Cerimon._]

 Enter two Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Good morrow.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Good morrow to your lordship.

CERIMON.
Gentlemen, why do you stir so early?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Sir, our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth did quake;
The very principals did seem to rend,
And all to topple: pure surprise and fear
Made me to quit the house.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
That is the cause we trouble you so early;
’Tis not our husbandry.

CERIMON.
O, you say well.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
But I much marvel that your lordship, having
Rich tire about you, should at these early hours
Shake off the golden slumber of repose.
’Tis most strange,
Nature should be so conversant with pain.
Being thereto not compell’d.

CERIMON.
I hold it ever,
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater
Than nobleness and riches: careless heirs
May the two latter darken and expend;
But immortality attends the former,
Making a man a god. ’Tis known, I ever
Have studied physic, through which secret art,
By turning o’er authorities, I have,
Together with my practice, made familiar
To me and to my aid the blest infusions
That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones;
And I can speak of the disturbances
That nature works, and of her cures; which doth give me
A more content in course of true delight
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour,
Or tie my pleasure up in silken bags,
To please the fool and death.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Your honour has through Ephesus pour’d forth
Your charity, and hundreds call themselves
Your creatures, who by you have been restored:
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even
Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown as time shall never—

 Enter two or three Servants with a chest.

FIRST SERVANT.
So, lift there.

CERIMON.
What’s that?

FIRST SERVANT.
Sir, even now
Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest:
’Tis of some wreck.

CERIMON.
Set’t down, let’s look upon’t.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis like a coffin, sir.

CERIMON.
Whate’er it be,
’Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight:
If the sea’s stomach be o’ercharged with gold,
’Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis so, my lord.

CERIMON.
How close ’tis caulk’d and bitumed!
Did the sea cast it up?

FIRST SERVANT.
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,
As toss’d it upon shore.

CERIMON.
Wrench it open;
Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A delicate odour.

CERIMON.
As ever hit my nostril. So up with it.
O you most potent gods! what’s here? a corpse!

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Most strange!

CERIMON.
Shrouded in cloth of state; balm’d and entreasured
With full bags of spices! A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in the characters!

 [_Reads from a scroll._]

     _Here I give to understand,
     If e’er this coffin drives a-land,
     I, King Pericles, have lost
     This queen, worth all our mundane cost.
     Who finds her, give her burying;
     She was the daughter of a king:
     Besides this treasure for a fee,
     The gods requite his charity._
If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart
That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Most likely, sir.

CERIMON.
Nay, certainly tonight;
For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough
That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.

 [_Exit a Servant._]

Death may usurp on nature many hours,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
The o’erpress’d spirits. I heard of an Egyptian
That had nine hours lain dead,
Who was by good appliance recovered.

 Re-enter a Servant with napkins and fire.

Well said, well said; the fire and cloths.
The rough and woeful music that we have,
Cause it to sound, beseech you
The viol once more: how thou stirr’st, thou block!
The music there!—I pray you, give her air.
Gentlemen, this queen will live.
Nature awakes; a warmth breathes out of her.
She hath not been entranced above five hours.
See how she ’gins to blow into life’s flower again!

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
The heavens, through you, increase our wonder
And sets up your fame for ever.

CERIMON.
She is alive; behold, her eyelids,
Cases to those heavenly jewels which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold;
The diamonds of a most praised water doth appear,
To make the world twice rich. Live, and make us weep
To hear your fate, fair creature, rare as you seem to be.

 [_She moves._]

THAISA.
O dear Diana,
Where am I? Where’s my lord? What world is this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Is not this strange?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Most rare.

CERIMON.
Hush, my gentle neighbours!
Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear her.
Get linen: now this matter must be look’d to,
For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;
And Aesculapius guide us!

 [_Exeunt, carrying her away._]



SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in Cleon’s house.

 Enter Pericles, Cleon, Dionyza and Lychorida with Marina in her arms.

PERICLES.
Most honour’d Cleon, I must needs be gone;
My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You and your lady,
Take from my heart all thankfulness! The gods
Make up the rest upon you!

CLEON.
Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally,
Yet glance full wanderingly on us.

DIONYZA.
O, your sweet queen!
That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,
To have bless’d mine eyes with her!

PERICLES.
We cannot but obey
The powers above us. Could I rage and roar
As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end
Must be as ’tis. My gentle babe Marina,
Whom, for she was born at sea, I have named so,
Here I charge your charity withal,
Leaving her the infant of your care;
Beseeching you to give her princely training,
That she may be manner’d as she is born.

CLEON.
Fear not, my lord, but think
Your grace, that fed my country with your corn,
For which the people’s prayers still fall upon you,
Must in your child be thought on. If neglection
Should therein make me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, would force me to my duty:
But if to that my nature need a spur,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine,
To the end of generation!

PERICLES.
I believe you;
Your honour and your goodness teach me to’t,
Without your vows. Till she be married, madam,
By bright Diana, whom we honour, all
Unscissored shall this hair of mine remain,
Though I show ill in’t. So I take my leave.
Good madam, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my child.

DIONYZA.
I have one myself,
Who shall not be more dear to my respect
Than yours, my lord.

PERICLES.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.

CLEON.
We’ll bring your grace e’en to the edge o’the shore,
Then give you up to the mask’d Neptune and
The gentlest winds of heaven.

PERICLES.
I will embrace your offer. Come, dearest madam.
O, no tears, Lychorida, no tears.
Look to your little mistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE IV. Ephesus. A room in Cerimon’s house.

 Enter Cerimon and Thaisa.

CERIMON.
Madam, this letter, and some certain jewels,
Lay with you in your coffer, which are
At your command. Know you the character?

THAISA.
It is my lord’s.
That I was shipp’d at sea, I well remember,
Even on my groaning time; but whether there
Deliver’d, by the holy gods,
I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I ne’er shall see again,
A vestal livery will I take me to,
And never more have joy.

CERIMON.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,
Diana’s temple is not distant far,
Where you may abide till your date expire.
Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine
Shall there attend you.

THAISA.
My recompense is thanks, that’s all;
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV


 Enter Gower.

GOWER.
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire.
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus,
Unto Diana there a votaress.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find
At Tarsus, and by Cleon train’d
In music’s letters; who hath gain’d
Of education all the grace,
Which makes her both the heart and place
Of general wonder. But, alack,
That monster envy, oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marina’s life
Seeks to take off by treason’s knife,
And in this kind our Cleon hath
One daughter, and a full grown wench
Even ripe for marriage-rite; this maid
Hight Philoten: and it is said
For certain in our story, she
Would ever with Marina be.
Be’t when she weaved the sleided silk
With fingers long, small, white as milk;
Or when she would with sharp needle wound,
The cambric, which she made more sound
By hurting it; or when to th’ lute
She sung, and made the night-bird mute
That still records with moan; or when
She would with rich and constant pen
Vail to her mistress Dian; still
This Philoten contends in skill
With absolute Marina: so
The dove of Paphos might with the crow
Vie feathers white. Marina gets
All praises, which are paid as debts,
And not as given. This so darks
In Philoten all graceful marks,
That Cleon’s wife, with envy rare,
A present murderer does prepare
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
Lychorida, our nurse, is dead:
And cursed Dionyza hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath
Prest for this blow. The unborn event
I do commend to your content:
Only I carry winged time
Post on the lame feet of my rhyme;
Which never could I so convey,
Unless your thoughts went on my way.
Dionyza does appear,
With Leonine, a murderer.

 [_Exit._]



Scene I. Tarsus. An open place near the seashore.

 Enter Dionyza with Leonine.

DIONYZA.
Thy oath remember; thou hast sworn to do’t:
’Tis but a blow, which never shall be known.
Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon,
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,
Which is but cold, inflaming love i’ thy bosom,
Inflame too nicely; nor let pity, which
Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be
A soldier to thy purpose.

LEONINE.
I will do’t; but yet she is a goodly creature.

DIONYZA.
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Here she comes weeping for
her only mistress’ death. Thou art resolved?

LEONINE.
I am resolved.

 Enter Marina with a basket of flowers.

MARINA.
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed
To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues,
The purple violets, and marigolds,
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave,
While summer days do last. Ay me! poor maid,
Born in a tempest, when my mother died,
This world to me is like a lasting storm,
Whirring me from my friends.

DIONYZA.
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you?
Do not consume your blood with sorrowing;
Have you a nurse of me? Lord, how your favour’s
Changed with this unprofitable woe!
Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.
Walk with Leonine; the air is quick there,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.
Come, Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.

MARINA.
No, I pray you;
I’ll not bereave you of your servant.

DIONYZA.
Come, come;
I love the king your father, and yourself,
With more than foreign heart. We every day
Expect him here: when he shall come and find
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage;
Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken
No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerful once again; reserve
That excellent complexion, which did steal
The eyes of young and old. Care not for me;
I can go home alone.

MARINA.
Well, I will go;
But yet I have no desire to it.

DIONYZA.
Come, come, I know ’tis good for you.
Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:
Remember what I have said.

LEONINE.
I warrant you, madam.

DIONYZA.
I’ll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:
Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:
What! I must have a care of you.

MARINA.
My thanks, sweet madam.

 [_Exit Dionyza._]

Is this wind westerly that blows?

LEONINE.
South-west.

MARINA.
When I was born the wind was north.

LEONINE.
Was’t so?

MARINA.
My father, as nurse said, did never fear,
But cried ‘Good seamen!’ to the sailors,
Galling his kingly hands, haling ropes;
And clasping to the mast, endured a sea
That almost burst the deck.

LEONINE.
When was this?

MARINA.
When I was born:
Never was waves nor wind more violent;
And from the ladder tackle washes off
A canvas-climber. ‘Ha!’ says one, ‘wolt out?’
And with a dropping industry they skip
From stem to stern: the boatswain whistles, and
The master calls and trebles their confusion.

LEONINE.
Come, say your prayers.

MARINA.
What mean you?

LEONINE.
If you require a little space for prayer,
I grant it: pray; but be not tedious,
For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.

MARINA.
Why will you kill me?

LEONINE.
To satisfy my lady.

MARINA.
Why would she have me kill’d now?
As I can remember, by my troth,
I never did her hurt in all my life:
I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn
To any living creature: believe me, la,
I never kill’d a mouse, nor hurt a fly:
I trod upon a worm against my will,
But I wept for it. How have I offended,
Wherein my death might yield her any profit,
Or my life imply her any danger?

LEONINE.
My commission
Is not to reason of the deed, but do it.

MARINA.
You will not do’t for all the world, I hope.
You are well favour’d, and your looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately,
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:
Good sooth, it show’d well in you: do so now:
Your lady seeks my life; come you between,
And save poor me, the weaker.

LEONINE.
I am sworn,
And will dispatch.

 [_He seizes her._]

 Enter Pirates.

FIRST PIRATE.
Hold, villain!

 [_Leonine runs away._]

SECOND PIRATE.
A prize! a prize!

THIRD PIRATE.
Half part, mates, half part,
Come, let’s have her aboard suddenly.

 [_Exeunt Pirates with Marina._]

 Re-enter Leonine.

LEONINE.
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes;
And they have seized Marina. Let her go:
There’s no hope she will return. I’ll swear she’s dead
And thrown into the sea. But I’ll see further:
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. If she remain,
Whom they have ravish’d must by me be slain.

 [_Exit._]



Scene II. Mytilene. A room in a brothel.

 Enter Pandar, Bawd and Boult.

PANDAR.
Boult!

BOULT.
Sir?

PANDAR.
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full of gallants. We lost too
much money this mart by being too wenchless.

BAWD.
We were never so much out of creatures. We have but poor three, and
they can do no more than they can do; and they with continual action
are even as good as rotten.

PANDAR.
Therefore let’s have fresh ones, whate’er we pay for them. If there be
not a conscience to be used in every trade, we shall never prosper.

BAWD.
Thou sayest true: ’tis not our bringing up of poor bastards,—as, I
think, I have brought up some eleven—

BOULT.
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. But shall I search the
market?

BAWD.
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind will blow it to
pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.

PANDAR.
Thou sayest true; they’re too unwholesome, o’ conscience. The poor
Transylvanian is dead, that lay with the little baggage.

BOULT.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meat for worms. But I’ll
go search the market.

 [_Exit._]

PANDAR.
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a proportion to live
quietly, and so give over.

BAWD.
Why to give over, I pray you? Is it a shame to get when we are old?

PANDAR.
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor the commodity wages
not with the danger: therefore, if in our youths we could pick up some
pretty estate, ’twere not amiss to keep our door hatched. Besides, the
sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for
giving over.

BAWD.
Come, others sorts offend as well as we.

PANDAR.
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse. Neither is our
profession any trade; it’s no calling. But here comes Boult.

 Re-enter Boult, with the Pirates and Marina.

BOULT
[_To Pirates._] Come your ways. My masters, you say she’s a virgin?

FIRST PIRATE.
O sir, we doubt it not.

BOULT.
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see: if you like her,
so; if not, I have lost my earnest.

BAWD.
Boult, has she any qualities?

BOULT.
She has a good face, speaks well and has excellent good clothes:
there’s no farther necessity of qualities can make her be refused.

BAWD.
What is her price, Boult?

BOULT.
I cannot be baited one doit of a thousand pieces.

PANDAR.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your money presently. Wife,
take her in; instruct her what she has to do, that she may not be raw
in her entertainment.

 [_Exeunt Pandar and Pirates._]

BAWD.
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her hair, complexion,
height, her age, with warrant of her virginity; and cry ‘He that will
give most shall have her first.’ Such a maidenhead were no cheap thing,
if men were as they have been. Get this done as I command you.

BOULT.
Performance shall follow.

 [_Exit._]

MARINA.
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!
He should have struck, not spoke; or that these pirates,
Not enough barbarous, had not o’erboard thrown me
For to seek my mother!

BAWD.
Why lament you, pretty one?

MARINA.
That I am pretty.

BAWD.
Come, the gods have done their part in you.

MARINA.
I accuse them not.

BAWD.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.

MARINA.
The more my fault
To scape his hands where I was like to die.

BAWD.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.

MARINA.
No.

BAWD.
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all fashions: you shall
fare well; you shall have the difference of all complexions. What! do
you stop your ears?

MARINA.
Are you a woman?

BAWD.
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?

MARINA.
An honest woman, or not a woman.

BAWD.
Marry, whip the gosling: I think I shall have something to do with you.
Come, you’re a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have
you.

MARINA.
The gods defend me!

BAWD.
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men must comfort you,
men must feed you, men stir you up. Boult’s returned.

 Re-enter Boult.

Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?

BOULT.
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs; I have drawn her
picture with my voice.

BAWD.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination of the
people, especially of the younger sort?

BOULT.
Faith, they listened to me as they would have hearkened to their
father’s testament. There was a Spaniard’s mouth so watered, that he
went to bed to her very description.

BAWD.
We shall have him here tomorrow with his best ruff on.

BOULT.
Tonight, tonight. But, mistress, do you know the French knight that
cowers i’ the hams?

BAWD.
Who, Monsieur Veroles?

BOULT.
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at the proclamation; but he made a
groan at it, and swore he would see her tomorrow.

BAWD.
Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease hither: here he does but
repair it. I know he will come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in
the sun.

BOULT.
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we should lodge them with
this sign.

 [_To Marina._] Pray you, come hither awhile. You have fortunes coming
 upon you. Mark me: you must seem to do that fearfully which you commit
 willingly, despise profit where you have most gain. To weep that you
 live as ye do makes pity in your lovers: seldom but that pity begets
 you a good opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.

MARINA.
I understand you not.

BOULT.
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these blushes of hers must
be quenched with some present practice.

BAWD.
Thou sayest true, i’faith so they must; for your bride goes to that
with shame which is her way to go with warrant.

BOULT.
Faith, some do and some do not. But, mistress, if I have bargained for
the joint,—

BAWD.
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.

BOULT.
I may so.

BAWD. Who should deny it? Come young one, I like the manner of your
garments well.

BOULT.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.

BAWD.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a sojourner we have;
you’ll lose nothing by custom. When nature framed this piece, she meant
thee a good turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou hast
the harvest out of thine own report.

BOULT.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels as
my giving out her beauty stirs up the lewdly inclined. I’ll bring home
some tonight.

BAWD.
Come your ways; follow me.

MARINA.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
Diana, aid my purpose!

BAWD.
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in Cleon’s house.

 Enter Cleon and Dionyza.

DIONYZA.
Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?

CLEON.
O, Dionyza, such a piece of slaughter
The sun and moon ne’er look’d upon!

DIONYZA.
I think you’ll turn a child again.

CLEON.
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,
I’d give it to undo the deed. A lady,
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crown o’ the earth
I’ the justice of compare! O villain Leonine!
Whom thou hast poison’d too:
If thou hadst drunk to him, ’t had been a kindness
Becoming well thy face. What canst thou say
When noble Pericles shall demand his child?

DIONYZA.
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,
To foster it, nor ever to preserve.
She died at night; I’ll say so. Who can cross it?
Unless you play the pious innocent,
And for an honest attribute cry out
‘She died by foul play.’

CLEON.
O, go to. Well, well,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods
Do like this worst.

DIONYZA.
Be one of those that thinks
The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence,
And open this to Pericles. I do shame
To think of what a noble strain you are,
And of how coward a spirit.

CLEON.
To such proceeding
Whoever but his approbation added,
Though not his prime consent, he did not flow
From honourable courses.

DIONYZA.
Be it so, then:
Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.
She did distain my child, and stood between
Her and her fortunes: none would look on her,
But cast their gazes on Marina’s face;
Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin
Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through;
And though you call my course unnatural,
You not your child well loving, yet I find
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness
Perform’d to your sole daughter.

CLEON.
Heavens forgive it!

DIONYZA.
And as for Pericles, what should he say?
We wept after her hearse, and yet we mourn.
Her monument is almost finish’d, and her epitaphs
In glittering golden characters express
A general praise to her, and care in us
At whose expense ’tis done.

CLEON.
Thou art like the harpy,
Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel’s face,
Seize with thine eagle’s talons.

DIONYZA.
You are like one that superstitiously
Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:
But yet I know you’ll do as I advise.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE IV.

 Enter Gower, before the monument of Marina at Tarsus.

GOWER.
Thus time we waste, and long leagues make short;
Sail seas in cockles, have and wish but for’t;
Making, to take your imagination,
From bourn to bourn, region to region.
By you being pardon’d, we commit no crime
To use one language in each several clime
Where our scenes seem to live. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who stand i’the gaps to teach you,
The stages of our story. Pericles
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas
Attended on by many a lord and knight,
To see his daughter, all his life’s delight.
Old Helicanus goes along. Behind
Is left to govern, if you bear in mind,
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time to great and high estate.
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought
This king to Tarsus,—think his pilot thought;
So with his steerage shall your thoughts go on,—
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone.
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile;
Your ears unto your eyes I’ll reconcile.

 Dumb-show. Enter Pericles at one door with all his train; Cleon and
 Dionyza at the other. Cleon shows Pericles the tomb; whereat Pericles
 makes lamentation, puts on sackcloth and in a mighty passion departs.
 Then exeunt Cleon and Dionyza.

See how belief may suffer by foul show;
This borrow’d passion stands for true old woe;
And Pericles, in sorrow all devour’d,
With sighs shot through; and biggest tears o’ershower’d,
Leaves Tarsus and again embarks. He swears
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:
He puts on sackcloth, and to sea he bears
A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,
And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit
The epitaph is for Marina writ
By wicked Dionyza.

 [_Reads the inscription on Marina’s monument._]

     _The fairest, sweet’st, and best lies here,
     Who wither’d in her spring of year.
     She was of Tyrus the King’s daughter,
     On whom foul death hath made this slaughter;
     Marina was she call’d; and at her birth,
     Thetis, being proud, swallow’d some part o’ the earth:
     Therefore the earth, fearing to be o’erflow’d,
     Hath Thetis’ birth-child on the heavens bestow’d:
     Wherefore she does, and swears she’ll never stint,
     Make raging battery upon shores of flint._

No visor does become black villany
So well as soft and tender flattery.
Let Pericles believe his daughter’s dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered
By Lady Fortune; while our scene must play
His daughter’s woe and heavy well-a-day
In her unholy service. Patience, then,
And think you now are all in Mytilene.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE V. Mytilene. A street before the brothel.

 Enter, from the brothel, two Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Did you ever hear the like?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she being once gone.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
But to have divinity preached there! did you ever dream of such a
thing?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy houses: shall’s go hear the
vestals sing?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I’ll do anything now that is virtuous; but I am out of the road of
rutting for ever.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE VI. The same. A room in the brothel.

 Enter Pandar, Bawd and Boult.

PANDAR.
Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she had ne’er come here.

BAWD.
Fie, fie upon her! She’s able to freeze the god Priapus, and undo a
whole generation. We must either get her ravished, or be rid of her.
When she should do for clients her fitment, and do me the kindness of
our profession, she has me her quirks, her reasons, her master reasons,
her prayers, her knees; that she would make a puritan of the devil, if
he should cheapen a kiss of her.

BOULT.
Faith, I must ravish her, or she’ll disfurnish us of all our cavaliers,
and make our swearers priests.

PANDAR.
Now, the pox upon her green sickness for me!

BAWD.
Faith, there’s no way to be rid on’t but by the way to the pox.
Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.

BOULT.
We should have both lord and lown, if the peevish baggage would but
give way to customers.

 Enter Lysimachus.

LYSIMACHUS.
How now! How a dozen of virginities?

BAWD.
Now, the gods to bless your honour!

BOULT.
I am glad to see your honour in good health.

LYSIMACHUS.
You may so; ’tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon
sound legs. How now? Wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
withal, and defy the surgeon?

BAWD.
We have here one, sir, if she would—but there never came her like in
Mytilene.

LYSIMACHUS.
If she’d do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.

BAWD.
Your honour knows what ’tis to say well enough.

LYSIMACHUS.
Well, call forth, call forth.

BOULT.
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall see a rose; and she
were a rose indeed, if she had but—

LYSIMACHUS.
What, prithee?

BOULT.
O, sir, I can be modest.

LYSIMACHUS.
That dignifies the renown of a bawd no less than it gives a good report
to a number to be chaste.

 [_Exit Boult._]

BAWD.
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; never plucked yet, I can
assure you.

 Re-enter Boult with Marina.

Is she not a fair creature?

LYSIMACHUS.
Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea. Well, there’s for
you: leave us.

BAWD.
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, and I’ll have done
presently.

LYSIMACHUS.
I beseech you, do.

BAWD.
[_To Marina._] First, I would have you note, this is an honourable man.

MARINA.
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.

BAWD.
Next, he’s the governor of this country, and a man whom I am bound to.

MARINA.
If he govern the country, you are bound to him indeed; but how
honourable he is in that, I know not.

BAWD. Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will you use him
kindly? He will line your apron with gold.

MARINA.
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.

LYSIMACHUS.
Ha’ you done?

BAWD.
My lord, she’s not paced yet: you must take some pains to work her to
your manage. Come, we will leave his honour and her together. Go thy
ways.

 [_Exeunt Bawd, Pandar and Boult._]

LYSIMACHUS.
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?

MARINA.
What trade, sir?

LYSIMACHUS.
Why, I cannot name’t but I shall offend.

MARINA.
I cannot be offended with my trade. Please you to name it.

LYSIMACHUS.
How long have you been of this profession?

MARINA.
E’er since I can remember.

LYSIMACHUS. Did you go to’t so young? Were you a gamester at five or at
seven?

MARINA.
Earlier, too, sir, if now I be one.

LYSIMACHUS.
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a creature of sale.

MARINA.
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort, and will come
into’t? I hear say you are of honourable parts, and are the governor of
this place.

LYSIMACHUS.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?

MARINA.
Who is my principal?

LYSIMACHUS.
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots of shame and
iniquity. O, you have heard something of my power, and so stand aloof
for more serious wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my
authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly upon thee. Come,
bring me to some private place: come, come.

MARINA.
If you were born to honour, show it now;
If put upon you, make the judgement good
That thought you worthy of it.

LYSIMACHUS.
How’s this? how’s this? Some more; be sage.

MARINA.
For me,
That am a maid, though most ungentle Fortune
Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic,
O, that the gods
Would set me free from this unhallow’d place,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
That flies i’ the purer air!

LYSIMACHUS.
I did not think
Thou couldst have spoke so well; ne’er dream’d thou couldst.
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
Thy speech had alter’d it. Hold, here’s gold for thee:
Persever in that clear way thou goest,
And the gods strengthen thee!

MARINA.
The good gods preserve you!

LYSIMACHUS.
For me, be you thoughten
That I came with no ill intent; for to me
The very doors and windows savour vilely.
Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.
Hold, here’s more gold for thee.
A curse upon him, die he like a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.

 Re-enter Boult.

BOULT.
I beseech your honour, one piece for me.

LYSIMACHUS.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!
Your house but for this virgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!

 [_Exit._]

BOULT.
How’s this? We must take another course with you. If your peevish
chastity, which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under
the cope, shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like a
spaniel. Come your ways.

MARINA.
Whither would you have me?

BOULT.
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common hangman shall
execute it. Come your ways. We’ll have no more gentlemen driven away.
Come your ways, I say.

 Re-enter Bawd.

BAWD.
How now! what’s the matter?

BOULT.
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holy words to the Lord
Lysimachus.

BAWD.
O, abominable!

BOULT.
She makes our profession as it were to stink afore the face of the
gods.

BAWD.
Marry, hang her up for ever!

BOULT.
The nobleman would have dealt with her like a nobleman, and she sent
him away as cold as a snowball; saying his prayers too.

BAWD.
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure: crack the glass of her
virginity, and make the rest malleable.

BOULT.
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she is, she shall be
ploughed.

MARINA.
Hark, hark, you gods!

BAWD.
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never come within my doors!
Marry, hang you! She’s born to undo us. Will you not go the way of
womankind? Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!

 [_Exit._]

BOULT.
Come, mistress; come your way with me.

MARINA.
Whither wilt thou have me?

BOULT.
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.

MARINA.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.

BOULT.
Come now, your one thing?

MARINA.
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?

BOULT.
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.

MARINA.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,
Since they do better thee in their command.
Thou hold’st a place, for which the pained’st fiend
Of hell would not in reputation change:
Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every
Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib.
To the choleric fisting of every rogue
Thy ear is liable, thy food is such
As hath been belch’d on by infected lungs.

BOULT.
What would you have me do? Go to the wars, would you? where a man may
serve seven years for the loss of a leg, and have not money enough in
the end to buy him a wooden one?

MARINA.
Do anything but this thou doest. Empty
Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth;
Serve by indenture to the common hangman:
Any of these ways are yet better than this;
For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear. O, that the gods
Would safely deliver me from this place!
Here, here’s gold for thee.
If that thy master would gain by me,
Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues, which I’ll keep from boast;
And I will undertake all these to teach.
I doubt not but this populous city will
Yield many scholars.

BOULT.
But can you teach all this you speak of?

MARINA.
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,
And prostitute me to the basest groom
That doth frequent your house.

BOULT.
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I can place thee, I will.

MARINA.
But amongst honest women.

BOULT.
Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them. But since my master
and mistress have bought you, there’s no going but by their consent:
therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt
not but I shall find them tractable enough. Come, I’ll do for thee what
I can; come your ways.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V


 Enter Gower.

GOWER.
Marina thus the brothel ’scapes, and chances
Into an honest house, our story says.
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
As goddess-like to her admired lays;
Deep clerks she dumbs; and with her nee’le composes
Nature’s own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry,
That even her art sisters the natural roses;
Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry:
That pupils lacks she none of noble race,
Who pour their bounty on her; and her gain
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place;
And to her father turn our thoughts again,
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost;
Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived
Here where his daughter dwells; and on this coast
Suppose him now at anchor. The city strived
God Neptune’s annual feast to keep: from whence
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies,
His banners sable, trimm’d with rich expense;
And to him in his barge with fervour hies.
In your supposing once more put your sight
Of heavy Pericles; think this his bark:
Where what is done in action, more, if might,
Shall be discover’d; please you, sit and hark.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE I. On board Pericles’ ship, off Mytilene. A close pavilion on
deck, with a curtain before it; Pericles within it, reclined on a
couch. A barge lying beside the Tyrian vessel.

 Enter two Sailors, one belonging to the Tyrian vessel, the other to
 the barge; to them Helicanus.

TYRIAN SAILOR.
[_To the Sailor of Mytilene._]
Where is lord Helicanus? He can resolve you.
O, here he is.
Sir, there’s a barge put off from Mytilene,
And in it is Lysimachus the governor,
Who craves to come aboard. What is your will?

HELICANUS.
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.

TYRIAN SAILOR.
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.

 Enter two or three Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Doth your lordship call?

HELICANUS.
Gentlemen, there is some of worth would come aboard;
I pray ye, greet them fairly.

 [_The Gentlemen and the two Sailors descend and go on board the
 barge._]

 Enter, from thence, Lysimachus and Lords; with the Gentlemen and the
 two Sailors.

TYRIAN SAILOR.
Sir,
This is the man that can, in aught you would,
Resolve you.

LYSIMACHUS.
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!

HELICANUS.
And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,
And die as I would do.

LYSIMACHUS.
You wish me well.
Being on shore, honouring of Neptune’s triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
I made to it, to know of whence you are.

HELICANUS.
First, what is your place?

LYSIMACHUS.
I am the governor of this place you lie before.

HELICANUS.
Sir, our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king;
A man who for this three months hath not spoken
To anyone, nor taken sustenance
But to prorogue his grief.

LYSIMACHUS.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?

HELICANUS.
’Twould be too tedious to repeat;
But the main grief springs from the loss
Of a beloved daughter and a wife.

LYSIMACHUS.
May we not see him?

HELICANUS.
You may;
But bootless is your sight: he will not speak
To any.

LYSIMACHUS.
Yet let me obtain my wish.

HELICANUS.
Behold him.
[_Pericles discovered._]
This was a goodly person.
Till the disaster that, one mortal night,
Drove him to this.

LYSIMACHUS.
Sir king, all hail! The gods preserve you!
Hail, royal sir!

HELICANUS.
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.

FIRST LORD.
Sir, we have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,
Would win some words of him.

LYSIMACHUS.
’Tis well bethought.
She questionless with her sweet harmony
And other chosen attractions, would allure,
And make a battery through his deafen’d parts,
Which now are midway stopp’d:
She is all happy as the fairest of all,
And, with her fellow maids, is now upon
The leafy shelter that abuts against
The island’s side.

 [_Whispers a Lord who goes off in the barge of Lysimachus._]

HELICANUS.
Sure, all’s effectless; yet nothing we’ll omit
That bears recovery’s name. But, since your kindness
We have stretch’d thus far, let us beseech you
That for our gold we may provision have,
Wherein we are not destitute for want,
But weary for the staleness.

LYSIMACHUS.
O, sir, a courtesy
Which if we should deny, the most just gods
For every graff would send a caterpillar,
And so inflict our province. Yet once more
Let me entreat to know at large the cause
Of your king’s sorrow.

HELICANUS.
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you:
But, see, I am prevented.

 Re-enter from the barge, Lord with Marina and a young Lady.

LYSIMACHUS.
O, here is the lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!
Is’t not a goodly presence?

HELICANUS.
She’s a gallant lady.

LYSIMACHUS.
She’s such a one, that, were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,
I’d wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.
Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient:
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay
As thy desires can wish.

MARINA.
Sir, I will use
My utmost skill in his recovery, provided
That none but I and my companion maid
Be suffer’d to come near him.

LYSIMACHUS.
Come, let us leave her,
And the gods make her prosperous!

 [_Marina sings._]

LYSIMACHUS.
Mark’d he your music?

MARINA.
No, nor look’d on us.

LYSIMACHUS.
See, she will speak to him.

MARINA.
Hail, sir! My lord, lend ear.

PERICLES.
Hum, ha!

MARINA.
I am a maid,
My lord, that ne’er before invited eyes,
But have been gazed on like a comet: she speaks,
My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief
Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh’d.
Though wayward Fortune did malign my state,
My derivation was from ancestors
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings:
But time hath rooted out my parentage,
And to the world and awkward casualties
Bound me in servitude.
[_Aside._] I will desist;
But there is something glows upon my cheek,
And whispers in mine ear ‘Go not till he speak.’

PERICLES.
My fortunes—parentage—good parentage—
To equal mine!—was it not thus? what say you?

MARINA.
I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage,
You would not do me violence.

PERICLES.
I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me.
You are like something that—what country-woman?
Here of these shores?

MARINA.
No, nor of any shores:
Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am
No other than I appear.

PERICLES.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.
My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one
My daughter might have been: my queen’s square brows;
Her stature to an inch; as wand-like straight;
As silver-voiced; her eyes as jewel-like
And cased as richly; in pace another Juno;
Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry,
The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?

MARINA.
Where I am but a stranger: from the deck
You may discern the place.

PERICLES.
Where were you bred?
And how achieved you these endowments, which
You make more rich to owe?

MARINA.
If I should tell my history, it would seem
Like lies disdain’d in the reporting.

PERICLES.
Prithee, speak:
Falseness cannot come from thee; for thou look’st
Modest as Justice, and thou seem’st a palace
For the crown’d Truth to dwell in: I will believe thee,
And make my senses credit thy relation
To points that seem impossible; for thou look’st
Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?
Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back—
Which was when I perceived thee—that thou cam’st
From good descending?

MARINA.
So indeed I did.

PERICLES.
Report thy parentage. I think thou said’st
Thou hadst been toss’d from wrong to injury,
And that thou thought’st thy griefs might equal mine,
If both were open’d.

MARINA.
Some such thing,
I said, and said no more but what my thoughts
Did warrant me was likely.

PERICLES.
Tell thy story;
If thine consider’d prove the thousand part
Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I
Have suffer’d like a girl: yet thou dost look
Like Patience gazing on kings’ graves, and smiling
Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?
How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin?
Recount, I do beseech thee: come, sit by me.

MARINA.
My name is Marina.

PERICLES.
O, I am mock’d,
And thou by some incensed god sent hither
To make the world to laugh at me.

MARINA.
Patience, good sir,
Or here I’ll cease.

PERICLES.
Nay, I’ll be patient.
Thou little know’st how thou dost startle me,
To call thyself Marina.

MARINA.
The name
Was given me by one that had some power,
My father, and a king.

PERICLES.
How! a king’s daughter?
And call’d Marina?

MARINA.
You said you would believe me;
But, not to be a troubler of your peace,
I will end here.

PERICLES.
But are you flesh and blood?
Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy?
Motion! Well; speak on. Where were you born?
And wherefore call’d Marina?

MARINA.
Call’d Marina
For I was born at sea.

PERICLES.
At sea! What mother?

MARINA.
My mother was the daughter of a king;
Who died the minute I was born,
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft
Deliver’d weeping.

PERICLES.
O, stop there a little! [_Aside._] This is the rarest dream that e’er
dull sleep
Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be:
My daughter, buried. Well, where were you bred?
I’ll hear you more, to the bottom of your story,
And never interrupt you.

MARINA.
You scorn: believe me, ’twere best I did give o’er.

PERICLES.
I will believe you by the syllable
Of what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave:
How came you in these parts? Where were you bred?

MARINA.
The king my father did in Tarsus leave me;
Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife,
Did seek to murder me: and having woo’d
A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do’t,
A crew of pirates came and rescued me;
Brought me to Mytilene. But, good sir.
Whither will you have me? Why do you weep? It may be,
You think me an impostor: no, good faith;
I am the daughter to King Pericles,
If good King Pericles be.

PERICLES.
Ho, Helicanus!

 Enter Helicanus and Lysimachus.

HELICANUS.
Calls my lord?

PERICLES.
Thou art a grave and noble counsellor,
Most wise in general: tell me, if thou canst,
What this maid is, or what is like to be,
That thus hath made me weep.

HELICANUS.
I know not,
But here is the regent, sir, of Mytilene
Speaks nobly of her.

LYSIMACHUS.
She would never tell
Her parentage; being demanded that,
She would sit still and weep.

PERICLES.
O Helicanus, strike me, honour’d sir;
Give me a gash, put me to present pain;
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me
O’erbear the shores of my mortality,
And drown me with their sweetness.
[_To Marina_] O, come hither,
Thou that beget’st him that did thee beget;
Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,
And found at sea again! O Helicanus,
Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud
As thunder threatens us: this is Marina.
What was thy mother’s name? tell me but that,
For truth can never be confirm’d enough,
Though doubts did ever sleep.

MARINA.
First, sir, I pray, what is your title?

PERICLES.
I am Pericles of Tyre: but tell me now
My drown’d queen’s name, as in the rest you said
Thou hast been godlike perfect,
The heir of kingdoms and another life
To Pericles thy father.

MARINA.
Is it no more to be your daughter than
To say my mother’s name was Thaisa?
Thaisa was my mother, who did end
The minute I began.

PERICLES.
Now, blessing on thee! rise; thou art my child.
Give me fresh garments. Mine own, Helicanus;
She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been,
By savage Cleon: she shall tell thee all;
When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge
She is thy very princess. Who is this?

HELICANUS.
Sir, ’tis the governor of Mytilene,
Who, hearing of your melancholy state,
Did come to see you.

PERICLES.
I embrace you.
Give me my robes. I am wild in my beholding.
O heavens bless my girl! But, hark, what music?
Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him
O’er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,
How sure you are my daughter. But, what music?

HELICANUS.
My lord, I hear none.

PERICLES.
None!
The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.

LYSIMACHUS.
It is not good to cross him; give him way.

PERICLES.
Rarest sounds! Do ye not hear?

LYSIMACHUS.
Music, my lord? I hear.

 [_Music._]

PERICLES.
Most heavenly music!
It nips me unto listening, and thick slumber
Hangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.

 [_Sleeps._]

LYSIMACHUS.
A pillow for his head:
So, leave him all. Well, my companion friends,
If this but answer to my just belief,
I’ll well remember you.

 [_Exeunt all but Pericles._]

 Diana appears to Pericles as in a vision.

DIANA.
My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither,
And do upon mine altar sacrifice.
There, when my maiden priests are met together,
Before the people all,
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife:
To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter’s, call
And give them repetition to the life.
Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe:
Do it, and happy; by my silver bow!
Awake and tell thy dream.

 [_Disappears._]

PERICLES.
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,
I will obey thee. Helicanus!

 Re-enter Helicanus, Lysimachus and Marina.

HELICANUS.
Sir?

PERICLES.
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike
The inhospitable Cleon; but I am
For other service first: toward Ephesus
Turn our blown sails; eftsoons I’ll tell thee why.
[_To Lysimachus._] Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,
And give you gold for such provision
As our intents will need?

LYSIMACHUS.
Sir, with all my heart,
And when you come ashore I have another suit.

PERICLES.
You shall prevail, were it to woo my daughter;
For it seems you have been noble towards her.

LYSIMACHUS.
Sir, lend me your arm.

PERICLES.
Come, my Marina.

 [_Exeunt._]



SCENE II.

 Enter Gower before the temple of Diana at Ephesus.

GOWER.
Now our sands are almost run;
More a little, and then dumb.
This, my last boon, give me,
For such kindness must relieve me,
That you aptly will suppose
What pageantry, what feats, what shows,
What minstrelsy, and pretty din,
The regent made in Mytilene
To greet the king. So he thrived,
That he is promised to be wived
To fair Marina; but in no wise
Till he had done his sacrifice,
As Dian bade: whereto being bound,
The interim, pray you, all confound.
In feather’d briefness sails are fill’d,
And wishes fall out as they’re will’d.
At Ephesus, the temple see,
Our king and all his company.
That he can hither come so soon,
Is by your fancy’s thankful doom.

 [_Exit._]



SCENE III. The temple of Diana at Ephesus; Thaisa standing near the
altar, as high priestess; a number of Virgins on each side; Cerimon and
other inhabitants of Ephesus attending.

 Enter Pericles with his train; Lysimachus, Helicanus, Marina and a
 Lady.

PERICLES.
Hail, Dian! to perform thy just command,
I here confess myself the King of Tyre;
Who, frighted from my country, did wed
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.
At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth
A maid child call’d Marina; whom, O goddess,
Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus
Was nursed with Cleon; who at fourteen years
He sought to murder: but her better stars
Brought her to Mytilene; ’gainst whose shore
Riding, her fortunes brought the maid aboard us,
Where by her own most clear remembrance, she
Made known herself my daughter.

THAISA.
Voice and favour!
You are, you are—O royal Pericles!

 [_Faints._]

PERICLES.
What means the nun? She dies! help, gentlemen!

CERIMON.
Noble sir,
If you have told Diana’s altar true,
This is your wife.

PERICLES.
Reverend appearer, no;
I threw her overboard with these very arms.

CERIMON.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.

PERICLES.
’Tis most certain.

CERIMON.
Look to the lady; O, she’s but o’er-joy’d.
Early in blustering morn this lady was
Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,
Found there rich jewels; recover’d her, and placed her
Here in Diana’s temple.

PERICLES.
May we see them?

CERIMON.
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,
Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is
Recovered.

THAISA.
O, let me look!
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,
But curb it, spite of seeing. O, my lord,
Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,
Like him you are: did you not name a tempest,
A birth, and death?

PERICLES.
The voice of dead Thaisa!

THAISA.
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead
And drown’d.

PERICLES.
Immortal Dian!

THAISA.
Now I know you better,
When we with tears parted Pentapolis,
The king my father gave you such a ring.

 [_Shows a ring._]

PERICLES.
This, this: no more, you gods! your present kindness
Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well,
That on the touching of her lips I may
Melt and no more be seen. O, come, be buried
A second time within these arms.

MARINA.
My heart
Leaps to be gone into my mother’s bosom.

 [_Kneels to Thaisa._]

PERICLES.
Look, who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa;
Thy burden at the sea, and call’d Marina
For she was yielded there.

THAISA.
Blest, and mine own!

HELICANUS.
Hail, madam, and my queen!

THAISA.
I know you not.

PERICLES.
You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre,
I left behind an ancient substitute:
Can you remember what I call’d the man?
I have named him oft.

THAISA.
’Twas Helicanus then.

PERICLES.
Still confirmation:
Embrace him, dear Thaisa; this is he.
Now do I long to hear how you were found:
How possibly preserved; and who to thank,
Besides the gods, for this great miracle.

THAISA.
Lord Cerimon, my lord; this man,
Through whom the gods have shown their power; that can
From first to last resolve you.

PERICLES.
Reverend sir,
The gods can have no mortal officer
More like a god than you. Will you deliver
How this dead queen relives?

CERIMON.
I will, my lord.
Beseech you, first go with me to my house,
Where shall be shown you all was found with her;
How she came placed here in the temple;
No needful thing omitted.

PERICLES.
Pure Dian, bless thee for thy vision! I
Will offer night-oblations to thee. Thaisa,
This prince, the fair betrothed of your daughter,
Shall marry her at Pentapolis.
And now this ornament
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form;
And what this fourteen years no razor touch’d
To grace thy marriage-day, I’ll beautify.

THAISA.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,
My father’s dead.

PERICLES.
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,
We’ll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves
Will in that kingdom spend our following days:
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.
Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay
To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead’s the way.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Gower.

GOWER.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward:
In Pericles, his queen and daughter seen,
Although assail’d with Fortune fierce and keen,
Virtue preserved from fell destruction’s blast,
Led on by heaven, and crown’d with joy at last.
In Helicanus may you well descry
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty:
In reverend Cerimon there well appears
The worth that learned charity aye wears:
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame
Had spread their cursed deed, the honour’d name
Of Pericles, to rage the city turn,
That him and his they in his palace burn.
The gods for murder seemed so content
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So on your patience evermore attending,
New joy wait on you! Here our play has ending.

 [_Exit._]




THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I.   London. A Room in the palace.
 Scene II.  The same. A room in the Duke of Lancaster’s palace.
 Scene III. Open Space, near Coventry. Lists set out, and a Throne. Heralds, &c., attending.
 Scene IV.  London. A Room in the King’s Castle.
 
ACT II
 Scene I.   London. An Apartment in Ely House.
 Scene II.  The Same. A Room in the Castle.
 Scene III. The Wolds in Gloucestershire.
 Scene IV.  A camp in Wales.
 
ACT III
 Scene I.   Bristol. Bolingbroke’s camp.
 Scene II.  The coast of Wales. A castle in view.
 Scene III. Wales. Before Flint Castle.
 Scene IV.  Langley. The Duke of York’s garden.
 
ACT IV
 Scene I.   Westminster Hall.
 
ACT V
 Scene I.   London. A street leading to the Tower.
 Scene II.  The same. A room in the Duke of York’s palace.
 Scene III. Windsor. A room in the Castle.
 Scene IV.  Another room in the Castle.
 Scene V.   Pomfret. The dungeon of the Castle.
 Scene VI.  Windsor. An Apartment in the Castle.




Dramatis Personæ

KING RICHARD THE SECOND
JOHN OF GAUNT, Duke of Lancaster - uncle to the King
EDMUND LANGLEY, Duke of York - uncle to the King
HENRY, surnamed BOLINGBROKE, Duke of Hereford, son of John of Gaunt,
afterwards King Henry IV
DUKE OF AUMERLE, son of the Duke of York
THOMAS MOWBRAY, Duke of Norfolk
DUKE OF SURREY
EARL OF SALISBURY
LORD BERKELEY
BUSHY - Servant to King Richard
BAGOT - Servant to King Richard
GREEN - Servant to King Richard
EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND
HARRY PERCY, surnamed Hotspur, his son
LORD ROSS
LORD WILLOUGHBY
LORD FITZWATER
BISHOP OF CARLISLE
ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER
LORD MARSHAL
SIR PIERCE OF EXTON
SIR STEPHEN SCROOP
Captain of a band of Welshmen

QUEEN TO KING RICHARD
DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
DUCHESS OF YORK
Lady attending on the Queen

Lords, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, Gardeners, Keeper, Messenger,
Groom, and other Attendants

SCENE: Dispersedly in England and Wales.




ACT I

SCENE I. London. A Room in the palace.


 Enter King Richard, John of Gaunt, with other Nobles and Attendants.

KING RICHARD.
Old John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
Here to make good the boist’rous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

GAUNT.
I have, my liege.

KING RICHARD.
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?

GAUNT.
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aimed at your Highness, no inveterate malice.

KING RICHARD.
Then call them to our presence. Face to face
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak.
High-stomached are they both and full of ire,
In rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

Enter Bolingbroke and Mowbray.

BOLINGBROKE.
Many years of happy days befall
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!

MOWBRAY.
Each day still better other’s happiness
Until the heavens, envying earth’s good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown!

KING RICHARD.
We thank you both. Yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come,
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

BOLINGBROKE.
First—heaven be the record to my speech!—
In the devotion of a subject’s love,
Tend’ring the precious safety of my prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor’s name stuff I thy throat,
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
What my tongue speaks, my right-drawn sword may prove.

MOWBRAY.
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.
’Tis not the trial of a woman’s war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hushed and naught at all to say.
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
Which else would post until it had returned
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood’s royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain;
Which to maintain, I would allow him odds
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable
Wherever Englishman durst set his foot.
Meantime let this defend my loyalty:
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

BOLINGBROKE.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the King,
And lay aside my high blood’s royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honour’s pawn, then stoop.
By that and all the rites of knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke or thou canst worst devise.

MOWBRAY.
I take it up; and by that sword I swear
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I’ll answer thee in any fair degree
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial.
And when I mount, alive may I not light
If I be traitor or unjustly fight!

KING RICHARD.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray’s charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

BOLINGBROKE.
Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true:
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your highness’ soldiers,
The which he hath detained for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was surveyed by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted and contrived in this land
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say, and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester’s death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood,
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel’s, cries
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth
To me for justice and rough chastisement.
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

KING RICHARD.
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Thomas of Norfolk, what sayst thou to this?

MOWBRAY.
O! let my sovereign turn away his face
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

KING RICHARD.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears.
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom’s heir,
As he is but my father’s brother’s son,
Now, by my sceptre’s awe I make a vow
Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou.
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.

MOWBRAY.
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Disbursed I duly to his highness’ soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
Upon remainder of a dear account
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen.
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester’s death,
I slew him not, but to my own disgrace
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honourable father to my foe,
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul;
But ere I last received the sacrament
I did confess it and exactly begged
Your Grace’s pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault. As for the rest appealed,
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor,
Which in myself I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor’s foot,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Even in the best blood chambered in his bosom.
In haste whereof most heartily I pray
Your highness to assign our trial day.

KING RICHARD.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me.
Let’s purge this choler without letting blood.
This we prescribe, though no physician;
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive, conclude and be agreed;
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We’ll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

GAUNT.
To be a make-peace shall become my age.
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk’s gage.

KING RICHARD.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.

GAUNT.
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

KING RICHARD.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.

MOWBRAY.
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame.
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
To dark dishonour’s use thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeached, and baffled here,
Pierced to the soul with slander’s venomed spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison.

KING RICHARD.
Rage must be withstood.
Give me his gage. Lions make leopards tame.

MOWBRAY.
Yea, but not change his spots. Take but my shame,
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation; that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times-barred-up chest
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honour is my life; both grow in one.
Take honour from me, and my life is done.
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
In that I live, and for that will I die.

KING RICHARD.
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.

BOLINGBROKE.
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
Shall I seem crest-fallen in my father’s sight?
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
Before this outdared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray’s face.

 [_Exit Gaunt._]

KING RICHARD.
We were not born to sue, but to command;
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry upon Saint Lambert’s day.
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate.
Since we cannot atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor’s chivalry.
Lord Marshal, command our officers-at-arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A room in the Duke of Lancaster’s palace.

 Enter John of Gaunt with the Duchess of Gloucester.

GAUNT.
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock’s blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims
To stir against the butchers of his life.
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders’ heads.

DUCHESS.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward’s seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root.
Some of those seven are dried by nature’s course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward’s sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is cracked, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hacked down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy’s hand and murder’s bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt! his blood was thine! That bed, that womb,
That metal, that self mould, that fashioned thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him. Thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father’s death
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father’s life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair.
In suff’ring thus thy brother to be slaughtered,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.
That which in mean men we entitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
What shall I say? To safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Gloucester’s death.

GAUNT.
God’s is the quarrel; for God’s substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death, the which if wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.

DUCHESS.
Where then, alas! may I complain myself?

GAUNT.
To God, the widow’s champion and defence.

DUCHESS.
Why then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight.
O, sit my husband’s wrongs on Hereford’s spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbray’s breast!
Or if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray’s sins so heavy in his bosom
That they may break his foaming courser’s back
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
Farewell, old Gaunt. Thy sometimes brother’s wife
With her companion, Grief, must end her life.

GAUNT.
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry.
As much good stay with thee as go with me!

DUCHESS.
Yet one word more. Grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
I take my leave before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all. Nay, yet depart not so!
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
I shall remember more. Bid him—ah, what?—
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnished walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there
To seek out sorrow that dwells everywhere.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die!
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Open Space, near Coventry. Lists set out, and a Throne.
Heralds, &c., attending.

 Enter the Lord Marshal and the Duke of Aumerle.

MARSHAL.
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford armed?

AUMERLE.
Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.

MARSHAL.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appelant’s trumpet.

AUMERLE.
Why then, the champions are prepared and stay
For nothing but his Majesty’s approach.

 Enter King Richard, who takes his seat on his Throne; Gaunt, Bushy,
 Bagot, Green and others, who take their places. A trumpet is sounded,
 and answered by another trumpet within. Then enter Mowbray in armour,
 defendant, preceded by a Herald.

KING RICHARD.
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms.
Ask him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

MARSHAL.
In God’s name and the King’s, say who thou art,
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou com’st, and what thy quarrel.
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath,
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour.

MOWBRAY.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither come engaged by my oath—
Which God defend a knight should violate!—
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my King, and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me,
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
To prove him, in defending of myself,
A traitor to my God, my king, and me;
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

 [_He takes his seat._]

 Trumpet sounds. Enter Bolingbroke, appellant, in armour, preceded by
 a Herald.

KING RICHARD.
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

MARSHAL.
What is thy name? And wherefore com’st thou hither
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou? and what’s thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!

BOLINGBROKE.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Am I, who ready here do stand in arms
To prove by God’s grace and my body’s valour,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he’s a traitor foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me.
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

MARSHAL.
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the Marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

BOLINGBROKE.
Lord Marshal, let me kiss my sovereign’s hand
And bow my knee before his Majesty.
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.

MARSHAL.
The appellant in all duty greets your highness
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

KING RICHARD. [_Descends from his throne_.]
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight.
Farewell, my blood, which if today thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

BOLINGBROKE.
O, let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray’s spear.
As confident as is the falcon’s flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you.
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo! as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my lance’s point,
That it may enter Mowbray’s waxen coat
And furbish new the name of John o’ Gaunt,
Even in the lusty haviour of his son.

GAUNT.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous.
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.

BOLINGBROKE.
Mine innocence and Saint George to thrive!

 [_He takes his seat._]

MOWBRAY. [_Rising_.]
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard’s throne,
A loyal, just, and upright gentleman.
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
His golden uncontrolled enfranchisement,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight. Truth hath a quiet breast.

KING RICHARD.
Farewell, my lord. Securely I espy
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
Order the trial, Marshal, and begin.

 [_The King and the Lords return to their seats._]

MARSHAL.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right.

BOLINGBROKE. [_Rising_.]
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry “Amen”!

MARSHAL.
[_To an officer_.] Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.

FIRST HERALD.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Stands here for God, his sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A traitor to his God, his King, and him,
And dares him to set forward to the fight.

SECOND HERALD.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
Courageously and with a free desire,
Attending but the signal to begin.

MARSHAL.
Sound trumpets, and set forward, combatants.

 [_A charge sounded._]

Stay! the King hath thrown his warder down.

KING RICHARD.
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
And both return back to their chairs again.
Withdraw with us, and let the trumpets sound
While we return these dukes what we decree.

 [_A long flourish._]

[_To the Combatants_.] Draw near,
And list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom’s earth should not be soiled
With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds ploughed up with neighbours’ swords;
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
To wake our peace, which in our country’s cradle
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep,
Which so roused up with boist’rous untuned drums,
With harsh-resounding trumpets’ dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
And make us wade even in our kindred’s blood:
Therefore we banish you our territories.
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
Till twice five summers have enriched our fields
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

BOLINGBROKE.
Your will be done. This must my comfort be:
That sun that warms you here shall shine on me,
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

KING RICHARD.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile.
The hopeless word of “never to return”
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

MOWBRAY.
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
And all unlooked for from your highness’ mouth.
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Have I deserved at your highness’ hands.
The language I have learnt these forty years,
My native English, now I must forgo;
And now my tongue’s use is to me no more
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
Within my mouth you have engaoled my tongue,
Doubly portcullised with my teeth and lips,
And dull unfeeling, barren ignorance
Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now.
What is thy sentence, then, but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

KING RICHARD.
It boots thee not to be compassionate.
After our sentence plaining comes too late.

MOWBRAY.
Then thus I turn me from my country’s light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

 [_Retiring._]

KING RICHARD.
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Lay on our royal sword your banished hands.
Swear by the duty that you owe to God—
Our part therein we banish with yourselves—
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God,
Embrace each other’s love in banishment;
Nor never look upon each other’s face;
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
Nor never by advised purpose meet
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
’Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

BOLINGBROKE.
I swear.

MOWBRAY.
And I, to keep all this.

BOLINGBROKE.
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:
By this time, had the King permitted us,
One of our souls had wandered in the air,
Banished this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banished from this land.
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm.
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burden of a guilty soul.

MOWBRAY.
No, Bolingbroke. If ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banished as from hence!
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;
And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
Save back to England, all the world’s my way.

 [_Exit._]

KING RICHARD.
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart. Thy sad aspect
Hath from the number of his banished years
Plucked four away. [_To Bolingbroke_.] Six frozen winters spent,
Return with welcome home from banishment.

BOLINGBROKE.
How long a time lies in one little word!
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

GAUNT.
I thank my liege that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my son’s exile;
But little vantage shall I reap thereby,
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their moons and bring their times about,
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold death not let me see my son.

KING RICHARD.
Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live.

GAUNT.
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give.
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow.
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

KING RICHARD.
Thy son is banished upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave.
Why at our justice seem’st thou then to lour?

GAUNT.
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge, but I had rather
You would have bid me argue like a father.
O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild.
A partial slander sought I to avoid,
And in the sentence my own life destroyed.
Alas, I looked when some of you should say
I was too strict to make mine own away;
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
Against my will to do myself this wrong.

KING RICHARD.
Cousin, farewell, and, uncle, bid him so.
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

 [_Flourish. Exit King Richard and Train._]

AUMERLE.
Cousin, farewell. What presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.

MARSHAL.
My lord, no leave take I, for I will ride,
As far as land will let me, by your side.

GAUNT.
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
That thou return’st no greeting to thy friends?

BOLINGBROKE.
I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongue’s office should be prodigal
To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.

GAUNT.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

BOLINGBROKE.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

GAUNT.
What is six winters? They are quickly gone.

BOLINGBROKE.
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.

GAUNT.
Call it a travel that thou tak’st for pleasure.

BOLINGBROKE.
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an enforced pilgrimage.

GAUNT.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home return.

BOLINGBROKE.
Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
Will but remember me what a deal of world
I wander from the jewels that I love.
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
But that I was a journeyman to grief?

GAUNT.
All places that the eye of heaven visits
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus:
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the King did banish thee,
But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour,
And not the King exiled thee; or suppose
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air,
And thou art flying to a fresher clime.
Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com’st.
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
The grass whereon thou tread’st the presence strewed,
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
Than a delightful measure or a dance;
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

BOLINGBROKE.
O, who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer’s heat?
O no, the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
Fell sorrow’s tooth doth never rankle more
Than when it bites but lanceth not the sore.

GAUNT.
Come, come, my son, I’ll bring thee on thy way.
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

BOLINGBROKE.
Then, England’s ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu,
My mother and my nurse that bears me yet!
Where’er I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banished, yet a true-born Englishman.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. London. A Room in the King’s Castle

 Enter King Richard, Green and Bagot at one door; Aumerle at another.

KING RICHARD.
We did observe.—Cousin Aumerle,
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?

AUMERLE.
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
But to the next highway, and there I left him.

KING RICHARD.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

AUMERLE.
Faith, none for me, except the northeast wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

KING RICHARD.
What said our cousin when you parted with him?

AUMERLE.
“Farewell.”
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief
That words seemed buried in my sorrow’s grave.
Marry, would the word “farewell” have lengthened hours
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewells,
But since it would not, he had none of me.

KING RICHARD.
He is our cousin, cousin, but ’tis doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green,
Observed his courtship to the common people,
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
As ’twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well,
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With “Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends”,
As were our England in reversion his,
And he our subjects’ next degree in hope.

GREEN.
Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts.
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means
For their advantage and your highness’ loss.

KING RICHARD.
We will ourself in person to this war.
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are enforced to farm our royal realm,
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand. If that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold,
And send them after to supply our wants;
For we will make for Ireland presently.

 Enter Bushy.

Bushy, what news?

BUSHY.
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken, and hath sent posthaste
To entreat your Majesty to visit him.

KING RICHARD.
Where lies he?

BUSHY.
At Ely House.

KING RICHARD.
Now put it, God, in his physician’s mind
To help him to his grave immediately!
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let’s all go visit him.
Pray God we may make haste and come too late!

ALL.
Amen!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. London. An Apartment in Ely House.


Gaunt on a couch; the Duke of York and Others standing by him.

GAUNT.
Will the King come, that I may breathe my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

YORK.
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath,
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

GAUNT.
O, but they say the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony.
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
He that no more must say is listened more
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose.
More are men’s ends marked than their lives before.
The setting sun and music at the close,
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past.
Though Richard my life’s counsel would not hear,
My death’s sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

YORK.
No, it is stopped with other flattering sounds,
As praises, of whose state the wise are fond;
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen;
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy-apish nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity—
So it be new, there’s no respect how vile—
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will doth mutiny with wit’s regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose.
’Tis breath thou lack’st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

GAUNT.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired,
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder.
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings, this sceptered isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands;
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Feared by their breed, and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
For Christian service and true chivalry,
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry
Of the world’s ransom, blessed Mary’s Son,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leased out—I die pronouncing it—
Like to a tenement or pelting farm.
England, bound in with the triumphant sea,
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of wat’ry Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds
That England that was wont to conquer others
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death!

 Enter King Richard and Queen; Aumerle, Bushy, Green, Bagot, Ross and
 Willoughby.

YORK.
The King is come. Deal mildly with his youth,
For young hot colts, being raged, do rage the more.

QUEEN.
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?

KING RICHARD.
What comfort, man? How is’t with aged Gaunt?

GAUNT.
O, how that name befits my composition!
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old.
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast,
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched;
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon
Is my strict fast—I mean my children’s looks,
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt.
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

KING RICHARD.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

GAUNT.
No, misery makes sport to mock itself.
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

KING RICHARD.
Should dying men flatter with those that live?

GAUNT.
No, no, men living flatter those that die.

KING RICHARD.
Thou, now a-dying, sayest thou flatterest me.

GAUNT.
O, no, thou diest, though I the sicker be.

KING RICHARD.
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

GAUNT.
Now, He that made me knows I see thee ill,
Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land,
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
Committ’st thy anointed body to the cure
Of those physicians that first wounded thee.
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
And yet, encaged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet’s eye
Seen how his son’s son should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou wert possessed,
Which art possessed now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
It were a shame to let this land by lease;
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, not king.
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law,
And thou—

KING RICHARD.
A lunatic lean-witted fool,
Presuming on an ague’s privilege,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With fury from his native residence.
Now, by my seat’s right royal majesty,
Wert thou not brother to great Edward’s son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

GAUNT.
O! spare me not, my brother Edward’s son,
For that I was his father Edward’s son.
That blood already, like the pelican,
Hast thou tapped out, and drunkenly caroused.
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
Whom fair befall in heaven ’mongst happy souls!—
May be a precedent and witness good
That thou respect’st not spilling Edward’s blood.
Join with the present sickness that I have,
And thy unkindness be like crooked age
To crop at once a too-long withered flower.
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.
Love they to live that love and honour have.

 [_Exit, borne off by his Attendants._]

KING RICHARD.
And let them die that age and sullens have,
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

YORK.
I do beseech your Majesty, impute his words
To wayward sickliness and age in him.
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
As Harry, Duke of Hereford, were he here.

KING RICHARD.
Right, you say true: as Hereford’s love, so his;
As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

 Enter Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.

KING RICHARD.
What says he?

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Nay, nothing; all is said.
His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

YORK.
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

KING RICHARD.
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he.
His time is spent; our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
Which live like venom where no venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
And, for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
The plate, coin, revenues, and moveables
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.

YORK.
How long shall I be patient? Ah, how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester’s death, nor Hereford’s banishment,
Nor Gaunt’s rebukes, nor England’s private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign’s face.
I am the last of noble Edward’s sons,
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first.
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast, for even so looked he,
Accomplished with the number of thy hours;
But when he frowned, it was against the French
And not against his friends. His noble hand
Did win what he did spend, and spent not that
Which his triumphant father’s hand had won.
His hands were guilty of no kindred’s blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

KING RICHARD.
Why, uncle, what’s the matter?

YORK.
O my liege.
Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased
Not to be pardoned, am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The royalties and rights of banished Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead? And doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just? And is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford’s rights away, and take from Time
His charters and his customary rights;
Let not tomorrow then ensue today;
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now, afore God—God forbid I say true!—
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford’s rights,
Call in the letters patents that he hath
By his attorneys-general to sue
His livery, and deny his offered homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts,
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

KING RICHARD.
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.

YORK.
I’ll not be by the while. My liege, farewell.
What will ensue hereof there’s none can tell;
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.

 [_Exit._]

KING RICHARD.
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight.
Bid him repair to us to Ely House
To see this business. Tomorrow next
We will for Ireland, and ’tis time, I trow.
And we create, in absence of ourself,
Our Uncle York Lord Governor of England,
For he is just, and always loved us well.
Come on, our queen. Tomorrow must we part;
Be merry, for our time of stay is short.

 [_Exeunt King, Queen, Bushy, Aumerle, Green and Bagot._]

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

ROSS.
And living too, for now his son is Duke.

WILLOUGHBY.
Barely in title, not in revenues.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.

ROSS.
My heart is great, but it must break with silence
Ere’t be disburdened with a liberal tongue.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Nay, speak thy mind, and let him ne’er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!

WILLOUGHBY.
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.

ROSS.
No good at all that I can do for him,
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Now, afore God, ’tis shame such wrongs are borne
In him, a royal prince, and many moe
Of noble blood in this declining land.
The King is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers; and what they will inform,
Merely in hate ’gainst any of us all,
That will the King severely prosecute
’Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

ROSS.
The commons hath he pilled with grievous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts. The nobles hath he fined
For ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts.

WILLOUGHBY.
And daily new exactions are devised,
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what.
But what, i’ God’s name, doth become of this?

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Wars hath not wasted it, for warred he hath not,
But basely yielded upon compromise
That which his ancestors achieved with blows.
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.

ROSS.
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.

WILLOUGHBY.
The King’s grown bankrupt like a broken man.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.

ROSS.
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
His burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banished Duke.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
His noble kinsman. Most degenerate king!
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm;
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

ROSS.
We see the very wrack that we must suffer;
And unavoided is the danger now
For suffering so the causes of our wrack.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Not so. Even through the hollow eyes of death
I spy life peering; but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

WILLOUGHBY.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts as thou dost ours.

ROSS.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland.
We three are but thyself, and, speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts. Therefore be bold.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Then thus: I have from Le Port Blanc, a bay
In Brittany, received intelligence
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton, and Francis Coint,
All these well furnished by the Duke of Brittany
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience,
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping country’s broken wing,
Redeem from broking pawn the blemished crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre’s gilt,
And make high majesty look like itself,
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh.
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.

ROSS.
To horse, to horse! Urge doubts to them that fear.

WILLOUGHBY.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Same. A Room in the Castle.

 Enter Queen, Bushy and Bagot.

BUSHY.
Madam, your Majesty is too much sad.
You promised, when you parted with the King,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

QUEEN.
To please the King I did; to please myself
I cannot do it. Yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard. Yet again methinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in Fortune’s womb,
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles. At something it grieves
More than with parting from my lord the King.

BUSHY.
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
For sorrow’s eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects,
Like perspectives which, rightly gazed upon,
Show nothing but confusion; eyed awry,
Distinguish form. So your sweet Majesty,
Looking awry upon your lord’s departure,
Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail,
Which, looked on as it is, is naught but shadows
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious Queen,
More than your lord’s departure weep not. More is not seen,
Or if it be, ’tis with false sorrow’s eye,
Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

QUEEN.
It may be so; but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe’er it be,
I cannot but be sad—so heavy sad
As thought, in thinking, on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

BUSHY.
’Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.

QUEEN.
’Tis nothing less. Conceit is still derived
From some forefather grief. Mine is not so,
For nothing hath begot my something grief,
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve.
’Tis in reversion that I do possess,
But what it is, that is not yet known what,
I cannot name. ’Tis nameless woe, I wot.

 Enter Green.

GREEN.
God save your majesty! And well met, gentlemen.
I hope the King is not yet shipped for Ireland.

QUEEN.
Why hop’st thou so? ’Tis better hope he is,
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope.
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipped?

GREEN.
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,
And driven into despair an enemy’s hope
Who strongly hath set footing in this land.
The banished Bolingbroke repeals himself,
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
At Ravenspurgh.

QUEEN.
Now God in heaven forbid!

GREEN.
Ah, madam, ’tis too true; and that is worse,
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Harry Percy,
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.

BUSHY.
Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction traitors?

GREEN.
We have, whereupon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broken his staff, resigned his stewardship,
And all the household servants fled with him
To Bolingbroke.

QUEEN.
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
And Bolingbroke my sorrow’s dismal heir.
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I, a gasping new-delivered mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined.

BUSHY.
Despair not, madam.

QUEEN.
Who shall hinder me?
I will despair and be at enmity
With cozening hope. He is a flatterer,
A parasite, a keeper-back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hope lingers in extremity.

 Enter York.

GREEN.
Here comes the Duke of York.

QUEEN.
With signs of war about his aged neck.
O! full of careful business are his looks!
Uncle, for God’s sake, speak comfortable words.

YORK.
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts.
Comfort’s in heaven, and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares, and grief.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Whilst others come to make him lose at home.
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself.
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
Now shall he try his friends that flattered him.

 Enter a Servingman.

SERVINGMAN.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.

YORK.
He was? Why, so! Go all which way it will!
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford’s side.
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound.
Hold, take my ring.

SERVINGMAN.
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship:
Today, as I came by, I called there—
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

YORK.
What is’t, knave?

SERVINGMAN.
An hour before I came, the Duchess died.

YORK.
God for his mercy, what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do. I would to God,
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
The King had cut off my head with my brother’s.
What, are there no posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, sister—cousin, I would say, pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow, get thee home; provide some carts
And bring away the armour that is there.

 [_Exit Servingman._]

Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen.
Th’ one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend; th’ other again
Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wronged,
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin,
I’ll dispose of you. Gentlemen, go muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Berkeley Castle.
I should to Plashy too,
But time will not permit. All is uneven,
And everything is left at six and seven.

 [_Exeunt York and Queen._]

BUSHY.
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy
Is all unpossible.

GREEN.
Besides, our nearness to the King in love
Is near the hate of those love not the King.

BAGOT.
And that is the wavering commons, for their love
Lies in their purses; and whoso empties them,
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

BUSHY.
Wherein the King stands generally condemned.

BAGOT.
If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the King.

GREEN.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol Castle.
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

BUSHY.
Thither will I with you, for little office
Will the hateful commons perform for us,
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?

BAGOT.
No, I will to Ireland to his Majesty.
Farewell. If heart’s presages be not vain,
We three here part that ne’er shall meet again.

BUSHY.
That’s as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.

GREEN.
Alas, poor Duke! The task he undertakes
Is numb’ring sands and drinking oceans dry.
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

BUSHY.
Well, we may meet again.

BAGOT.
I fear me, never.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The Wolds in Gloucestershire.

 Enter Bolingbroke and Northumberland with Forces.

BOLINGBROKE.
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire.
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Draws out our miles and makes them wearisome.
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Ravenspurgh to Cotshall will be found
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
The tediousness and process of my travel.
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I possess;
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Than hope enjoyed. By this the weary lords
Shall make their way seem short as mine hath done
By sight of what I have, your noble company.

BOLINGBROKE.
Of much less value is my company
Than your good words. But who comes here?

 Enter Harry Percy.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry, how fares your uncle?

PERCY.
I had thought, my lord, to have learned his health of you.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Why, is he not with the Queen?

PERCY.
No, my good lord. He hath forsook the court,
Broken his staff of office, and dispersed
The household of the King.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

PERCY.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Berkeley to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?

PERCY.
No, my good lord; for that is not forgot
Which ne’er I did remember. To my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Then learn to know him now. This is the Duke.

PERCY.
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw, and young,
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.

BOLINGBROKE.
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
I count myself in nothing else so happy
As in a soul rememb’ring my good friends;
And as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true love’s recompense.
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
How far is it to Berkeley, and what stir
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

PERCY.
There stands the castle by yon tuft of trees,
Manned with three hundred men, as I have heard.
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour,
None else of name and noble estimate.

 Enter Ross and Willoughby.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

BOLINGBROKE.
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
A banished traitor. All my treasury
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which, more enriched,
Shall be your love and labour’s recompense.

ROSS.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.

WILLOUG
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dracula
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dracula

Author: Bram Stoker


        
Release date: May 30, 2014 [eBook #45839]
                Most recently updated: March 17, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/45839

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Reiner Ruf, James Adcock
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA ***

                          Transcriber’s Note
                          ##################

This e-text is based on a reproduction of the original 1897 edition.
All modern material has been removed.

Italic text in the original version has been placed between underscores
(_text_); passages in small caps have been symbolised by forward
slashes (/small caps/). Subscript numerals have been placed between
curly braces ({2}).

Inconsistencies in hyphenation and spelling (to-morrow/tomorrow;
aerial/aërial, etc.), as well as incorrectly used phrases in Van
Helsing’s speech have been retained. A number of obvious errors in
punctuation and inconsistencies in single/double quotation have been
tacitly removed.

The following typographical errors, have been corrected:

    # p. vi/vii: header word “Page” has been moved from page vii to
                 page vi.
    # p. vii: “Chapter VXVII” → “Chapter XVIII”; “Chapter XXI” →
              “Chapter XXVII”; “320” → “324”
    # p. 16: “a long” → “along”
    # p. 30: “Wœ” → “Woe”
    # p. 44: “wondow” → “window”
    # p. 43: “that” → “than”
    # p. 58: “number One” → “number one”
    # p. 63: “Hopwood” → “Holmwood”
    # p. 82: “role of paper” → “roll of paper”
    # p. 98: “dreadul” → “dreadful”
    # p. 99: “pounts” → “pounds”
    # p. 112: “Holmmood” → “Holmwood”
    # p. 133: “pharmacopœœia” → “pharmacopœia”
    # p. 147: “do do” → “to do”
    # p. 157: “confortable” → “comfortable”; “everthing” → “everything”
    # p. 186: “greatful” → “grateful”
    # p. 212: “Arther” → “Arthur”
    # p. 241: “next the Professor” → “next to the Professor”
    # p. 257: “gloated with fresh blood” → “bloated with fresh blood”
    # p. 286: “Rat, rats, rats!” → “Rats, rats, rats!”
    # p. 339: “preceeded” → “preceded”
    # p. 358: “the bit box” → “the big box”
    # p. 380: “they mean fight” → “they mean to fight”
    # p. 384: “respulsive” → “repulsive”




                       BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


                          “Under the Sunset.”
                          “The Snake’s Pass.”
                         “The Watter’s Mou’.”
                       “The Shoulder of Shasta.”




                                DRACULA

                                  BY

                              BRAM STOKER


                          Constable · London




       First published by Archibald Constable and Company, 1897




                                  TO

                            MY DEAR FRIEND

                               HOMMY-BEG




CONTENTS.


                                                                    Page

    /Chapter I./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                          1


    /Chapter II./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         15


    /Chapter III./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         28


    /Chapter IV./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         41


    /Chapter V./

    Letters--Lucy and Mina                                            55


    /Chapter VI./

    Mina Murray’s Journal                                             64


    /Chapter VII./

    Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August                           77


    /Chapter VIII./

    Mina Murray’s Journal                                             91


    /Chapter IX./

    Mina Murray’s Journal                                            106


    /Chapter X./

    Mina Murray’s Journal                                            120


    /Chapter XI./

    Lucy Westenra’s Diary                                            135


    /Chapter XII./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               148


    /Chapter XIII./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               166


    /Chapter XIV./

    Mina Harker’s Journal                                            182


    /Chapter XV./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               198


    /Chapter XVI./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               212


    /Chapter XVII./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               223


    /Chapter XVIII./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               237


    /Chapter XIX./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        254


    /Chapter XX./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        267


    /Chapter XXI./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               282


    /Chapter XXII./

    Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        297


    /Chapter XXIII./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               310


    /Chapter XXIV./

    Dr. Seward’s Phonograph Diary, spoken by Van Helsing             324


    /Chapter XXV./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               339


    /Chapter XXVI./

    Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               354


    /Chapter XXVII./

    Mina Harker’s Journal                                            372




How these papers have been placed in sequence will be made manifest
in the reading of them. All needless matters have been eliminated, so
that a history almost at variance with the possibilities of later-day
belief may stand forth as simple fact. There is throughout no statement
of past things wherein memory may err, for all the records chosen are
exactly contemporary, given from the standpoints and within the range
of knowledge of those who made them.




DRACULA.




CHAPTER I.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

(_Kept in shorthand._)


_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8.35 p.m. on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6.46, but train was
an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse
which I got of it from the train and the little I could walk through
the streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had
arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The
impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the
East; the most Western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner,
or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which
was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the
waiter, and he said it was called “paprika hendl,” and that, as it
was a national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the
Carpathians. I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed,
I don’t know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the
British Museum, and made search among the books and maps of the library
regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of
the country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with
a noble of that country. I find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post
town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall
enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk
over my travels with Mina.

In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct
nationalities: Saxons in the south, and mixed with them the Wallachs,
who are the descendants of the Dacians; Magyars in the west; and
Szekelys in the east and north. I am going among the latter, who claim
to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the
Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the
Huns settled in it. I read that every known superstition in the world
is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the
centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very
interesting. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howling all night under my
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have
been the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe,
and was still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the
continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping
soundly then. I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge
of maize flour which they said was “mamaliga,” and egg-plant stuffed
with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call “impletata.”
(_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for
the train started a little before eight, or rather it ought to have
done so, for after rushing to the station at 7.30 I had to sit in the
carriage for more than an hour before we began to move. It seems to me
that the further East you go the more unpunctual are the trains. What
ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side
of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those
I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round
hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The
women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very
clumsy about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or
other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course
petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks,
who are more barbarian than the rest, with their big cowboy hats, great
baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy
leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails.
They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had
long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque,
but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at
once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am
told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.

It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is
a very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for
the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a
series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five
separate occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it
underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties
of war proper being assisted by famine and disease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I
wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently
expected, for when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly
woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double
apron, front and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for
modesty. When I came close she bowed, and said: “The Herr Englishman?”
“Yes,” I said, “Jonathan Harker.” She smiled, and gave some message
to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the
door. He went, but immediately returned with a letter:--


“/My Friend/,--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start
for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass my
carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust that your
journey from London has been a happy one, and that you will enjoy your
stay in my beautiful land.

    “Your friend,
        “/Dracula./”


_4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort
of way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and
that was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and
could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed
themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused
to speak further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no
time to ask any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any
means comforting.

Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in
a very hysterical way:

“Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?” She was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew,
and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at
all. I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I
told her that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important
business, she asked again:

“Do you know what day it is?” I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

“Oh, yes! I know that, I know that! but do you know what day it is?” On
my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

“It is the eve of St. George’s Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are going
to?” She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous, but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business
to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me.
I did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet
it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in
such a state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she
put the rosary round my neck, and said, “For your mother’s sake,” and
went out of the room. I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I
am waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix
is still round my neck. Whether it is the old lady’s fear, or the many
ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not
know, but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this
book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here
comes the coach!

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun
is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with
trees or hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and
little are mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till
I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many odd things
to put down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well
before I left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on
what they call “robber steak”--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned
with red pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the
simple style of the London cat’s-meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch,
which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I
saw him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of
me, for every now and then they looked at me, and some of the people
who were sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a
name meaning “word-bearer”--came and listened, and then they looked
at me, most of them pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often
repeated, queer words, for there were many nationalities in the
crowd; so I quietly got my polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked
them out. I must say they were not cheering to me, for amongst them
were “Ordog”--Satan, “pokol”--hell, “stregoica”--witch, “vrolok” and
“vlkoslak”--both of which mean the same thing, one being Slovak and
the other Servian for something that is either were-wolf or vampire.
(_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these superstitions.)

When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this
time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross
and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for
me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but
every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic
that I could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse
which I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures,
all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with
its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green
tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide
linen drawers covered the whole front of the box-seat--“gotza” they
call them--cracked his big whip over his four small horses, which ran
abreast, and we set off on our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of
the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or
rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might
not have been able to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green
sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep
hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable
end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit
blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the
green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out
amongst these green hills of what they call here the “Mittel Land” ran
the road, losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut
out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down
the hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand
then what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing
no time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in
summer-time excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after
the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the general run
of roads in the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are
not to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair
them, lest the Turk should think that they were preparing to bring
in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at
loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpathians themselves. Right
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling upon them
and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep
blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in
the mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and
again the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched
my arm as we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty,
snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our
serpentine way, to be right before us:--

“Look! Isten szek!”--“God’s seat!”--and he crossed himself reverently.
As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower
behind us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This
was emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and
there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I
noticed that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many
crosses, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here
and there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did
not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender
of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There
were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees and
here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white
stems shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now
and again we passed a leiterwagon--the ordinary peasant’s cart, with
its long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of
the road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, the Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get very cold,
and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the
Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background
of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine
woods that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great
masses of greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced
a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts
and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling
sunset threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst
the Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys. Sometimes
the hills were so steep that, despite our driver’s haste, the horses
could only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do
at home, but the driver would not hear of it. “No, no,” he said; “you
must not walk here; the dogs are too fierce!” and then he added, with
what he evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to
catch the approving smile of the rest--“and you may have enough of such
matters before you go to sleep.” The only stop he would make was a
moment’s pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on
to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared
to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering the Borgo Pass. One by
one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed upon
me with earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of
an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a
kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning
movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of
the cross and the guard against the evil eye. Then, as we flew along,
the driver leaned forward, and on each side the passengers, craning
over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the darkness. It was
evident that something very exciting was either happening or expected,
but though I asked each passenger, no one would give me the slightest
explanation. This state of excitement kept on for some little time;
and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on the eastern
side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the air the
heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though the mountain
range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into
the thunderous one. I was now myself looking out for the conveyance
which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light
was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could now see the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
my own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had best do, when
the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which
I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was, “An hour less than the time.” Then, turning to me, he
said in German worse than my own:--

“There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected, after all. He
will now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day;
better the next day.” Whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh
and snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up.
Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal
crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind
us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see from the
flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were
coal-black and splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a
long brown beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face
from us. I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes,
which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to the
driver:--

“You are early to-night, my friend.” The man stammered in reply:--

“The English Herr was in a hurry,” to which the stranger replied:--

“That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You
cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are
swift.” As he spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking
mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory.
One of my companions whispered to another the line from Burger’s
“Lenore:”--

    “Denn die Todten reiten schnell.”--
    (“For the dead travel fast.”)

The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. “Give me the Herr’s
luggage,” said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of
the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me
with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must
have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses
turned, and we swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I
saw the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps,
and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing
themselves. Then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses,
and off they swept on their way to Bukovina.

As they sank into the darkness I felt a strange chill, and a lonely
feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a
rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:--

“The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take
all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz [the plum brandy of the
country] underneath the seat, if you should require it.” I did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was there, all the same. I felt a
little strange, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any
alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that unknown
night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight along, then we
made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It seemed
to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground again;
and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was so.
I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention
to delay. By and by, however, as I was curious to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my
recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind
which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which
seemed to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination
could grasp it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl
the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them
soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though
after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance,
from the mountains on each side of us began a louder and sharper
howling--that of wolves--which affected both the horses and myself in
the same way--for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst
they reared again and plunged madly, so that the driver had to use
all his great strength to keep them from bolting. In a few minutes,
however, my own ears got accustomed to the sound, and the horses so far
became quiet that the driver was able to descend and to stand before
them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their
ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers doing, and with extraordinary
effect, for under his caresses they became quite manageable again,
though they still trembled. The driver again took his seat, and shaking
his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the
far side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which
ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over
the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great
frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in
shelter, we could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled
through the rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as
we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine powdery snow
began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were covered with a
white blanket. The keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs,
though this grew fainter as we went on our way. The baying of the
wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they were closing round on
us from every side. I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my
fear; but the driver was not in the least disturbed. He kept turning
his head to left and right, but I could not see anything through the
darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not know
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but
while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word
took his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen
asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now, looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road that even in the darkness
around us I could watch the driver’s motions. He went rapidly to where
the blue flame rose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there appeared a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me,
but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived
me straining through the darkness. Then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he
had yet done, and during his absence the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any
cause for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but
just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind
the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times
more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they
howled. For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only
when a man feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can
understand their true import.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side, and they
had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through
the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept
his long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the
wolves fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed
across the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and
the wolves had disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that
a dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move.
The time seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost
complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. Suddenly I became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.




CHAPTER II.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal/--_continued._


_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully
awake I must have noticed the approach to such a remarkable place. In
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several
dark ways led from it under great round arches it perhaps seemed
bigger than it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by
daylight.

When the calèche stopped the driver jumped down, and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old
and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook
the reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared
down one of the dark openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The
time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this
a customary incident in the life of a solicitor’s clerk sent out to
explain the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor’s
clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor,--for just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am now a
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see
if I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with
the dawn struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again
felt in the morning after a day of overwork. But my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake
and among the Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of the morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming
light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean-shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long, quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of
the open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with
a courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange
intonation:--

“Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!” He made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

“Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of
the happiness you bring!” The strength of the handshake was so much
akin to that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not
seen, that for a moment I doubted if it were not the same person to
whom I was speaking; so, to make sure, I said interrogatively:--

“Count Dracula?” He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

“I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest.” As he was
speaking he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I
protested but he insisted:--

“Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself.” He insisted on carrying
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. At the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs flamed and flared.

The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room
lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort.
Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter.
It was a welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and
warmed with another log fire, which sent a hollow roar up the wide
chimney. The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying,
before he closed the door:--

“You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared.”

The light and warmth and the Count’s courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal
state, I discovered that I was half-famished with hunger; so making a
hasty toilet, I went into the other room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

“I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust,
excuse me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do
not sup.”

I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to
me. He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he
handed it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill
of pleasure:--

“I much regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a
constant sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for
some time to come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient
substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young
man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful
disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in
my service. He shall be ready to attend on you when you will during his
stay, and shall take your instructions in all matters.”

The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses,
was my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me
many questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished my supper, and by my host’s desire had
drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he
offered me, at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I
had now an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.

His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead,
and hair growing scantily round the temples, but profusely elsewhere.
His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with
bushy hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so
far as I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over
the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in
a man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing
them now close to me, I could not but notice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs
in the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to
a sharp point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me,
I could not repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was
rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what
I would, I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew
back; and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet
done his protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of
the fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards
the window I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed
a strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard, as if
from down below in the valley, the howling of many wolves. The Count’s
eyes gleamed, and he said:--

“Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!”
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he
added:--

“Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of
the hunter.” Then he rose and said:--

“But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!” and, with a courteous bow, he opened for
me himself the door to the octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom....

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things
which I dare not confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

_7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. When I had dressed myself I went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by
the pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on
which was written:--

“I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D.” So I set to
and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so
that I might let the servants know I had finished; but I could not find
one. There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering
the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table
service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of
immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and
the hangings of my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics,
and must have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are
centuries old, though in excellent order. I saw something like them
in Hampton Court, but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten.
But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a
toilet glass on my table, and I had to get the little shaving glass
from my bag before I could either shave or brush my hair. I have not
yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except
for the howling of wolves. When I had finished my meal--I do not know
whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and
six o’clock when I had it--I looked about for something to read, for
I did not like to go about the castle until I had asked the Count’s
permission. There was absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper,
or even writing materials; so I opened another door in the room and
found a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it
locked.

In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. The books
were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life
and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the
London Directory, the “Red” and “Blue” books, Whitaker’s Almanack, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the
Law List.

Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count
entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night’s rest. Then he went on:--

“I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will interest you. These friends”--and he laid his hand on some of the
books--“have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great England; and
to know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets
of your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak.”

“But, Count,” I said, “you know and speak English thoroughly!” He bowed
gravely.

“I thank you, my friend, for your all too flattering estimate, but yet
I fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I
know the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them.”

“Indeed,” I said, “you speak excellently.”

“Not so,” he answered. “Well I know that, did I move and speak in your
London, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is
not enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common people
know me, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no
one; men know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content
if I am like the rest, so that no man stops if he sees me, or pause in
his speaking if he hear my words, to say, ‘Ha, ha! a stranger!’ I have
been so long master that I would be master still--or at least that none
other should be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my
friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in
London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me a while, so that by our
talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would that you tell
me when I make error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry
that I had to be away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one
who has so many important affairs in hand.”

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: “Yes, certainly,” and
added:--

“You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand.” I said I was sure
of this, and then he went on:--

“We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something
of what strange things here may be.”

This led to much conversation. And as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking’s sake, I asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked
most frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I
asked him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for
instance, why the coachman went to the places where we had seen the
blue flames. Was it indeed true that they showed where gold was hidden?
He then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a certain
night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits are
supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. “That treasure has been hidden,” he
went on, “in the region through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for centuries by
the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of
soil in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,
patriots or invaders. In old days there were stirring times, when the
Austrian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil.”

“But how,” said I, “can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?”
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

“Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames
only appear on one night. And on that night no man of this land will,
if he can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he
did he would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell
me of who marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in
daylight even for his own work. You would not, I dare be sworn, be able
to find these places again?”

“There you are right,” I said. “I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them.” Then we drifted into other matters.

“Come,” he said at last, “tell me of London and of the house which you
have procured for me.” With an apology for my remissness, I went into
my own room to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as
I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also
lit in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the sofa,
reading, of all things in the world, an English Bradshaw’s Guide. When
I came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him
I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested
in everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very
much more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:--

“Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me,
I fall into my country’s habit of putting your patronymic first--my
friend Jonathan Harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He
will be in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law
with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!”

We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which
I inscribe here:--

“At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed
to be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that
the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient
structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large
number of years. The closed gates were of heavy old oak and iron, all
eaten with rust.

“The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old _Quatre
Face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points
of the compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded
by the solid stone wall above mentioned. There are many trees on it,
which make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear
and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of
all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of
stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily
barred with iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old
chapel or church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the
door leading to it from the house, but I have taken with my Kodak views
of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a very
straggling way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers,
which must be very great. There are but few houses close at hand, one
being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a
private lunatic asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds.”

When I had finished, he said:--

“I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and
to live in a new house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable
in a day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I
rejoice that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles
love not to think that our bones may be amongst the common dead. I seek
not gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine
and sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer
young; and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead,
is not attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken;
the shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when I may.”

Somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else it was
that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found opened naturally
at England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I
found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I
noticed that one was near London on the east side, manifestly where his
new estate was situated; the other two were Exeter, and Whitby on the
Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned. “Aha!”
he said; “still at your books? Good! But you must not work always.
Come; I am informed that your supper is ready.” He took my arm, and
we went into the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready
on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on
his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and
chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the last evening,
and the Count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions on every
conceivable subject, hour after hour. I felt that it was getting very
late indeed, but I did not say anything, for I felt under obligation to
meet my host’s wishes in every way. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep
yesterday had fortified me; but I could not help experiencing that
chill which comes over one at the coming of dawn, which is like, in its
way, the turn of the tide. They say that people who are near death die
generally at the change to the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any
one who has, when tired, and tied as it were to his post, experienced
this change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once we heard
the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the
clear morning air; Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

“Why, there is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by
us,” and, with a courtly bow, he left me.

I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little
to notice; my window opened into the courtyard; all I could see was
the warm grey quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting
too diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first,
for there is something so strange about this place and all in it that
I cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-existence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak
with, and he!--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the
place. Let me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to
bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am
lost. Let me say at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window,
and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the Count’s voice saying to me, “Good morning.” I started,
for it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the
glass covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself
slightly, but did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the
Count’s salutation, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been
mistaken. This time there could be no error, for the man was close to
me, and I could see him over my shoulder. But there was no reflection
of him in the mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed; but there
was no sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and,
coming on the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase
that vague feeling of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is
near; but at that instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the
blood was trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I
did so half round to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw
my face, his eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly
made a grab at my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string
of beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for
the fury passed so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever
there.

“Take care,” he said, “take care how you cut yourself. It is more
dangerous than you think in this country.” Then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on: “And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief. It is a foul bauble of man’s vanity. Away with it!” and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones
of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case
or the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal.

When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could
not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange
that as yet I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very
peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle.
I went out on the stairs and found a room looking towards the south.
The view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every
opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the very edge of a terrible
precipice. A stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet
without touching anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of
green tree-tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm.
Here and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges
through the forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen the view
I explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!




CHAPTER III.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal/ (_continued_).


When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over
me. I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out
of every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other things. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
anything in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done.
I am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain: that it is no use making my ideas known
to the Count. He knows well that I am imprisoned; and as he has done
it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only
deceive me if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see,
my only plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and
my eyes open. I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my
own fears, or else I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so,
I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly come
to this conclusion when I heard the great door below shut, and knew
that the Count had returned. He did not come at once into the library,
so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making the bed.
This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along thought--that
there were no servants in the house. When later I saw him through the
chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the dining-room,
I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these menial offices,
surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them. This gave me
a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it must have been
the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that brought me here.
This is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it mean that he could
control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand in silence.
How was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the coach had some
terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of the
garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good
woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a comfort and a
strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing which I have
been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous should in a time
of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there is something in
the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium, a tangible
help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some time, if it
may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up my mind about
it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as
it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I
turn the conversation that way. I must be very careful, however, not to
awake his suspicion.

_Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few
questions on Transylvanian history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially
of battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said “we,”
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could
put down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. He
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

“We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from
Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their
Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe,
ay, and of Asia and Africa, too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found
the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia, had mated with the devils in
the desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great
as Attila, whose blood is in these veins?” He held up his arms. “Is
it a wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that
when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured
his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that
when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he
found us here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was
completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the
Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us
for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land;
ay, and more than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as
the Turks say, ‘water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.’ Who more gladly
than we throughout the Four Nations received the ‘bloody sword,’ or at
its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was
redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of Cassova, when the
flags of the Wallach and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent;
who was it but one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube
and beat the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe
was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his
people to the Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it
not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in
a later age again and again brought his forces over the great river
into Turkey-land; who, when he was beaten back, came again, and again,
and again, though he had to come alone from the bloody field where
his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could
ultimately triumph? They said that he thought only of himself. Bah!
what good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without
a brain and heart to conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of
Mohacs, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were
amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook that we were not
free. Ah, young sir, the Szekelys--and the Dracula as their heart’s
blood, their brains, and their swords--can boast a record that mushroom
growths like the Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach. The
warlike days are over. Blood is too precious a thing in these days of
dishonourable peace; and the glories of the great races are as a tale
that is told.”

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._ this
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the “Arabian Nights,” for
everything has to break off at cock-crow--or like the ghost of Hamlet’s
father.)

_12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified
by books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must
not confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own
observation or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the
matters I had been examined in at Lincoln’s Inn. There was a certain
method in the Count’s inquires, so I shall try to put them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors, or more.
I told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not
be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as
only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to
militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and
went on to ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one
man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in
case local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by
any chance mislead him, so he said:--

“I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from
under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far
from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London.
Good! Now here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange
that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead
of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest
might be served save my wish only; and as one of London resident might,
perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve I went thus
afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest.
Now, suppose I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to
Newcastle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it
could with more ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?” I
answered that certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors
had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be
done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the client,
simply placing himself in the hands of one man, could have his wishes
carried out by him without further trouble.

“But,” said he, “I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?”

“Of course,” I replied; “and such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person.”

“Good!” he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,
and he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made
a wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of
or foresee. For a man who was never in the country, and who did not
evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen
were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which
he had spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

“Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any other?” It was with some bitterness in my heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity
of sending letters to anybody.

“Then write now, my young friend,” he said, laying a heavy hand on my
shoulder; “write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now.”

“Do you wish me to stay so long?” I asked, for my heart grew cold at
the thought.

“I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that some one should come on his
behalf, it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. I
have not stinted. Is it not so?”

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins’s interest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count
Dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it
I could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them,
but in his own smooth, resistless way:--

“I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of
things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please
your friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to
getting home to them. Is it not so?” As he spoke he handed me three
sheets of notepaper and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest
foreign post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet
smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red under-lip, I
understood as well as if he had spoken that I should be careful what I
wrote, for he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only
formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also
to Mina, for to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle
the Count, if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat
quiet, reading a book whilst the Count wrote several notes, referring
as he wrote them to some books on his table. Then he took up my two
and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials, after
which, the instant the door had closed behind him, I leaned over and
looked at the letters, which were face down on the table. I felt no
compunction in doing so, for under the circumstances I felt that I
should protect myself in every way I could.

One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The
Crescent, Whitby; another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to
Coutts & Co., London, and the fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in
my seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been
and to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter
in his hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and
stamped them carefully, and then, turning to me, said:--

“I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private
this evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish.” At the
door he turned, and after a moment’s pause said:--

“Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with
all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. It is old, and has
many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely.
Be warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do,
then haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will
then be safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then”----He
finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands
as if he were washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to
whether any dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible
net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing round me.

_Later._--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed--I imagine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing
any sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look
out towards the south. There was some sense of freedom in the vast
expanse, inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow
darkness of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was
indeed in prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though
it were of the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence
tell on me. It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and
am full of all sorts of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is
ground for any terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over
the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was
almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became
melted, and the shadows in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness.
The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in
every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window my eye was caught by
something moving a storey below me, and somewhat to my left, where I
imagined, from the lie of the rooms, that the windows of the Count’s
own room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep,
stone-mullioned, and though weather-worn, was still complete; but it
was evidently many a day since the case had been there. I drew back
behind the stonework, and looked carefully out.

What I saw was the Count’s head coming out from the window. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his
back and arms. In any case, I could not mistake the hands which I had
had so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed
to repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from
the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful
abyss, _face down_, with his cloak spreading out around him like
great wings. At first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was
some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept
looking, and it could be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp
the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of
years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards
with considerable speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the
semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; I am
encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of....

_15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count go out in his lizard
fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down,
and a good deal to the left. He vanished into some hole or window. When
his head had disappeared I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity
to explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the
room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked
as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went
down the stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I
found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great
chains; but the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must
be in the Count’s room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so
that I may get it and escape. I went on to make a thorough examination
of the various stairs and passages, and to try the doors that opened
from them. One or two small rooms near the hall were open, but there
was nothing to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and
moth-eaten. At last, however, I found one door at the top of a stairway
which, though it seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure.
I tried it harder, and found that it was not really locked, but that
the resistance came from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat,
and the heavy door rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which
I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts
forced it back so that I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle
further to the right than the rooms I knew and a story lower down. From
the windows I could see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south
of the castle, the windows of the end room looking out both west and
south. On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great
precipice. The castle was built on the corner of a great rock, so that
on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed
here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently
light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be guarded,
were secured. To the west was a great valley, and then, rising far
away, great jagged mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer
rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks
and crevices and crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion
of the castle occupied in bygone days, for the furniture had more air
of comfort than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the
yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. My
lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I
was glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the
place which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was
better than living alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the
presence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It
is nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, unless my
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have powers of their own
which mere “modernity” cannot kill.

_Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I
am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for: that I may
not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely
it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone
I can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. I begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant
when he made Hamlet say:--

    “My tablets! quick, my tablets!
    ’Tis meet that I put it down,” etc.,

for now, feeling as though my own brain was unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

The Count’s mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold
upon me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book
and pen in my pocket, I felt sleepy. The Count’s warning came into my
mind, but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of sleep was
upon me, and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The
soft moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of
freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where of old ladies had sat and
sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that, as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring
for the dust, composed myself for sleep.

I suppose I must have fallen asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all
that followed was startlingly real--so real that now, sitting here in
the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the least believe
that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,
my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of
dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. They came close to me and looked at me for some
time and then whispered together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes, that seemed to
be almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great, wavy masses of golden hair and
eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to
know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not recollect
at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth, that
shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was
something about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same
time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that
they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this
down, lest some day it should meet Mina’s eyes and cause her pain;
but it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all three
laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound
never could have come through the softness of human lips. It was like
the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on
by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the
other two urged her on. One said:--

“Go on! You are first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to
begin.” The other added:--

“He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all.” I lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly
under the lashes. The fair girl went on her knees and bent over me,
fairly gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both
thrilling and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually
licked her lips like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the
moisture shining on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped
the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went
below the range of my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my
throat. Then she paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her
tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath
on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one’s flesh
does when the hand that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I
could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the supersensitive
skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching
and pausing there. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and
waited--waited with beating heart.

But at that instant another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily
I saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant’s power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. But the Count! Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even
in the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red
light in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind
them. His face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like
drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like
a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he
hurled the woman from him, and then motioned to the others, as though
he were beating them back; it was the same imperious gesture that I
had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost a
whisper, seemed to cut through the air and then ring round the room, as
he said:--

“How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him
when I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man belongs to me!
Beware how you meddle with him, or you’ll have to deal with me.” The
fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

“You yourself never loved; you never love!” On this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

“Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it
not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him, you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work
to be done.”

“Are we to have nothing to-night?” said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward and opened it. If
my ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

Then the horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.




CHAPTER IV.

JONATHAN HARKER’S JOURNAL--_continued._


I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the Count must
have carried me here. I tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid
by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and
I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to
bed, and many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may
have been evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause
or another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof.
Of one thing I am glad: if it was that the Count carried me here and
undressed me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are
intact. I am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he
would not have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look
round this room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now
a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful
women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
I _must_ know the truth. When I got to the doorway at the top of the
stairs, I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the
bolt of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the
inside. I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me
in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work
here was nearly done and that I should start for home within a few
days, another that I was starting on the next morning from the time
of the letter, and the third that I had left the castle and arrived
at Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present
state of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count
whilst I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to
excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know
too much, and that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my
only chance is to prolong my opportunities. Something may occur which
will give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that
gathering wrath which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from
him. He explained to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that my
writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured
me with so much impressiveness that he would countermand the later
letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case
chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would
have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in
with his views, and asked him what dates I should put on the letters.
He calculated a minute, and then said:--

“The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29.”

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

_28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able
to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are
encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of
them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. There are thousands
of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and
call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany
tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted. I have already spoken to them through my window to begin an
acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, I could not understand any more than I could
their spoken language....

I have written the letters. Mina’s is in shorthand, and I simply
ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my
situation, but without the horrors which I may only surmise. It would
shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her.
Should the letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my
secret or the extent of my knowledge....

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted.
The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then
put them in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study and
began to read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here....

The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two letters:--

“The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!”--he must have looked at
it--“one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other”--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--“the
other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It
is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us.” And he calmly held
letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed.
Then he went on:--

“The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that
unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?” He
held out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute
later I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, his
coming wakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been
sleeping, he said:

“So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest.
I may not have the pleasure to talk to-night, since there are many
labours to me; but you will sleep, I pray.” I passed to my room and
went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has
its own calms.

_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket,
so that I might write in case I should get an opportunity; but again a
surprise, again a shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact, all
that might be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and
pondered a while, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made
search of my portmanteau and in the wardrobe where I had placed my
clothes.

The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses’ feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard.
With joy I hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-waggons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great, nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through
the main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a
shock: my door was fastened on the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the “hetman” of the Szgany came
out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which
they laughed. Henceforth, no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away.
The leiter-waggons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. When
they were all unloaded and backed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse’s head. Shortly afterwards I
heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.

_24 June, before morning._--Last night the Count left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dared, I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window which opened south. I
thought I would watch for the Count, for there is something going on.
The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle, and are doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away, muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be to the end of
some ruthless villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count’s window. I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me
to find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he
will allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local
people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut
up here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law
which is even a criminal’s right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count’s return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at the window. Then I began to notice that there were some
quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered
in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense
of soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more
fully the aerial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it
seemed to ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new
shapes to the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself
struggling to awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul
was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to
answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced
the dust, and the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into
the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they gathered till they seemed
to take dim phantom shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in full
possession of my senses, and ran screaming from the place. The phantom
shapes, which were becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams,
were those of the three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and
felt somewhat safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and
where the lamp was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the
Count’s room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and
then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With
a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of
a woman. I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between
the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. When she saw my face at the window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

“Monster, give me my child!”

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the
same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair
and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of
extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I
could not see her, I could hear the beating of her naked hands against
the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of
the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to
be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. Before many
minutes had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when
liberated, through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

What shall I do? What can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful
thrall of night and gloom and fear?

_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When
the sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great
gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to
me as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me
as if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I
must take action of some sort while the courage of the day is upon me.
Last night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that
fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from
the earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen
the Count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake,
that he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his
room! But there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way
for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not another body go? I have seen him myself crawl from his
window; why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall
risk it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man’s death is not a
calf’s, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

_Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and, God helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order.
I went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south
side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs
round the building on this side. The stones were big and roughly cut,
and the mortar had by process of time been washed away between them.
I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked
down once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth
would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I
knew pretty well the direction and distance of the Count’s window, and
made for it as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities
available. I did not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and
the time seemed ridiculously short till I found myself standing on
the windowsill and trying to raise up the sash. I was filled with
agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through
the window. Then I looked round for the Count, but, with surprise and
gladness, made a discovery. The room was empty! It was barely furnished
with odd things, which seemed to have never been used; the furniture
was something the same style as that in the south rooms, and was
covered with dust. I looked for the key, but it was not in the lock,
and I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great
heap of gold in one corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and
Austrian, and Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a
film of dust, as though it had lain long in the ground. None of it that
I noticed was less than three hundred years old. There were also chains
and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only
lit by loopholes in the heavy masonry. At the bottom there was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage the
smell grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door
which stood ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had
evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two
places were steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been
dug over, and the earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those
which had been brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I
made search for any further outlet, but there was none. Then I went
over every inch of the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down
even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so
was dread to my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw nothing
except fragments of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third,
however, I made a discovery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on
a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep,
I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without
the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through
all their pallor, and the lips were as red as ever. But there was no
sign of movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. I bent
over him, and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not
have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in
a few hours. By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes
here and there. I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I
went to search I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were,
such a look of hate, though unconscious of me or my presence, that
I fled from the place, and leaving the Count’s room by the window,
crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my own chamber, I threw
myself panting upon the bed and tried to think....

_29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave
the castle by the same window, and in my clothes. As he went down the
wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that
I might destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man’s
hand would have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return,
for I feared to see those weird sisters. I came back to the library,
and read there till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

“To-morrow, my friend, we must part. You return to your beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come
the Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come
some Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and
shall bear you to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina
to Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Dracula.” I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so I asked him point-blank:--

“Why may I not go to-night?”

“Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission.”

“But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once.” He
smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew there was
some trick behind his smoothness. He said:--

“And your baggage?”

“I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time.”

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub
my eyes, it seemed so real:--

“You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit
is that which rules our _boyars_: ‘Welcome the coming, speed the
parting guest.’ Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall
you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going,
and that you so suddenly desire it. Come!” With a stately gravity, he,
with the lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly
he stopped.

“Hark!”

Close at hand came the howling of many wolves. It was almost as if the
sound sprang up at the raising of his hand, just as the music of a
great orchestra seems to leap under the baton of the conductor. After a
pause of a moment, he proceeded in his stately way, to the door, drew
back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw
it open.

To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew
louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their
blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. I
knew that to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless. With
such allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. But still the
door continued slowly to open, and only the Count’s body stood in the
gap. Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and the means
of my doom; I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation.
There was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the
Count, and as a last chance I cried out:--

“Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!” and covered my face with
my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of
his powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts
clanged and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their
places.

In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his
hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile
that Judas in hell might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whispering at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears
deceived me, I heard the voice of the Count:--

“Back, back, to your own place! Your time is not yet come. Wait. Have
patience. To-morrow night, to-morrow night, is yours!” There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw
without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. Is it then so near
the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

_30 June, morning._--These may be the last words I ever write in this
diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I woke threw myself
on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me
ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in the air and knew that the morning
had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down the hall. I had seen
that the door was unlocked and now escape was before me. With hands
that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled and pulled
at the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left
the Count.

Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I
determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count’s
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east window and scrambled
down the wall, as before, into the Count’s room. It was empty, but
that was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap
of gold remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the
winding stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I knew now
well enough where to find the monster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the
lid was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in
their places to be hammered home. I knew I must search the body for
the key, so I raised the lid and laid it back against the wall; and
then I saw something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay
the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half-renewed, for the
white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks
were fuller, and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth
was redder than ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which
trickled from the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck.
Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the
lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole
awful creature were simply gorged with blood; he lay like a filthy
leech, exhausted with his repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to
touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had
to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body a
banquet in a similar way to those horrid three. I felt all over the
body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked
at the Count. There was a mocking smile on the bloated face which
seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I was helping to transfer
to London, where, perhaps for centuries to come, he might, amongst its
teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever
widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very
thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world
of such a monster. There was no lethal weapon at hand, but I seized a
shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the cases, and lifting
it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the hateful face. But as I
did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full upon me, with all their
blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyse me, and the
shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a
deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my hand across the
box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge
of the lid, which fell over again, and hid the horrid thing from my
sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face, blood-stained
and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its own in the
nethermost hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As
I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices
coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and
the cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count
had spoken were coming. With a last look round and at the box which
contained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count’s
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
With strained ears I listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of
the key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door.
There must have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key
for one of the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet
tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo.
I turned to run down again towards the vault, where I might find the
new entrance; but at that moment there seemed to come a violent puff of
wind, and the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set
the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found
that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of
doom was closing round me more closely.

As I write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes,
with their freight of earth. There is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again
along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key withdrawn; then another door opens and
shuts; I hear the creaking of lock and bolt.

Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the
distance.

I am alone in the castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina is a
woman, and there is naught in common. They are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle
wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold
with me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dreadful
place.

And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

At least God’s mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!




CHAPTER V.

_Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._


    “_9 May._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have been simply overwhelmed
with work. The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes
trying. I am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can
walk together freely and build our castles in the air. I have been
working very hard lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan’s
studies, and I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When
we are married I shall be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can
stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to say in this
way and write it out for him on the typewriter, at which I am also
practising very hard. He and I sometimes write letters in shorthand,
and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I
am with you I shall keep a diary in the same way. I don’t mean one of
those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries,
but a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I
do not suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it
is not intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there
is in it anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book.
I shall try to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and
writing descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told
that, with a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that
one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I shall tell you
all my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines
from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in
about a week. I am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to
see strange countries, I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall
ever see them together. There is the ten o’clock bell ringing. Goodbye.

    “Your loving
        “/Mina./

“Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything
for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???”


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray._

    “_17, Chatham Street,

        “Wednesday._

“My dearest Mina,--

“I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent.
I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only
your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really
nothing to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a
good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park.
As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who was
with me at the last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales.
That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma
get on very well together; they have so many things to talk about in
common. We met some time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if
you were not already engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_,
being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and really
clever. Just fancy! He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense
lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to
me, and he called here to see us, and often comes now. I think he is
one of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He
seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he
must have over his patients. He has a curious habit of looking one
straight in the face, as if trying to read one’s thoughts. He tries
this on very much with me, but I flatter myself he has got a tough
nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do you ever try to read your
own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not a bad study, and gives
you more trouble than you can well fancy if you have never tried it.
He says that I afford him a curious psychological study, and I humbly
think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to
be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a bore. That is slang
again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day. There, it is all
out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were
_children_; we have slept together and eaten together; and laughed
and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like to
speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn’t you guess? I love him. I am blushing
as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so
in words. But, oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There,
that does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the letter, and I don’t want to stop, for I _do so_
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in
your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness.

    “/Lucy./

“P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Good-night again.

    “L.”


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray._

    “24 _May._

“My dearest Mina,--

“Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter! It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

“My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.
Here am I, who will be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! /Three/ proposals in one day! Isn’t it awful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don’t know what to do with myself. And three proposals!
But, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell any of the girls, or they would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain. You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged
and are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must
keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan.
You will tell him, because I would, if I were in your place, certainly
tell Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don’t you
think so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their
wives, to be quite as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are
not always quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number
one came just before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the
lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was
very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently
been schooling himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered
them; but he almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men
don’t generally do when they are cool, and then when he wanted to
appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way that made me
nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told
me how dear I was to him, though he had known me so little, and what
his life would be with me to help and cheer him. He was going to tell
me how unhappy he would be if I did not care for him, but when he saw
me cry he said that he was a brute and would not add to my present
trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I could love him in time; and
when I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation
he asked me if I cared already for any one else. He put it very nicely,
saying that he did not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to
know, because if a woman’s heart was free a man might have hope. And
then, Mina, I felt it a sort of duty to tell him that there was some
one. I only told him that much, and then he stood up, and he looked
very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in his and said he
hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever wanted a friend I must count
him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can’t help crying; and you must
excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very
nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn’t at all a happy thing when
you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know loves you honestly, going
away and looking all broken-hearted, and to know that, no matter what
he may say at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life. My
dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so miserable, though I am so
happy.

    “_Evening._

“Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number
two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas,
and he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that
he has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise
with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards
that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know
now what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love
me. No, I don’t, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and
Arthur never told any, and yet----My dear, I am somewhat previous.
Mr. Quincey P. Morris found me alone. It seems that a man always does
find a girl alone. No, he doesn’t, for Arthur tried twice to _make_
a chance, and I helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it
now. I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn’t always speak
slang--that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them,
for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found
out that it amused me to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I
was present, and there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny
things. I am afraid, my dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits
exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is a way slang has.
I do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang; I do not know if
Arthur likes it, as I have never heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr.
Morris sat down beside me and looked as happy and jolly as he could,
but I could see all the same that he was very nervous. He took my hand
in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

“‘Miss Lucy, I know I ain’t good enough to regulate the fixin’s of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won’t
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road
together driving in double harness?’

“Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn’t seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward, so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that
I wasn’t broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken
in a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing
so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him.
He really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn’t help
feeling a bit serious, too--I know, Mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though I couldn’t help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

“‘Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is,
I’ll never trouble you a hair’s breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.’

“My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy
of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think
this is a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt
very badly. Why can’t they let a girl marry three men, or as many as
want her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not
say it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look
into Mr. Morris’s brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

“‘Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that
he even loves me.’ I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite
a light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took
mine--I think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

“‘That’s my brave girl. It’s better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. Don’t
cry, my dear. If it’s for me, I’m a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that other fellow doesn’t know his happiness, well,
he’d better look for it soon, or he’ll have to deal with me. Little
girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that’s rarer
than a lover; it’s more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I’m going to have
a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won’t you give me
one kiss? It’ll be something to keep off the darkness now and then.
You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must
be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love
him--hasn’t spoken yet.’ That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave
and sweet of him, and noble, too, to a rival--wasn’t it?--and he so
sad; so I leant over and kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in
his, and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing
very much--he said:--

“‘Little girl, I hold your hand, and you’ve kissed me, and if these
things don’t make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for your
sweet honesty to me, and good-bye.’ He wrung my hand, and taking up
his hat, went straight out of the room without looking back, without a
tear or a quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must
a man like that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who
would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were
free--only I don’t want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I
feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it;
and I don’t wish to tell of the number three till it can all be happy.

    “Ever your loving

        “/Lucy./

“P.S.--Oh, about number three--I needn’t tell you of number three,
need I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from
his coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don’t know what I have done
to deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not
ungrateful for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a lover,
such a husband, and such a friend.

    “Good-bye.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

(Kept in phonograph.)

_25 April._--Ebb tide in appetite to-day. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be
worth the doing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing
was work, I went down amongst the patients. I picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. He is so quaint in his ideas, and
so unlike the normal lunatic, that I have determined to understand him
as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get nearer than ever before to the
heart of his mystery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to
making myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner
of doing it there was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seemed to
wish to keep him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid
with the patients as I would the mouth of hell. (_Mem._, under what
circumstances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?) _Omnia Romae
vernalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be anything
behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical
strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom ending in some fixed
idea which I cannot make out. I presume that the sanguine temperament
itself and the disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished
finish; a possibly dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish.
In selfish men caution is as secure an armour for their foes as for
themselves. What I think of on this point is, when self is the fixed
point the centripetal force is balanced with the centrifugal: when
duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed point, the latter force is paramount,
and only accident or a series of accidents can balance it.

_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

    “_25 May._

“My dear Art,--

“We’ve told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another’s wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. Won’t you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the
Korea, Jack Seward. He’s coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. Come!

    “Yours, as ever and always,
        “/Quincey P. Morris./”


_Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._

    “_26 May._

“Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

    “/Art./”




CHAPTER VI.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./


_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Crescent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the
Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near
the harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through
which the view seems, somehow, farther away than it really is. The
valley is beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on
the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are
near enough to see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from
us--are all red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow,
like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin
of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene
of part of “Marmion,” where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a
most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic
bits; there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the
windows. Between it and the town there is another church, the parish
one, round which is a big graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is,
to my mind, the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the
town, and has a full view of the harbour and all up the bay to where
the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea. It descends
so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen away,
and some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the
stonework of the graves stretches out over the sandy pathway far below.
There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and
people go and sit there all day long looking at the beautiful view and
enjoying the breeze. I shall come and sit here very often myself and
work. Indeed, I am writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening
to the talk of three old men who are sitting beside me. They seem to
do nothing all day but sit up here and talk.

The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it,
in the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along
outside of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked
inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers
there is a narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.

It is nice at high tide; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he
is coming this way....

He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the Greenland fishing
fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady
at the abbey he said very brusquely:--

“I wouldn’t fash masel’ about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don’t say they never was, but I do say that they wasn’t in
my time. They be all very well for comers and trippers an’ the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York
and Leeds that be always eatin’ cured herrin’s an’ drinkin’ tea an’
lookin’ out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel’ who’d
be bothered tellin’ lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk.” I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something
about whale-fishing in the old days. He was just settling himself to
begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and
said:--

“I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My granddaughter doesn’t like
to be kept waitin’ when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of ’em; an’, miss, I lack
belly-timber sairly by the clock.”

He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could,
down the steps. The steps are a great feature of the place. They lead
from the town up to the church; there are hundreds of them--I do not
know how many--and they wind up in a delicate curve; the slope is so
gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they
must originally have had something to do with the Abbey. I shall go
home too. Lucy went out visiting with her mother, and as they were only
duty calls, I did not go. They will be home by this.

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come
and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and I should
think must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not
admit anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can’t out-argue them
he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his
views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has
got a beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old
men did not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat
down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love
with her on the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict
her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of the
legends, and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. I must try to
remember it and put it down:--

“It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that’s what it be, an’
nowt else. These bans an’ wafts an’ boh-ghosts an’ bar-guests and
bogles an’ all anent them is only fit to set bairns an’ dizzy women
a-belderin’. They be nowt but air-blebs! They, an’ all grims an’ signs
an’ warnin’s, be all invented by parsons an’ illsome beuk-bodies an’
railway touters to skeer an’ scunner hafflin’s, an’ to get folks to
do somethin’ that they don’t other incline to. It makes me ireful to
think o’ them. Why, it’s them that, not content with printin’ lies on
paper an’ preachin’ them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin’ them
on the tombsteans. Look here all round you in what airt ye will; all
them steans, holdin’ up their heads as well as they can out of their
pride, is acant--simply tumblin’ down with the weight o’ the lies wrote
on them, ‘Here lies the body’ or ‘Sacred to the memory’ wrote on all
of them, an’ yet in nigh half of them there bean’t no bodies at all;
an’ the memories of them bean’t cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin’ but lies of one kind or another! My
gog, but it’ll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment, when they
come tumblin’ up here in their death-sarks, all jouped together an’
tryin’ to drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was;
some of them trimmlin’ and ditherin’, with their hands that dozzened
an’ slippy from lyin’ in the sea that they can’t even keep their grup
o’ them.”

I could see from the old fellow’s self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was
“showing off,” so I put in a word to keep him going:--

“Oh, Mr. Swales, you can’t be serious. Surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?”

“Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin’ where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl
be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only
lies. Now look you here; you come here a stranger, an’ you see this
kirk-garth.” I nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did
not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with
the church. He went on: “And you consate that all these steans be aboon
folk that be happed here, snod an’ snog?” I assented again. “Then that
be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds
that be toom as old Dun’s ’bacca-box on Friday night.” He nudged one of
his companions, and they all laughed. “And my gog! how could they be
otherwise? Look at that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank; read it!”
I went over and read:--

“Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast
of Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30.” When I came back Mr. Swales went
on:--

“Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the
coast of Andres! an’ you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name
ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above”--he pointed
northwards--“or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost
in the _Lively_ off Greenland in ’20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in
the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in ’50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they’d be jommlin’ an’
jostlin’ one another that way that it ’ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we’d be at one another from daylight to dark, an’
tryin’ to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis.” This
was evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and
his cronies joined in with gusto.

“But,” I said, “surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?”

“Well, what else be they tombsteans for? Answer me that, miss!”

“To please their relatives, I suppose.”

“To please their relatives, you suppose!” This he said with intense
scorn. “How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?” He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. “Read the
lines on that thruffstean,” he said. The letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

“Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb is erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. ‘He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.’
Really, Mr. Swales, I don’t see anything very funny in that!” She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

“Ye don’t see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that’s because ye don’t gawm
the sorrowin’ mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk’d--a regular lamiter he was--an’ he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn’t get an insurance she put
on his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket
that they had for scarin’ the crows with. ’Twarn’t for crows then, for
it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That’s the way he fell off
the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I’ve often
heard him say masel’ that he hoped he’d go to hell, for his mother was
so pious that she’d be sure to go to heaven, an’ he didn’t want to
addle where she was. Now isn’t that stean at any rate”--he hammered it
with his stick as he spoke--“a pack of lies? and won’t it make Gabriel
keckle when Geordie comes pantin’ up the grees with the tombstean
balanced on his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!”

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

“Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide.”

“That won’t harm ye, my pretty; an’ it may make poor Geordie gladsome
to have so trim a lass sittin’ on his lap. That won’t hurt ye. Why,
I’ve sat here off an’ on for nigh twenty years past, an’ it hasn’t
done me no harm. Don’t ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that
doesn’ lie there either! It’ll be time for ye to be getting scart when
ye see the tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a
stubble-field. There’s the clock, an’ I must gang. My service to ye,
ladies!” And off he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and
their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven’t heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The same day._--I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine. I see the lights scattered all over the
town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the Abbey. The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey’s hoofs up the paved road below.
The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and farther
along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he
were here.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get
to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed:
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what is the
object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his
own, but what it is I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a
love of animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that
I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a
quantity that I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: “May I have
three days? I shall clear them away.” Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding them with his flies, and the
number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has
used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room.

_1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at
all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same
time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for
when a horrid blowfly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the
room, he caught it, held it exultingly for a few moments between his
finger and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in
his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that
it was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life,
and gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I
must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep
problem in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is
always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses
of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the
totals added in batches again, as though he was “focusing” some account,
as the auditors put it.

_8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary
idea in my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then,
oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your
conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that
I might notice if there were any change. Things remained as they were
except that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He
has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His
means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the
flies by tempting them with his food.

_19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

“A kitten, a nice little, sleek, playful kitten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!” I was not unprepared for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

“Oh, yes I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they?” I shook
my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of
danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.

_10 p.m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

_11 a.m._--The attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. “My belief is,
doctor,” he said, “that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!”

_11 p.m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night; enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The
thought that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and
the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall
have to invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoophagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the brain? Had
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch
compared with which Burdon-Sanderson’s physiology or Ferrier’s brain
knowledge would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient cause! I
must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might
turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain,
congenitally?

How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great
Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must only wait on
hopeless and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there, a
good, unselfish cause to make me work, that would be indeed happiness.


/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here;
it is like whispering to one’s self and listening at the same time.
And there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter
from him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the
enclosed had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle
Dracula, and says that he is just starting for home. That is not like
Jonathan; I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too,
Lucy, although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of
walking in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we
have decided that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs.
Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of
houses and along the edges of cliffs, and then get suddenly awakened
and fall over with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place.
Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that
her husband, Lucy’s father, had the same habit; that he would get up in
the night and dress himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy
is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her
dresses and how her house is to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for
I do the same, only Jonathan and I will start in life in a very simple
way, and shall have to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is
the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here
very shortly--as soon as he can leave town, for his father is not very
well, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She
wants to take him up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him
the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it is the waiting which disturbs her;
she will be all right when he arrives.

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about
him, though why I should I do not know; but I _do_ wish that he would
write, if it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and
each night I am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the
weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and
the perpetually being awakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am
getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy’s health keeps up.
Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his father, who has
been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him,
but it does not touch her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks
are a lovely rose pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I
pray it will all last.

_3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even
to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill.
He surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it
is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much
in her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
letter. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable
than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The
sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey
mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and
there is a “brool” over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded
in the mist, and seem “men like trees walking.” The fishing-boats are
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

“I want to say something to you, miss.” I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

“I’m afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked
things I’ve been sayin’ about the dead, and such-like, for weeks past;
but I didn’t mean them, and I want ye to remember that when I’ve gone.
We aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal,
don’t altogether like to think of it, and we don’t want to feel scart of
it; an’ that’s why I’ve took to makin’ light of it, so that I’d cheer up
my own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain’t afraid of dyin’,
not a bit; only I don’t want to die if I can help it. My time must be
nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any
man to expect; and I’m so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin’
his scythe. Ye see, I can’t get out o’ the habit of caffin’ about it
all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the
Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don’t ye dooal an’
greet, my deary!”--for he saw that I was crying--“if he should come this
very night I’d not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all,
only a waitin’ for somethin’ else than what we’re doin’; and death be
all that we can rightly depend on. But I’m content, for it’s comin’ to
me, my deary, and comin’ quick. It may be comin’ while we be lookin’
and wonderin’. Maybe it’s in that wind out over the sea that’s bringin’
with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!”
he cried suddenly. “There’s something in that wind and in the hoast
beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It’s
in the air; I feel it comin’. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call
comes!” He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes’ silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time
kept looking at a strange ship.

“I can’t make her out,” he said; “she’s a Russian, by the look of her;
but she’s knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn’t know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can’t decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn’t mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We’ll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow.”




CHAPTER VII.

/Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August./

(_Pasted in Mina Murray’s Journal._)

From a Correspondent.


_Whitby._

One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
August. Saturday evening was as fine as ever was known, and the great
body of holiday-makers set out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,
Robin Hood’s Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips
in the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_
made excursions along the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
“tripping” both to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till
the afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the East Cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show
of “mares’-tails” high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then
blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked “No. 2: light breeze.” The coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century
has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an
emphatic manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset was
so very beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds,
that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the
old churchyard to enjoy the beauty. Before the sun dipped below the
black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its
downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here
and there masses not large, but seemingly of absolute blackness, in
all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The
experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the “Prelude to the Great Storm” will grace the R.A. and
R.I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then
and there that his “cobble” or his “mule,” as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,
which usually “hug” the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating
swell of the sea,

    “As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.”

Shortly before ten o’clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep
inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and
the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord
in the great harmony of nature’s silence. A little after midnight came
a strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to
carry a strange, faint hollow booming.

Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to realise,
the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. The waves rose in
growing fury, each over-topping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume
swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of
either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew
with such force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept
their feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It was
found necessary to clear the entire piers from the mass of onlookers,
or else the fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold.
To add to the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog
came drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly
fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort
of imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and
many a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times
the mist cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the
glare of the lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such
sudden peals of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling
under the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the scenes thus
revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of absorbing interest--the
sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty
masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl
away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail,
running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again the white
wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East Cliff the
new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been tried.
The officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in the
pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea. Once
or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with
gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance of
the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the piers.
As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of joy
from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed to
cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the
searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails
set, apparently the same vessel which had been noticed earlier in the
evening. The wind had by this time backed to the east, and there was a
shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they realised the terrible
danger in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great
flat reef on which so many good ships have from time to time suffered,
and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would be quite
impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. It was
now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in
their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the
schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the
words of one old salt, “she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only in
hell.” Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than any hitherto--a
mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things like a grey
pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar
of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the
mighty bellows came through the damp oblivion even louder than before.
The rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour mouth across
the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless.
The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the
sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the
piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept
the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained
the safety of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder
ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with
drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the
ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on
all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had found the
harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead man! However, all took
place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner
paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that
accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms
into the south-east corner of the pier jutting under the East Cliff,
known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up
on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of
the “top-hamper” came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very
instant the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from
below, as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from
the bow on to the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the
churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some
of the flat tombstones--“thruff-steans” or “through-stones,” as they
call them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the
sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which
seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight.

It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier,
as all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed
or were out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty on the
eastern side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier,
was the first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after
scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then
turned the light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran
aft, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it and
recoiled at once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to
pique the general curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run.
It is a good way round from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate
Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well
ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found already assembled
on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to
come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boat-man, I was, as your
correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and was one of a small group
who saw that dead seaman whilst actually lashed to the wheel.

It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which
it was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast
by the binding cords. The poor fellow may have been seated at one
time, but the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through
the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords
with which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was
made of the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of
33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after
making examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two
days. In his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a
little roll of paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The
coastguard said the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the
knots with his teeth. The fact that a coastguard was the first on board
may save some complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for the
coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is the right of the first
civilian entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are
wagging, and one young law student is loudly asserting that the rights
of the owner are already completely sacrificed, his property being held
in contravention of the statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as
emblemship, if not proof, of delegated possession, is held in a _dead
hand_. It is needless to say that the dead steersman has been reverently
removed from the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till
death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the young Casabianca--and
placed in the mortuary to await inquest.

Already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating; the
crowds are scattering homewards, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further
details of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in the storm.

_Whitby._

_9 August._--The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. It
turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called
the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with
only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled
with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S.
F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and
formally took possession of the goods consigned to him. The Russian
consul, too, acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of
the ship, and paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here
to-day except the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of
Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been
made with existing regulations. As the matter is to be a “nine days’
wonder,” they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of
after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog
which landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members
of the S.P.C.A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend
the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be
found; it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be
that it was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is
still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff, belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in the roadway opposite its master’s yard. It had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly slit open as if with a savage claw.

_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been
permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. The greater interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced
at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive
for concealment, I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send
you a rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that this
had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my statement
must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from the dictation of a
clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being
short.


/Log of the “Demeter.”/

_Varna to Whitby._

_Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands, ... two mates,
cook, and myself (captain).

On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs
officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p.m.

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.

On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky,
was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells
last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
downcast than ever. All said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than that there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting
very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead.

On 17 July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to my cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering behind
the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall, thin man,
who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way, and go
along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when
he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed. He was
in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid the panic may spread.
To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to
stern.

Later in the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they
evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we should search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep
them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while
the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns;
we left no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes,
there were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but
said nothing.

_22 July._--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weather. Passed Gibraltar and out through Straits. All well.

_24 July._--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
violent. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will
do some violence.

_28 July._--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out.
Hardly know how to set a watch since no one fit to go on. Second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours’ sleep.
Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is
steadier.

_29 July._--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,
but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

_30 July._--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both men on watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

_1 August._--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than either of them. His stronger
nature seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond
fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They
are Russian, he Roumanian.

_2 August, midnight._--Woke up from few minutes’ sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck,
and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deserted us.

_3 August._--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, but
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for
the mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: “_It_ is here; I know
it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind
It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the
air.” And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on: “But It is here, and I’ll find it. It is in the
hold, perhaps, in one of those boxes. I’ll unscrew them one by one and
see. You work the helm.” And, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad, stark,
raving mad, and it’s no use my trying to stop him. He can’t hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as “clay,” and to pull them about is as
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can’t steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. “Save me! save me!” he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and
in a steady voice he said: “You had better come too, captain, before it
is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret now. The sea will save me
from Him, and it is all that is left!” Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into the sea. I suppose I know the secret too, now. It
was this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. God help me! How am I to account for all these
horrors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there
is sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dared not go
below, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dimness of the night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but the mate was
right to jump overboard. It is better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall
tie my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along
with them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come
good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I
am growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God
and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....

Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no evidence to adduce;
and whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now
none to say. The folk hold almost universally here that the captain
is simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it
is arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the
Esk for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the
Abbey steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The
owners of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I
believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more “mystery of the sea.”


/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could
not sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to
be like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got
up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time,
and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed.
It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her
will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her
life.

Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. There were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth
of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!

_10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the
way. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat, so that we
stood on it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed
much upset. She was restless and uneasy all the time, and I cannot
but think that her dreaming at night is telling on her. She is quite
odd in one thing: she will not admit to me that there is any cause
for restlessness; or if there be, she does not understand it herself.
There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead
this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as
the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for
there was a look of fear and horror on his face that the men said made
them shudder. Poor dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his
dying eyes! Lucy is so sweet and sensitive that she feels influences
more acutely than other people do. Just now she was quite upset by a
little thing which I did not much heed, though I am myself very fond of
animals. One of the men who come up here often to look for the boats
was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him. They are both
quiet persons, and I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark.
During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the
seat with us, but kept a few yards off, barking and howling. Its master
spoke to it gently, and then harshly, and then angrily; but it would
neither come nor cease to make a noise. It was in a sort of fury, with
its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat’s tail when
puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped
down and kicked the dog, and then took it by the scruff of the neck and
half dragged and half threw it on the tombstone on which the seat is
fixed. The moment it touched the stone the poor thing became quiet and
fell all into a tremble. It did not try to get away, but crouched down,
quivering and cowering, and was in such a pitiable state of terror that
I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity,
too, but she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at it in an
agonised sort of way. I greatly fear that she is of too supersensitive
a nature to go through the world without trouble. She will be dreaming
of this to-night, I am sure. The whole agglomeration of things--the ship
steered into port by a dead man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a
crucifix and beads; the touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now
in terror--will all afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so
I shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood’s Bay and
back. She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.




CHAPTER VIII.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./


_Same day, 11 o’clock p.m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that
I have made my diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a
lovely walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think,
to some dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the
lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we forgot
everything, except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the
slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a capital “severe tea” at
Robin Hood’s Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window
right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should
have shocked the “New Woman” with our appetites. Men are more tolerant,
bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to
rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy
was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we
could. The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him
to stay for supper. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with the dusty
miller; I know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I
think that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding
up a new class of curates, who don’t take supper, no matter how they may
be pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep
and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the “New Women” writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or
accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won’t condescend in future to
accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There’s some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.

_11 August, 3 a.m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my diary....
Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of
fear upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was
dark, so I could not see Lucy’s bed; I stole across and felt for her.
The bed was empty. I lit a match, and found that she was not in the
room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to
wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on
some clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was leaving the room
it struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. “Thank God,” I said
to myself, “she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress.” I ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked
in all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling my heart. Finally I came to the hall-door and found it open.
It was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The
people of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I
feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no time to
think of what might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all
details. I took a big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was striking
one as I was in the Crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran
along the North Terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure
which I expected. At the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked
across the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don’t know
which--of seeing Lucy in our favourite seat. There was a bright full
moon, with heavy black, driving clouds, which threw the whole scene
into a fleeting diorama of light and shade as they sailed across. For a
moment or two I could see nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured
St. Mary’s Church and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could
see the ruins of the Abbey coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow
band of light as sharp as a sword-cut moved along, the church and the
churchyard became gradually visible. Whatever my expectation was, it was
not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of
the moon struck a half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the
cloud was too quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light
almost immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood
behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it
was, whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch
another glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by
the fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East
Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced
that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy’s condition. The
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the Abbey. I must
have gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted
with lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I
got almost to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for
I was now close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of
shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over
the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, “Lucy! Lucy!”
and something raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white
face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly, as usual with her, but
in long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled
the collar of her nightdress close round her throat. Whilst she did so
there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet, and then began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradually
she became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and for many other
reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she
was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body
must have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at
waking unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there
was a puddle of water remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as
there are here, steep little closes, or “wynds,” as they call them in
Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes I thought
I should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walking adventure.
I hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother’s health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her, and seemed
not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was clear, and the
sun bright and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the
cliff path and joining her at the gate. I felt a little sad myself,
for I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening
we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr
and Mackenzie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than
she has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the
door and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect any
trouble to-night.

_12 August._--My expectations were wrong, for twice during the night
I was awakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her
sleep, to be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went
back to bed under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard
the birds chirping outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was
glad to see, was even better than on the previous morning. All her old
gaiety of manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in
beside me, and told me all about Arthur; I told her how anxious I was
about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can’t alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
before. Again I woke in the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great,
silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great, whirling circles. Once
or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing
me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the Abbey. When I
came back from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping
peacefully. She did not stir again all night.

_14 August._--On the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems
to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for
dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; the red light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old Abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--

“His red eyes again! They are just the same.” It was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look
on her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our seat, whereon
was a dark figure seated alone. I was a little startled myself, for it
seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like burning
flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. The red sunlight was
shining on the windows of St. Mary’s Church behind our seat, and as
the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the refraction and
reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. I called Lucy’s
attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start,
but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she was thinking
of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I said
nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early
to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself; I
walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet sadness,
for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright
moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the Crescent
was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance up at
our window, and saw Lucy’s head leaning out. I thought that perhaps she
was looking out for me, so I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She
did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then, the moonlight
crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell on the window.
There distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against the side of the
window-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and by her, seated
on the window-sill, was something that looked like a good-sized bird.
I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs, but as I came
into the room she was moving back to her bed, fast asleep, and breathing
heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat, as though to protect it
from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that
the door is locked and the window securely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont,
and there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like.
I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it
is.

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur’s father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later
on in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as
her very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to
protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy’s sleep-walking.

_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to
write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother’s hours are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy’s
fading away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if anything, larger, than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with
red centres. Unless they heal within a day or two, I shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.


_Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Paterson & Co., London._

“_17 August._

“Dear Sirs,--

“Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern
Railway. Same are to be delivered to Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station King’s Cross. The house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.

“You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the
house and marked ‘A’ on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The
goods leave by the train at 9.30 to-night, and will be due at King’s
Cross at 4.30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready
at King’s Cross at the time named and forthwith conveying the goods to
destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the
house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by
means of his duplicate key.

“Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.

    “We are, dear Sirs,
    “Faithfully yours,
    “/Samuel F. Billington & Son./”


_Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington &
Son, Whitby_

“_21 August._

“Dear Sirs,--


“We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17_s._
9_d._, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods
are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in
parcel in main hall, as directed.

    “We are, dear Sirs,
    “Yours respectfully,
    “_Pro_ /Carter, Paterson & Co./”

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

“My poor little feet didn’t make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was because I didn’t want to wake up
Geordie.” As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, I don’t wonder that he does. Then she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

“I didn’t quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don’t know why, for I was afraid of something--I
don’t know what. I remember, though I suppose I was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by,
and I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
I went up the steps. Then I have a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seemed to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do
it before I felt you.”

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I
listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write.
I am not afraid to think it or to say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins
sent me on the letter, and wrote himself oh, so kindly. I am to leave
in the morning and to go over to Jonathan, and to help nurse him if
necessary, and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad
thing if we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good
Sister’s letter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies.
It is of Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart.
My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one
change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I
send for it, for it may be that.... I must write no more; I must keep it
to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched
must comfort me till we meet.


_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wilhelmina Murray._

“_12 August._

“Dear Madam,--

“I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all his work is completed. He will require some few
weeks’ rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall
not be wanting for help.

    “Believe me,
    “Yours, with sympathy and all blessings,
    “/Sister Agatha./

“P.S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite
him of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an illness
as his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburgh, and the guard
was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the farthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

“Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for
safety’s sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many happy years for you both.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o’clock he began to get excited and to sniff about as a dog does
when setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my
interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to
the attendant, and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he
was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

“I don’t want to talk to you: you don’t count now; the Master is at
hand.”

The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which
has seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man
with homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The
combination is a dreadful one. At nine o’clock I visited him myself. His
attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an Omnipotent being. How these madmen give themselves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought
I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which never failed to excite his
attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

“Bother them all! I don’t care a pin about them.”

“What?” I said. “You don’t mean to tell me that you don’t care about
spiders?” (Spiders at present are his hobby, and the note-book is
filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered
enigmatically:--

“The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes
that are filled.”

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don’t sleep at once, chloral,
the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O·H_{2}O! I must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought
of Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had lain
tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield
had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting
out of the building by the door. He is a bulky man, and couldn’t get
through the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet
foremost, and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt.
The attendant told me the patient had gone to the left and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

I ran back at once, and told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our
friend might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the
wall, dropped down on the other side. I could see Renfield’s figure
just disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him.
On the far side of the house I found him pressed close against the old
iron-bound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic when the fit of escaping is
upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not take
note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the
more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I
heard him say:--

“I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?”

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong, and he was more like a wild beast than a man.
I never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn’t get free from the strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he’s chained to the wall in the padded
room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

“I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!”

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.




CHAPTER IX.

_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._


_“Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the train on here. I
feel I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I knew I
was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some nursing,
I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one, oh,
so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out of
his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face
has vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not remember
anything that has happened to him for a long time past. At least, he
wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some terrible
shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try to
recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved
about, added: ‘I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.’ I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of
_my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He is waking! ... When he woke he asked me for
his coat, as he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister
Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that amongst them was his
note-book, and was going to ask him to let me look at it--for I knew
then that I might find some clue to his trouble--but I suppose he must
have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, saying
he wanted to be quite alone for a moment. Then he called me back, and
when I came he had his hand over the note-book, and he said to me very
solemnly:--

“‘Wilhelmina’--I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--‘you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be
no secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want
to know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.’ For,
my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. ‘Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is
the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.’ He fell
back, exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

“She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission
church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

“Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his ‘I will’ firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even these
words seemed to choke me. The dear Sisters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the
chaplain and the Sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy,
it is the first time I have written the words ‘my husband’--left me
alone with my husband, I took the book from under his pillow, and
wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue
ribbon which was wound round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with
sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it
and showed it to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and
then it would be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that
we trusted each other; that I would never open it unless it were for his
own dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took my hand
in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife’s_ hand,
and said that it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that
he would go through all the past again to win it, if need be. The poor
dear meant to have said a part of the past; but he cannot think of time
yet, and I shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month,
but the year.

“Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I had nothing to give him
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

“Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because
it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear
to me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came
from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. I want you to see
now, and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me;
so that in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am. My
dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day
of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
always as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is waking--I must attend to my husband!

    “Your ever-loving
    “/Mina Harker./”


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

“_Whitby, 30 August._

“My dearest Mina,--

“Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. I wish you could be coming home soon enough
to stay with us here. This strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it
has quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here. We have
such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells me_ that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn’t love me
more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from your loving

“/Lucy./

“P.S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear.

“P.P.S.--We are to be married on 28 September.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary_

_20 August._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then
one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: “Now I can wait; now I can wait.” The attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had
gone from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I
might almost say, “cringing”--softness. I was satisfied with his
present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants
hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a
strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust,
for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking
furtively at them:--

“They think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!”

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same
I do not follow his thought. Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: “I don’t take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait.”

After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and then he began to get uneasy, and at length
violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so
that he swooned into a sort of coma.

... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day, then
quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the
cause. It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came
and went. Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad
ones. He escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with
it. We shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case
they are required....

_23 August._--“The unexpected always happens.” How well Disraeli knew
life! Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements went for naught. At any rate, we have proved one
thing: that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bond for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. The poor soul’s
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!
The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped.

_Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. Then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again we went into the ground of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then he suddenly grew
calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught
the patient’s eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

“You needn’t tie me; I shall go quietly!” Without trouble we came back
to the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_Lucy Westenra’s Diary._

_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things
down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and horrid to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn’t the spirit to be cheerful. I wonder if I
could sleep in mother’s room to-night. I shall make an excuse and try.

_25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my
proposal. She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when
the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been
falling asleep. There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the
window, but I did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I
must then have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember
them. This morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my
throat pains me. It must be something wrong with my lungs, for I don’t
seem ever to get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes,
or else I know he will be miserable to see me so.


_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._

“_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._

“My dear Jack,--

“I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. I have
asked her if there is any cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for
to disturb the poor lady’s mind about her daughter in her present state
of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her
doom is spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it
yet. I am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl’s mind.
I am almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a
pang. I told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred
at first--I know why, old fellow--she finally consented. It will be a
painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at
Hillingham tomorrow, two o’clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together. I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

“/Arthur./”


_Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._

“_1 September._

“Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully
by to-night’s post to Ring. Wire me if necessary.”

_Letter from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._

“_2 September._

“My dear old fellow,--

“With regard to Miss Westenra’s health, I hasten to let you know at
once that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any
malady that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means satisfied
with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I
saw her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have
done and propose doing.

“I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was trying all she
knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have
no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there
is. We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful,
we got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

“‘I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.’ I reminded her
that a doctor’s confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. ‘Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not care for
myself, but all for him!’ So I am quite free.

“I could easily see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not
see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to
test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff
a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It
was a slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I
secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite
satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be something
mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her,
but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child
she used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came
back, and that once she walked out in the night and went to the East
Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the
habit has not returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing
I know of; I have written to my old friend and master, Professor Van
Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any
one in the world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that
all things were to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you
are and your relations to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fellow, is only
in obedience to your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do
anything I can for her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me
for a personal reason. So, no matter on what ground he comes, we must
accept his wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because
he knows what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a
philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists
of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with
an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and
the kindest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for
the noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy.
I tell you these facts that you may know why I have such confidence
in him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

“Yours always,

“/John Seward./”


_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M.D., D.Ph., D.Litt., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

“_2 September._

“My good Friend,--

“When I have received your letter I am already coming to you. By good
fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who
have trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who
have trusted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he
holds dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound
so swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on tomorrow, for it is likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John.

“/Van Helsing./”


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

“_3 September._

“My dear Art,--

“Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy’s discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very careful examination
of the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he said: ‘You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.’ I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any further clue. You must
not be angry with him, Art, because his very reticence means that all
his brains are working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when
the time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account
of our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for
_The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the
smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. In any case I am to have a letter.

“Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to the Professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat
of all things except ourselves and diseases, and with such an infinite
geniality that I could see poor Lucy’s pretence of animation merge into
reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

“‘My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are much
beloved. That is much, my dear, even were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To them I say: “Pouf!”’ And he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: ‘But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How
can he’--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that
with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--‘know anything
of a young ladies? He has his madmans to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But
the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not
tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known
so many sorrows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send
him away to smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and I have
little talk all to ourselves.’ I took the hint, and strolled about,
and presently the Professor came to the window and called me in. He
looked grave, but said: ‘I have made careful examination, but there is
no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood
lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way
anæmic. I have asked her to send me her maid, that I may asked just
one or two questions, that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know
well what she will say. And yet there is cause; there is always cause
for everything. I must go back home and think. You must send to me
the telegram every day; and if there be cause I shall come again. The
disease--for not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the sweet
young dear, she interest me too. She charm me, and for her, if not for
you or disease, I come.’

“As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_4 September._--Zoophagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst, and that was yesterday at an unusual time.
Just before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The attendant
knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came
at a run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became
so violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now.
The attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were
really appalling; I found my hands full when I got in, attending to some
of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was
some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum,
and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show
something directly. I cannot quite understand it.

_Later._--Another change in my patient. At five o’clock I looked in
on him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to
be. He was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his
capture by making nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges
of padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be let back
to his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
humour him; so he is back in his room, with the window open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the windowsill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies. He is not now eating them, but putting them in a box,
as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find a
spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any clue
of his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not rise.
For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of far-away
voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

“All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do
it for myself!” Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
“Doctor, won’t you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me.”

“And the flies?” I said.

“Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like
it.” And there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, I suppose, any in the world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

_Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at
our own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I heard him yelling.
As his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it better than
in the morning. It was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the
window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. All this surprised me,
so I asked him: “Are you not going to keep flies any more?”

“No,” said he; “I am sick of all that rubbish!” He certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. Can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
We shall see.


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_4 September._--Patient still better to-day.”


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits, colour coming back.”


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you.”




CHAPTER X.

_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._


“_6 September._

“My dear Art,--

“My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a
bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it: Mrs.
Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted
me professionally about her. I took advantage of the opportunity,
and told her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist,
was coming to stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge
conjointly with myself; so now we can come and go without alarming
her unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in
Lucy’s weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but please God, we shall
come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste,

    “Yours ever,
    “/John Seward./”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liverpool Street was:--

“Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?”

“No,” I said. “I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram.
I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be.”

“Right, my friend,” he said, “quite right! Better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal
with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God’s madmen,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here.” He
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself
the same way. “I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall
unfold to you.”

“Why not now?” I asked. “It may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision.” He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

“My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: ‘Look! he’s good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.’” I did not see the application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: “The good husbandman tell
you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn,
and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there’s some promise; and I wait till the ear begins to swell.” He broke
off, for he evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on, and very
gravely:--

“You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master,
and I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that
knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practice, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
interest to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from failure, not from success!”

When I described Lucy’s symptoms--the same as before, but definitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, “the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade,” as he once called, in one of his lectures,
the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown
in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from
some cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change
in her daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her.
It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body
an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil
that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper roots for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that
I saw again the hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy’s room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale;
the red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones
of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing’s face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. “My God!” he said; “this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart’s
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?”

“I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me.”

“Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared.”

I went downstairs with him and as we were going there was a knock at the
hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door,
and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in an
eager whisper:--

“Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming.” When first the Professor’s eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at any interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

“Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She
is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that.” For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. “You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help.”

“What can I do?” asked Arthur hoarsely. “Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her.” The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

“My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!”

“What shall I do?” There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostrils
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. “Come!”
he said. “You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John.” Arthur looked bewildered, and the
Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

“Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me”--here Arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--“but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!” Arthur turned to him
and said:--

“If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----”

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

“Good boy!” said Van Helsing. “In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!”

We all went up to Lucy’s room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

“Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. Yes.” She had made
the effort with success.

It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was
satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Then he added: “You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over the table. Friend John, help to me!” So neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing, turning to me, said:--

“He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it.”

Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed
the operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to
come back to poor Lucy’s cheeks, and through Arthur’s growing pallor the
joy of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy’s system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the Professor’s face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: “Do not stir an instant.
It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her.” When all was over I
could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

“The brave lover I think deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently.” And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient’s head. As he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seemed always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing’s
ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: “Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. Good-bye.”

When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; I could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Professor in a
whisper:--

“What do you make of that mark on her throat?”

“What do you make of it?”

“I have not seen it yet,” I answered, and then and there proceeded to
loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no sign
of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

“Well?” said Van Helsing.

“Well?” said I, “I can make nothing of it.” The Professor stood up.
“I must go back to Amsterdam to-night,” he said. “There are books and
things there which I want. You must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her.”

“Shall I have a nurse?” I asked.

“We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all
the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
possible. And then we may begin.”

“May begin?” I said. “What on earth do you mean?”

“We shall see!” he answered as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door, and said, with warning finger
held up:--

“Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were
good, and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences
of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs.
Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with
her she almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter’s
renewed strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the
night I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was apparent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once:--

“You do not want to go to sleep?”

“No; I am afraid.”

“Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for.”

“Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!”

“A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?”

“I don’t know; oh, I don’t know. And that is what is so terrible. All
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought.”

“But my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and I
can promise that nothing will happen.”

“Ah, I can trust you!” I seized the opportunity, and said: “I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once.”

“You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me! Then I will
sleep!” And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my
zoophagous patient. The report was good: he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and would join me early in the morning.

_9 September._--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and
my brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

“No sitting up to-night for you. You are worn-out. I am quite well
again; indeed, I am; and if there is to be any sitting up, it is I who
will sit up with you.” I would not argue the point, but went and had
my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence,
I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs and showed me a room next
her own, where a cosy fire was burning. “Now,” she said, “you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the
sofa, for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything
I shall call out, and you can come to me at once.” I could not but
acquiesce, for I was “dog-tired,” and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_Lucy Westenra’s Diary_

_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a
long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me. And
to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and within
call. Thank everybody for being so good to me! Thank God! Good-night,
Arthur.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_10 September._--I was conscious of the Professor’s hand on my head, and
started awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

“And how is our patient?”

“Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me,” I answered.

“Come, let us see,” he said. And together we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I
heard the Professor’s low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, “Gott in Himmel!” needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.

There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. “Quick!” he said. “Bring
the brandy.” I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
He wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

“It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have
to call on you yourself this time, friend John.” As he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion;
I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment’s delay, we began the operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one’s blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing
held up a warning finger. “Do not stir,” he said, “but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia.” He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
cheeks and lips. No man knows till he experiences it, what it is to feel
his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. “That will do,” he said. “Already?”
I remonstrated. “You took a great deal more from Art.” To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

“He is her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for others; and the present will suffice.”

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied
digital pressure to my own incision. I lay down, whilst I waited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine
for myself. As I was leaving the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

“Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!”

When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

“You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me.”

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement
at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering
over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and
how she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere
to show for it. I think I must have continued my wonder in my dreams,
for sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day; and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much as the day before. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

“We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. You are looking pale
yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!” As she spoke Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
“Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. Good-night.”

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing’s wish that either he or I should
sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the “foreign
gentleman.” I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps it was on Lucy’s account that their
devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen similar
instances of woman’s kindness. I got back here in time for a late
dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting for
sleep. It is coming.

_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the Professor. He opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

“These are for you, Miss Lucy,” he said.

“For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!”

“Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines.” Here
Lucy made a wry face. “Nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters
of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought
for in the Floridas, and find him all too late.”

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and
smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter and
half-disgust:--

“Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only common garlic.”

To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

“No trifling with me! I never jest! There is grim purpose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own.” Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: “Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. I only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flower. See, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;
and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem,
where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here.”

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The Professor’s
actions were certainly odd, and not to be found in any pharmacopœia
that I ever heard of. First, he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and
round the fireplace in the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently I said:--

“Well, Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit.”

“Perhaps I am!” he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. The last words he said to her were:--

“Take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door.”

“I promise,” said Lucy, “and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?”

As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

“To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my ‘spell’ which I have work. Ho! ho!”

He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
I felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




CHAPTER XI.

/Lucy Westenra’s Diary./


_12 September._--How good they all are to me! I quite love that dear
Dr. Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone tonight, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in the play, with “virgin crants and maiden
strewments.” I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night
everybody.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as
usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The
Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at
eight o’clock. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature’s
annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

“You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should disturb her.” The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

“Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working,” to
which she answered:--

“You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy’s state this
morning is due in part to me.”

“How do you mean, ma’am?” asked the Professor.

“Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did
not wake her. But the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away
and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure.”

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As
she had spoken, I watched the Professor’s face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. “God! God!
God!” he said. “What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such a way? This
poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!” Suddenly he
jumped to his feet. “Come,” he said, “come, we must see and act. Devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same.” He went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to Lucy’s room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards the
bed. This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the
same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

“As I expected,” he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his
which meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and
then began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet
another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised
the necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. “No!” he said. “To-day you must operate. I shall provide.
You are weakened already.” As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy’s room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright, and
seemingly not much the worse from her terrible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_Lucy Westenra’s Diary._

_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong
again that I hardly know myself. It is as if I had passed through
some long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful
sunshine and feel the fresh air of the morning around me. I have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant; and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back
to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,
however, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother’s sake, and dear Arthur’s, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something flapped almost angrily against
the window-panes.


“_The Pall Mall Gazette_,” _18 September._

THE ESCAPED WOLF.

/Perilous Adventure of our Interviewer./

_Interview with the Keeper in the Zoological Gardens._


After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
the words _Pall Mall Gazette_ as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the Zoological Gardens in which the wolf
department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the cottages
in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting
down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable
folk, elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoyed of
their hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty
comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called “business”
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

“Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You’ll excoose me
refoosin’ to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the
wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
I begins to arsk them questions.”

“How do you mean, ask them questions?” I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

“’Ittin’ of them over the ’ead with a pole is one way; scratchin’
of their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a
show-orf to their gals. I don’t so much mind the fust--the ’ittin’
with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they’ve
’ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin’. Mind you,” he added philosophically, “there’s a deal of
the same nature in us as in them there animiles. Here’s you a-comin’ and
arskin’ of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin’ arf-quid I’d ’a’ seen you blowed fust ’fore I’d
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I’d like you to
arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence,
did I tell yer to go to ’ell?”

“You did.”

“An’ when you said you’d report me for usin’ of obscene language, that
was ’itten’ me over the ’ead; but the ’arf-quid made that all right. I
weren’t a-goin’ to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my ’owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor’ love yer ’art, now
that the old ’ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an’ rinsed
me out with her bloomin’ old teapot, and I’ve lit up, you may scratch
my ears for all you’re worth, and won’t get even a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions. I know what yer a-comin’ at, that ’ere
escaped wolf.”

“Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how
it happened; and when I know the facts I’ll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will
end.”

“All right, guv’nor. This ’ere is about the ’ole story. That ’ere wolf
what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach’s, which we bought off him four year ago. He was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I’m more
surprised at ’im for wantin’ to get out nor any other animile in the
place. But, there, you can’t trust wolves no more nor women.”

“Don’t you mind him, sir!” broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. “’E’s
got mindin’ the animiles so long that blest if he ain’t like a old wolf
’isself! But there ain’t no ’arm in ’im.”

“Well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin’ yesterday when I first
hear any disturbance. I was makin’ up a litter in the monkey-house for
a young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin’ and ’owlin’ I
kem away straight. There was Bersicker a-tearin’ like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn’t much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a ’ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin’ through it. He
had a ’ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was ’im as they was hirritated at. He ’ad white
kid gloves on ’is ’ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:
‘Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.’

“‘Maybe it’s you,’ says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
’isself. He didn’t get angry, as I ’oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. ‘Oh no, they
wouldn’t like me,’ ’e says.

“‘Ow yes, they would,’ says I, a-imitatin’ of him. ‘They always like
a bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you ’as a
bagful.’

“Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin’ they
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn’t put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf’s ears too!

“‘Tyke care,’ says I. ‘Bersicker is quick.’

“‘Never mind,’ he says. ‘I’m used to ’em!’

“‘Are you in the business yourself?’ I says, tyking off my ’at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

“‘No,’ says he, ‘not exactly in the business, but I ’ave made pets of
several.’ And with that he lifts his ’at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Bersicker kep’ a-lookin’ arter ’im till ’e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner, and wouldn’t come hout the ’ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-’owling. There warn’t nothing for them to ’owl at.
There warn’t no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin’ a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the ’owling
stopped. Just before twelve o’clock I just took a look round afore
turnin’ in, an’, bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker’s
cage I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And
that’s all I know for certing.”

“Did any one else see anything?”

“One of our gard’ners was a-comin’ ’ome about that time from a ’armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin’ out through the gardin ’edges. At
least, so he says; but I don’t give much for it myself, for if he did
’e never said a word about it to his missis when ’e got ’ome, and it
was only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been
up all night a-huntin’ of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered
seein’ anything. My own belief was that the ’armony ’ad got into his
’ead.”

“Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the
wolf?”

“Well, sir,” he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, “I think I
can; but I don’t know as ’ow you’d be satisfied with the theory.”

“Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can’t hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?”

“Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that ’ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out.”

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke
I could see that it had done service before, and that the whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn’t cope in badinage
with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

“Now, Mr. Bilder, we’ll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you’ve told me
what you think will happen.”

“Right y’are, sir,” he said briskly. “Ye’ll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin’ of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on.”

“Well, I never!” said the old lady.

“My opinion is this: that ’ere wolf is a-’idin’ of, somewheres. The
gard’ner wot didn’t remember said he was a-gallopin’ northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don’t believe him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don’t gallop no more than dogs does, they not bein’ built that
way. Wolves is fine things in a story-book, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivvin’ somethin’ that’s more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor’ bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in ’im. This
one ain’t been used to fightin’ or even to providin’ for hisself, and
more like he’s somewhere round the Park a-’idin’ an’ a-shiverin’ of,
and, if he thinks at all, wonderin’ where he is to get his breakfast
from; or maybe he’s got down some area and is in a coal-cellar. My eye,
won’t some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining
at her out of the dark! If he can’t get food he’s bound to look for it,
and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher’s shop in time. If he
doesn’t, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin’ orf with a soldier, leavin’
of the hinfant in the perambulator--well then I shouldn’t be surprised
if the census is one babby the less. That’s all.”

I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against the window, and Mr. Bilder’s face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

“God bless me!” he said. “If there ain’t old Bersicker come back by
’isself!”

He went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder
nor his wife thought any more of the wolf than I should of a dog. The
animal itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood’s quondam friend, whilst seeking her
confidence in masquerade.

The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. The
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed London and set all the
children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort
of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

“There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn’t I say it all along? Here’s his head all cut and full of broken
glass. ’E’s been a-gettin’ over some bloomin’ wall or other. It’s a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This ’ere’s what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker.”

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the
fatted calf, and went off to report.

I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given
to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up
my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to
Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open,
and in rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. I was
thunder-struck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the Superintendent’s study is almost unknown. Without an instant’s
pause he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knife in his hand, and, as
I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was too
quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get my balance
he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he
could strike again, however, I got in my right, and he was sprawling
on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little
pool trickled on to the carpet. I saw that my friend was not intent on
further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary
eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the attendants rushed in,
and we turned our attention to him, his employment positively sickened
me. He was lying on his belly on the floor licking up, like a dog, the
blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured,
and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply
repeating over and over again: “The blood is the life! the blood is the
life!”

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present: I have lost too much
of late for my physical good, and the then prolonged strain of Lucy’s
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. I am over-excited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.


_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

“_17 September._--Do not fail to be at Hillingham to-night. If not
watching all the time, frequently visit to see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_18 September._--Just off for train to London. The arrival of Van
Helsing’s telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I
know by bitter experience what may happen in a night. Of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with
me, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy’s phonograph.


_Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that
no one may by chance get into any trouble through me. This is an exact
record of what took place tonight. I feel I am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the
doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after the
sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now
I know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in
the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep
would try to come when I did not want it; so, as I feared to be alone,
I opened my door and called out: “Is there anybody there?” There was no
answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again. Then
outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl like a dog’s, but more
fierce and deeper. I went to the window and looked out, but could see
nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its wings
against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determined not to
go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by
my moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She said to me
even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

“I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right.”

I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she
did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay
awhile and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms,
and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She
was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: “What is that?” I
tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I
could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while
there was the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after
there was a crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled
on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in,
and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great
gaunt grey wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a
sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her.
Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van
Helsing insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me.
For a second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a
strange and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over, as if
struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy
for a moment or two. The room and all round seemed to spin round. I
kept my eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and
a whole myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the
broken window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust
that travellers describe when there is a simoom in the desert. I tried
to stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother’s poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I remembered no more for a while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the
nightingale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. I called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me in the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear
mother’s breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn’t like to remove them, and, besides, I would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that
the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went
to the dining-room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,
and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother’s doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? What am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for
the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead!
I dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken window.

The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not
survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!




CHAPTER XII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_18 September._--I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked
gently and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to disturb Lucy
or her mother, and hoped to bring only a servant to the door. After a
while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer.
I cursed the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such
an hour--for it was now ten o’clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, and still without response. Hitherto I had blamed
only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds, of delay might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and I went round the house to try if I could to find by chance an entry
anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened
and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard
the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse’s feet. They stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

“Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you
not get my telegram?”

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his
telegram early in the morning and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

“Then I fear we are too late. God’s will be done!” With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: “Come. If there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now.”

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen
window. The Professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window.
I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them.
Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes
and opened the window. I helped the Professor in and followed him.
There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants’ rooms, which were
close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the
dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and I looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: “We can attend to them later.”
Then we ascended to Lucy’s room. For an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her
mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother’s bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching
poor Lucy’s breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

“It is not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring the brandy!”

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and
I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make
sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

“I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those
maids. Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard.
Make them get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly
as cold as that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do
anything more.”

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
women. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I was stern with
them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice
Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half-clad
as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath, and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock on the hall-door. One
of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come
with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.

I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly
earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

“If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon.” He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning
to be of some effect. Lucy’s heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing’s
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

“The first gain is ours! Check to the King!”

We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

“We must consult as to what is to be done,” he said as we descended the
stairs. In the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in,
he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened,
but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette
of death which the British woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing’s sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

“What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl’s life
won’t be worth an hour’s purchase. You are exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. What are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?”

“What’s the matter with me, anyhow?”

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quincey Morris. Van
Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and
a glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: “Quincey Morris!” and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

“What brought you here?” I cried as our hands met.

“I guess Art is the cause.”

He handed me a telegram:--

“Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--/Holmwood./”

“I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do.”

Van Helsing strode forward and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

“A brave man’s blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. You’re a man, and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against
us for all he’s worth, but God sends us men when we want them.”

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not the heart
to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock, and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. The Professor watched
whilst I went downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet
or two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the paper, saying only: “It dropped from Lucy’s breast when
we carried her to the bath.”

When I had read it, I stood looking at the Professor, and after a pause
asked him: “In God’s name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?” I was so bewildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

“Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is that you came to me to say?” This brought me back to fact, and I was
all myself again.

“I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let
us fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker.”

“Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the
more for it! Now go.”

In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

“When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?” I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at
her side. From his putting his finger to his lips, I gathered that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful,
or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he
said to me:--

“Jack Seward, I don’t want to shove myself in anywhere where I’ve no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that’s all past and gone, I
can’t help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is it that’s
wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. But this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?”

“That’s so,” I said, and he went on:--

“I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?”

“That’s so.”

“And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at
his own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so
quick since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of go
to grass all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires
had got at her in the night, and, what with his gorge and the vein left
open, there wasn’t enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to
put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first; is not that so?” As he
spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of
suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the
terrible mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His
very heart was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there
was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused
before answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
Professor wished kept secret, but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answered
in the same phrase: “That’s so.”

“And how long has this been going on?”

“About ten days.”

“Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn’t hold it.” Then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: “What took it
out?”

I shook my head. “That,” I said, “is the crux. Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits’ end. I can’t even hazard a guess.
There has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill.” Quincey held
out his hand. “Count me in,” he said. “You and the Dutchman will tell me
what to do, and I’ll do it.”

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy’s first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it
had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit
on Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked round the
room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put
her poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother’s death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. The Professor
and I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor
Lucy’s strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at the station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o’clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave
more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, Arthur was simply
choked with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had
passed, the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for
it, had grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was
possible were shortened. Arthur’s presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

It is now nearly one o’clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with
her. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering
this on Lucy’s phonograph. Until six o’clock they are to try to rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all.


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

_“17 September._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You
will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at Exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his own house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. After
dinner Mr. Hawkins said:--

“‘My dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.’ I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one.

“So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both
my bedroom and drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow
stone of the cathedral; and I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things
and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now
that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the
clients.

“How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for
a day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on
my shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He is beginning
to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by
the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a
sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his
usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent
as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust.
And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be
married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are
you to wear, and is it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all
about it, dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which
interests you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send
his ‘respectful duty,’ but I do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm of Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his ‘love’ instead. Goodbye, my dearest
Lucy, and all blessings on you.

    “Yours,
    “/Mina Harker./”


_Report from Patrick Hennessey, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.K.Q.CP.I., etc., etc.,
to John Seward, M.D._

“_20 September._

“My dear Sir,--

“In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions
of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield,
there is more to say. He has had another outbreak which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier’s cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped
at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner,
and saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the window of
Renfield’s room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to ‘shut up for
a foul-mouthed beggar,’ whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of place he had got to by saying: ‘Lor’ bless yer,
sir, I wouldn’t mind what was said to me in a bloomin’ madhouse. I pity
ye and the guv’nor for havin’ to live in the house with a wild beast
like that.’ Then he asked the way civilly enough, and I told him where
the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats and
curses and revilings from our man. I went down to see if I could make
out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a well-behaved
man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had ever occurred.
I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his
manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked
me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe that he was
completely oblivious of the affair. It was, I am sorry to say, however,
only another instance of his cunning, for within half an hour I heard of
him again. This time he had broken out through the window of his room,
and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow
me, and ran after him, for I feared he was intent on some mischief. My
fear was justified when I saw the same cart which had passed before
coming down the road, having on it some great wooden boxes. The men were
wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the face, as if with violent
exercise. Before I could get up to him the patient rushed at them, and
pulling one of them off the cart, began to knock his head against the
ground. If I had not seized him just at the moment I believe he would
have killed the man there and then. The other fellow jumped down and
struck him over the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was
a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but seized him also,
and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and fro as if we were
kittens. You know I am no light weight, and the others were both burly
men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we began to master
him, and the attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat on him, he
began to shout: ‘I’ll frustrate them! They shan’t rob me! they shan’t
murder me by inches! I’ll fight for my Lord and Master!’ and all sorts
of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable difficulty
that they got him back to the house and put him in the padded room. One
of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set it all
right; and he is going on well.

“The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary
state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their
labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same,
and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and
swore that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure
of meeting so ‘bloomin’ good a bloke’ as your correspondent. I took
their names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding’s Rents, King George’s Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Parley’s Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master’s Yard, Soho.

“I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

    “Believe me, dear Sir,
    “Yours faithfully,
    “/Patrick Hennessey./”


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

“_18 September._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love
him that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew
either father or mother, so that the dear old man’s death is a real blow
to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels
sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all
his life, and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left
him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond
the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says
the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous.
He begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in
_him_ helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the
grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too
hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature
which enabled him by our dear, good friend’s aid, to rise from clerk to
master in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of
its strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles
in the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some
one, for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to
Jonathan tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread
coming up to London, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,

    “Your loving
    “/Mina Harker./”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_20 September._--Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, and I would not care if I heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy’s mother
and Arthur’s father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. “Come, my child,” he said;
“come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort for each other, even though we do not speak, and even if
we sleep.” Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on
Lucy’s face, which lay on her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. She
lay quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as
it should be. I could see that the Professor had carried out in this
room, as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of
the window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy’s neck, over the silk
handkerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moonlight,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every
now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back to my
seat I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to be
with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had
hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that the moment
she became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. It was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking, and repeated both actions many times.

At six o’clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy’s face
I could hear the hissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: “Draw up the blind; I want light!” Then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching Lucy’s, examined her carefully. He
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat.
As he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, “Mein
Gott!” as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked too,
and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.

The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

“She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him.”

I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that
Lucy was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with
his hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his hands buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. “Come,” I
said, “my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude; it will be best
and easiest for _her_.”

When we came into Lucy’s room I could see that Van Helsing had, with his
usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything
look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy’s hair, so that
it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came into the
room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:--

“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am glad you have come!” He was stooping to kiss
her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. “No,” he whispered, “not yet!
Hold her hand; it will comfort her more.”

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. Then
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child’s.

And then insensibly there came the strange change which I had noticed in
the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft voluptuous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!” Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

“Not for your life!” he said; “not for your living soul and hers!” And
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and he stood silent, waiting.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm
as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing’s great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. “My true friend,” she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, “My true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!”

“I swear it!” said he solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. Then he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: “Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once.”

Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

Lucy’s eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took
Arthur’s arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy’s breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

“It is all over,” said Van Helsing. “She is dead!”

I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where
he sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy,
and his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    “We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died.”

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

“Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!”

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

“Not so! alas! not so. It is only the beginning!”

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

“We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see.”




CHAPTER XIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._


The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and
her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

“She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It’s quite a privilege to
attend on her. It’s not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!”

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible
from the disordered state of things in the household. There were no
relatives at hand; and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend
at his father’s funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should
have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it
upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over
Lucy’s papers himself. I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

“I know; I know. You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. But
this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such
as this.”

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in Lucy’s breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

“When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy’s old room all night, and I myself
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers.”

I went on with my part of the work, and in another half-hour had found
the name and address of Mrs. Westenra’s solicitor and had written to
him. All the poor lady’s papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

“Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to
you.”

“Have you got what you looked for?” I asked, to which he replied:--

“I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, I shall use some.”

When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--

“And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. Alas!”

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over
and turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us,
the tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All
Lucy’s loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had
passed, instead of leaving traces of “decay’s effacing fingers,” had but
restored the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes
that I was looking at a corpse.

The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: “Remain till I
return,” and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic
from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little golden crucifix, and
placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

“To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives.”

“Must we make an autopsy?” I asked.

“Yes, and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen
with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that
make the rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend John,
that you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his father’s funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation; and then replace
all, so that none know, save we alone.”

“But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body
without need? And if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and
nothing to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it is monstrous.”

For answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

“Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I believe in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!

“Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is
not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart, and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!” He paused
a moment, and went on solemnly: “Friend John, there are strange and
terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?”

I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where Lucy
lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van
Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came over to my bedside and
said:--

“You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it.”

“Why not?” I asked. For his solemnity of the night before had greatly
impressed me.

“Because,” he said sternly, “it is too late--or too early. See!” Here he
held up the little golden crucifix. “This was stolen in the night.”

“How stolen,” I asked in wonder, “since you have it now?”

“Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the
woman who robbed the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did, and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait.”

He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.
Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy’s father which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

“Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. Indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry
out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept.
We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred
we should have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our
judgment. Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other
form of disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of
her wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have
come into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived
her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have
been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case, Lord
Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the
world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon
their just rights for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger.
I assure you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly
rejoiced.”

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy was an object-lesson
in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort
to us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was expected at five o’clock,
so a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods,
and there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits
at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity, and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as
I felt he would like to be quite alone with her; but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

“You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don’t know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can’t think yet....”

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

“Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do? The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for.”

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man’s
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said
softly to him:--

“Come and look at her.”

Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

“Jack, is she really dead?”

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer
than I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in
his and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker’s
men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When
he came out of the room again I told him of Arthur’s question, and he
replied:--

“I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!”

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time, but
when we had lit our cigars he said:--

“Lord----;” but Arthur interrupted him:--

“No, no, not that, for God’s sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so
recent.”

The Professor answered very sweetly:--

“I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
‘Mr.,’ and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
Arthur.”

Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man’s warmly.

“Call me what you will,” he said. “I hope I may always have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
your goodness to my poor dear.” He paused a moment, and went on: “I know
that she understood your goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember”--the
Professor nodded--“you must forgive me.”

He answered with a grave kindness:--

“I know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And there may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others, and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to protect.”

“And, indeed, indeed, sir,” said Arthur warmly, “I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack’s friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like.”

The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

“May I ask you something now?”

“Certainly.”

“You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?”

“No, poor dear; I never thought of it.”

“And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will.
I want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy’s papers and
letters. Believe me, it is no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It’s a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy’s sake?”

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes.”

The old Professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

“And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!”

I slept on a sofa in Arthur’s room that night. Van Helsing did not go
to bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between them, in Whitby and all the world before me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and
Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask
me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter,
his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the
President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, taking a ’bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the Row for a while,
so we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you can’t go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without
the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and
he was my husband, and we didn’t know anybody who saw us--and we didn’t
care if they did--so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cartwheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Giuliano’s
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: “My God!” I am always anxious about Jonathan, for
I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty
girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal’s.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he would notice. I
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was so disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking
that I knew as much about it as he did: “Do you see who it is?”

“No, dear,” I said; “I don’t know him; who is it?” His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:--

“It is the man himself!”

The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him, he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

“I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this
be so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew!” He was
distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes’ staring at nothing, Jonathan’s eyes closed, and
he went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought
it was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

“Why, Mina, have I been asleep? Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we’ll have a cup of tea somewhere.” He had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all
that this episode had reminded him of. I don’t like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I
must open that parcel and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, forgive me if I do wrong but it is for your own dear sake.

_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he
may be:--

“You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day.”

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to
have lost such sweetness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_22 September._--It is all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow is Quincey! I believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy’s death as
any of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral Viking. If
America can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the
world indeed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to
his journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which
can only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he
says he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor
old fellow! I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down
even his iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could
see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over,
we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his
part in the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy’s
veins; I could see Van Helsing’s face grow white and purple by turns.
Arthur was saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really
married, and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said
a word of the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and
Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on
here. The moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular
fit of hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and
insisted that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under
very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried and I had to draw
down the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he
cried till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a
woman does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the
circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mysterious. He said:--

“Ah, you don’t comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just
the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door
and say, ‘May I come in?’ is not the true laughter. No! he is a king,
and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time
of suitability. He say: ‘I am here.’ Behold, in example, I grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
sufferers want that she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her
coffin and say, ‘Thud! thud!’ to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet
even at such moment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my
ear, ‘Here I am! Here I am!’ till the blood come dance back and bring
some of the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend
John, it is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and
woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance
to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard,
and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that
he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John,
that he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes
drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come;
and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the
strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be.”

I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as
I did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As
he answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

“Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded
with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered
if she were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that
lonely churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the
mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going
‘Toll! toll! toll!’ so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all us with the bowed head. And all
for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?”

“Well, for the life of me, Professor,” I said, “I can’t see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. But even if the burial service was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking.”

“Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?”

“Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him.”

“Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church’s law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist.”

“I don’t see where the joke comes in there either!” I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

“Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me the most of all.”

I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

“Because I know!”

And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
London; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin
another. If I do, or if I ever open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

“/Finis./”


_The “Westminster Gazette,” 25 September._

/A Hampstead Mystery./

The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to the writers of headlines as “The Kensington Horror,” or
“The Stabbing Woman,” or “The Woman in Black.” During the past two
or three days several cases have occurred of young children straying
from home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath.
In all these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a “bloofer lady.” It has always been late
in the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the
children have not been found until early in the following morning. It
is generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child
missed gave as his reason for being away that a “bloofer lady” had
asked him to come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and
used it as occasion served. This is the more natural as the favourite
game of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles.
A correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending
to be the “bloofer lady” is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing
the reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that the “bloofer lady” should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely
says that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as
some of these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
themselves--to be.

There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some
of the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might
be made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. The police of the division have been
instructed to keep a sharp lookout for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


_“The Westminster Gazette,” 25 September._

_Extra Special._

THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

/Another Child Injured./

_The “Bloofer Lady.”_

We have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at
the Shooter’s Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common
story to tell of being lured away by the “bloofer lady.”




CHAPTER XIV.

/Mina Harker’s Journal./


_23 September._--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the
responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. My household work is done, so I shall take his foreign journal,
and lock myself up in my room and read it....

_24 September._--I hadn’t the heart to write last night; that terrible
record of Jonathan’s upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
terrible things; or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that
man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow!
I suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on
our wedding-day he said: “Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go
back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane.” There seems
to be through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count
was coming to London.... “If it should be, and he came to London, with
its teeming millions.” ... There may be a solemn duty; and if it come
we must not shrink from it.... I shall be prepared. I shall get my
typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready
for other eyes if required. And if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am
ready, poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never
let him be troubled or worried with it all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.


_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

    “_24 September._
    (_Confidence._)

“Dear Madam,--

“I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
send to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra’s death. By the kindness of
Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I
am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I
find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and
how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me.
It is for others’ good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift
much and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know.
May it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am a friend of Dr. John
Seward and of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must keep
it private for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you
at once if you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I
implore your pardon, madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy, and
know how good you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if
it may be, enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon, and
forgive me.

“/Van Helsing./”


_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

“_25 September._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

“/Wilhelmina Harker./”


/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect
it will throw some light upon Jonathan’s sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason for his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the
real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of
course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear, and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of
her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew all about it;
and now he wants me to tell him about it, so that he may understand. I
hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra; I should
never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even a negative one,
brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing will not
blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I
cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been parted since our marriage. I do
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o’clock and the doctor will be here soon
now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan’s journal unless he asks me. I am
so glad I have typewritten out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how
it all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it
be all possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan’s
journal first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor,
poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God all
this may not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it
may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and
awful in its consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears
and brain did not deceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that
it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no
matter which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be
a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur’s friend and Dr.
Seward’s, and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he is good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes tomorrow I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and then, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan’s
friend on “The Exeter News” told him that memory was everything in
such work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare
interview; I shall try to record it _verbatim_.

It was half-past two o’clock when the knock came. I took my courage
_à deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
announced “Dr. Van Helsing.”

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium height,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy eyebrows come down and
the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first
almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide
apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble
over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes
are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man’s
moods. He said to me:--

“Mrs. Harker, is it not?” I bowed assent.

“That was Miss Mina Murray?” Again I assented.

“It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come.”

“Sir,” I said, “you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra.” And I held out my hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

“Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----” He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

“I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Madam Mina; it was begun after you left, and was made in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you remember.”

“I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it.”

“Ah, then you have a good memory for facts, for details? It is not
always so with young ladies.”

“No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you
if you like.”

“Oh, Madam Mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour.” I
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--I suppose it
is some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

“May I read it?”

“If you wish,” I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
the instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

“Oh, you so clever woman!” he said. “I long knew that Mr. Jonathan was
a man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for
me? Alas! I know not the shorthand.” By this time my little joke was
over, and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from my
work-basket and handed it to him.

“Forgive me,” I said: “I could not help it; but I had been thinking
that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might
not have to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you.”

He took it, and his eyes glistened. “You are so good,” he said. “And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read.”

“By all means,” I said, “read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat.” He bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers,
whilst I went to see after lunch, chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back I found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

“Oh, Madam Mina,” he said, “how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light; and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Madam”--he said this very solemnly--“if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
your husband will be blessed in you.”

“But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me.”

“Not know you--I, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and
women; I, who have made my speciality the brain and all that belongs
to him and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that
you have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in
every line. I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels’ eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your
husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone,
and is he strong and hearty?” I saw here an opening to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--

“He has almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr.
Hawkins’s death.” He interrupted:--

“Oh yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters.” I went
on:--

“I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock.”

“A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
shock was it?”

“He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever.” And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I
was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

“My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here
by my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. Believe me, then, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what
I am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my
study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
Husband Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like
not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must
eat and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think over what you have told me, and when I have thought I will
ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of husband
Jonathan’s trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now;
afterwards you shall tell me all.”

After lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

“And now tell me all about him.” When it came to speaking to this great,
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to
go on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and I
trusted him, so I said:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things.” He reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

“Oh, my dear, if you only knew how strange is the matter regarding which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one’s belief, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane.”

“Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off
my mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is
long, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and
Jonathan’s. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and
judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think.”

“I promise,” he said as I gave him the papers; “I shall in the morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may.”

“Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3.34 train, which
will leave you at Paddington before eight.” He was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains offhand, but he does not know that I have made
up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don’t know what.


_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

“_25 September, 6 o’clock._

“Dear Madam Mina,--

“I have read your husband’s so wonderful diary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my
life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and you there is
no dread. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of
men, that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to
that room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

    “Yours the most faithful,
    “/Abraham Van Helsing./”


_Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._


“_25 September_, 6.30 _p.m._

“My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

“A thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are
in the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be
really in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing,
had a wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6.25 to-night
from Launceston and will be here at 10.18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast, at eight o’clock, if this be not too early for you? You
can get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10.30 train, which will
bring you to Paddington by 2.35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it
that, if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

    “Believe me,
    “Your faithful and grateful friend,
    “/Mina Harker./”


/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing’s visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she had been
about me. She showed me in the doctor’s letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where
he was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

“But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock.” It
was so funny to hear my wife called “Madam Mina” by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

“I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already.”

“And how?”

“By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the
evidence of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
myself. Doctor, you don’t know what it is to doubt everything, even
yourself. No, you don’t; you couldn’t with eyebrows like yours.” He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

“So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife.” I
would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded
and stood silent.

“She is one of God’s women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men
and other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the
knowing of others; but I have seen your true self since last night. You
will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives.”

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

“And now,” he said, “may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do.”

“Look here, sir,” I said, “does what you have to do concern the Count?”

“It does,” he said solemnly.

“Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10.30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundle of papers.
You can take them with you and read them in the train.”

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting he said:

“Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina
too.”

“We shall both come when you will,” I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers of the previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for
the train to start, he was turning them over. His eye suddenly seemed
to catch something in one of them, “The Westminster Gazette”--I knew
it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself: “Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!” I do not
think he remembered me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: “Love to Madam Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said “Finis,” and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he
had just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any
trouble to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from
it I gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is
with him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well
of good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows too,
but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He went to
Exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. To-day he came back, and
almost bounded into my room at about half-past five o’clock, and thrust
last night’s “Westminster Gazette” into my hand.

“What do you think of that?” he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but
he took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being
decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached
a passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. “Well?” he said.

“It is like poor Lucy’s.”

“And what do make of it?”

“Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured them.” I did not quite understand his answer:--

“That is true indirectly, but not directly.”

“How do you mean, Professor?” I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one’s spirits--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

“Tell me!” I said. “I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture.”

“Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as
to what poor Lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?”

“Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood.”

“And how the blood lost or waste?” I shook my head. He stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

“You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to
you. Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men’s
eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other
men have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to
explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do
not believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No?
Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in
hypnotism----”

“Yes,” I said. “Charcot has proved that pretty well.” He smiled as
he went on: “Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course
then you understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great
Charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought-reading. Let me tell you,
my friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science
which would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered
electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned as
wizards. There are always mysteries in life. Why was it that Methuselah
lived nine hundred years, and ‘Old Parr’ one hundred and sixty-nine,
and yet that poor Lucy, with four men’s blood in her poor veins, could
not live even one day? For, had she lived one more day, we could have
save her. Do you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know the
altogether of comparative anatomy, and can say wherefore the qualities
of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me why,
when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for
centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, that those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?”

“Good God, Professor!” I said, starting up. “Do you mean to tell me
that Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in
London in the nineteenth century?” He waved his hand for silence, and
went on:--

“Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and
the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then
men come and take away the unbroken seal, and that there lie the Indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?” Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature’s eccentricities and possible impossibilities that
my imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching
me some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam;
but he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object
of thought in mind all the time. But now I was without his help, yet I
wanted to follow him, so I said:--

“Professor, let me be your pet student again. Tell me the thesis, so
that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. I feel like a novice blundering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where I am going.”

“That is good image,” he said. “Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is
this: I want you to believe.”

“To believe what?”

“To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once
of an American who so defined faith: ‘that which enables us to believe
things which we know to be untrue.’ For one, I follow that man. He meant
that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of truth check
the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway truck. We get
the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value him; but all the
same we must not let him think himself all the truth in the universe.”

“Then you want me not to let some previous conviction injure the
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
your lesson aright?”

“Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. You think then that those so small holes in the children’s
throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?”

“I suppose so.” He stood up and said solemnly:--

“Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse,
far, far worse.”

“In God’s name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?” I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

“They were made by Miss Lucy!”




CHAPTER XV.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._


For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?” He raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. “Would I were!” he
said. “Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all
my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!”

“Forgive me,” said I. He went on:--

“My friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in the breaking to
you, for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do
not expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the ‘no’ of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dare you come with me?”

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

    “And prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

“The logic is simple, no madman’s logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty fog. If it be not true, then proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come,
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hospital. Dr. Vincent of the North Hospital, where the papers say
the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were in
class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will
not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to
learn. And then----”

“And then?” He took a key from his pocket and held it up. “And then we
spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This
is the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give
to Arthur.” My heart sank within me, for I felt that there were some
fearful ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up
what heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon
was passing....

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food,
and altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from
its throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy’s throat. They were smaller,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what
he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of
some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to
think that it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of London. “Out of so many harmless ones,” he said, “there may
be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
the Zoological Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days
ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction.
For a week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood
on the Heath and in every alley in the place until this ‘bloofer lady’
scare came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them.
Even this poor little mite, when he woke up today, asked the nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the ‘bloofer lady.’”

“I hope,” said Van Helsing, “that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?”

“Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed.”

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

“There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way.”

We dined at “Jack Straw’s Castle” along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o’clock we
started from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for
he went on unhesitatingly; but as for me, I was in quite a mix-up
as to locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people,
till at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol
of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached
the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little
difficulty--for it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange
to us--we found the Westenra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened
the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously,
motioned me to precede him. There was a delicious irony in the offer,
in the courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring
one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a match-box and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the daytime, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of Lucy’s coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

“What are you going to do?” I asked.

“To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced.” Straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: “You shall see,” and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point
of the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side
of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking
the edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty.

It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. “Are you satisfied now, friend
John?” he asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
I answered him:

“I am satisfied that Lucy’s body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing.”

“And what is that, friend John?”

“That it is not there.”

“That is good logic,” he said, “so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--account for it not being there?”

“Perhaps a body-snatcher,” I suggested. “Some of the undertaker’s people
may have stolen it.” I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. “Ah
well!” he said, “we must have more proof. Come with me.”

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. We opened the door, and went out. Behind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, saying: “Will you keep it? You had
better be assured.” I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I motioned him to keep it. “A key is nothing,” I said;
“there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind.” He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he could watch
at the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my
sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust; so altogether I had
a dreary, miserable time.

Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
Professor’s side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then
I too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs,
and I stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far
off an early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked the pathway to the church, a white, dim
figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the
rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

“Are you satisfied now?”

“No,” I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

“Do you not see the child?”

“Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?” I
asked.

“We shall see,” said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child’s throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

“Was I right?” I asked triumphantly.

“We were just in time,” said the Professor thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during the night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman’s heavy tramp,
and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw
it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of
astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near the “Spaniards,” and drove to town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours’
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall
go with him on another expedition.

_27 September._--It was two o’clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we
saw the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe
till morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that we should
not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense
of the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed
out of place; and I realised distinctly the perils of the law which
we were incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all
so useless. Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a
woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of
folly to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and
again courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome
as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy’s coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I
could not believe that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

“Is this a juggle?” I said to him.

“Are you convinced now?” said the Professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

“See,” he went on, “see, they are even sharper than before. With this
and this”--and he touched one of the canine teeth and that below
it--“the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend
John?” Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which I was even at the moment ashamed, I said:--

“She may have been placed here since last night.”

“Indeed? That is so, and by whom?”

“I do not know. Some one has done it.”

“And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so.” I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. He was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--

“Here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded: here is
some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when
the Un-Dead sleep at home”--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was “home”--“their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that-was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep.” This turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing’s
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

“Ah, you believe now?”

I answered: “Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?”

“I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body.” It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling
was not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

“I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If
I did simply follow my inclining I would do now, at this moment, what
is to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that
are thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have
to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the
wounds on Lucy’s throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child’s
at the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week after she die--if you know of this and know of
the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect
Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when
I took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always.
Yet he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and, again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he
must pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and
see that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this
churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to the
Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of America that gave his blood. Later
we shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
there dine, for I must be back here before the sun set.”

So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel, directed
to John Seward, M.D._

(Not delivered.)


“_27 September._

“Friend John,--

“I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall
not leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more
eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out;
they may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the Un-Dead is
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,
and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy, or from her, I have no fear: but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy’s life, and
we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf
and I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he
shall find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. But it may be
that he will not attempt the place. There is no reason why he should;
his hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
Un-Dead woman sleep, and one old man watch.

“Therefore I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
though it, so that the world may rest from him.

“If it be so, farewell.

“/Van Helsing./”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night’s sleep will do for
one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing’s monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. Is it possible that
the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some
light on the mystery.

_29 September, morning_.... Last night, at a little before ten o’clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing’s room; he told us all what he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, “for,” he said, “there is a grave duty to be
done there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?” This query was
directly addressed to Lord Godalming.

“I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. Quincey and I talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself
that I’m about up a tree as to any meaning about anything.”

“Me, too,” said Quincey Morris laconically.

“Oh,” said the Professor, “then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin.”

It was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

“I want your permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for
a time--I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything.”

“That’s frank anyhow,” broke in Quincey. “I’ll answer for the Professor.
I don’t quite see his drift, but I swear he’s honest; and that’s good
enough for me.”

“I thank you, sir,” said Van Helsing proudly. “I have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me.” He held out a hand, which Quincey took.

Then Arthur spoke out:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, I don’t quite like to ‘buy a pig in a poke,’ as they
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise.
If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though, for the life of me, I
cannot understand what you are driving at.”

“I accept your limitation,” said Van Helsing, “and all I ask of you
is that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will
first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations.”

“Agreed!” said Arthur; “that is only fair. And now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?”

“I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
Kingstead.”

Arthur’s face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

“Where poor Lucy is buried?” The Professor bowed. Arthur went on: “And
when there?”

“To enter the tomb!” Arthur stood up.

“Professor, are you in earnest; or is it some monstrous joke? Pardon
me, I see that you are in earnest.” He sat down again, but I could see
that he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was
silence until he asked again:--

“And when in the tomb?”

“To open the coffin.”

“This is too much!” he said, angrily rising again. “I am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----” He fairly choked with indignation. The
Professor looked pityingly at him.

“If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend,” he said, “God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!”

Arthur looked up with set, white face and said:--

“Take care, sir, take care!”

“Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?” said Van Helsing.
“And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go
on?”

“That’s fair enough,” broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

“Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----”

Arthur jumped to his feet.

“Good God!” he cried. “What do you mean? Has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?” He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

“I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no
further than to say that she might be Un-Dead.”

“Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?”

“There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?”

“Heavens and earth, no!” cried Arthur in a storm of passion. “Not for
the wide world will I consent to any mutilation of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things,
or am I mad that listen to them? Don’t dare to think more of such a
desecration; I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do
it!”

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

“My Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a
duty to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask
you now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if
when later I make the same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow of your Lordship’s wishes, I shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will.” His voice broke a little, and he went on with an accent full
of pity:--

“But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you
will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to
save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so much
of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from my own land to
do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and then
to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I am
ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you gave:
the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her lover,
but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her my nights and
days--before death, after death; and if my death can do her good even
now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely.” He said
this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected by it.
He took the old man’s hand and said in a broken voice:--

“Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I
will go with you and wait.”




CHAPTER XVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._


It was just a quarter before twelve o’clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark, with occasional
gleams of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded
across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing
slightly in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb
I looked well at Arthur, for I feared that the proximity to a place
laden with so sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself
well. I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding tended in some
way a counteractent to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door, and
seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the
difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of us followed, and he
closed the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin.
Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

“You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?”

“It was.” The Professor turned to the rest, saying:--

“You hear; and yet there is one who does not believe with me.” He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. He evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

The coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by
Quincey Morris:--

“Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn’t
ask such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn’t so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this your doing?”

“I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and
saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
daytime, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?”

“Yes.”

“That night we were just in time. One more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable
that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown I took away
my garlic and other things. And so it is we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So”--here he shut the dark slide of his lantern--“now to the outside.”
He opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror
of that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the
brief gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man’s life; how sweet it
was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay;
how humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and
to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city.
Each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and
was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning
of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again
to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing’s conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has
to stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug
of tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. He answered:--

“I am closing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter.”

“And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?” asked Quincey.
“Great Scott! Is this a game?”

“It is.”

“What is that which you are using?” This time the question was by
Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

“The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence.” It was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor’s, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it
was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself
been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet
I, who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress,
or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did
tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from
the Professor a keen “S-s-s-s!” He pointed; and far down the avenue
of yews we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held
something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a
ray of moonlight fell between the masses of driving clouds and showed in
startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of
the grave. We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we
saw to be a fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry,
such as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and
dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor’s warning hand, seen
by us as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked
the white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to
see clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as
ice, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features
of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of
the tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on Lucy’s face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous light that even
Van Helsing’s iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy’s eyes in form
and colour; but Lucy’s eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung
to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile, he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

“Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!”

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped as if
arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now
no quiver from Van Helsing’s iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again
by mortal eyes. The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to
throw out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the
folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa’s snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur:--

“Answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?”

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

“Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no horror
like this ever any more!” and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear
the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming
close to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the
sacred emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at the moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said:--

“Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock
the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home.” Coming close to Arthur,
he said:--

“My friend Arthur, you have had sore trial; but after, when you will
look back, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the
bitter waters, my child. By this time tomorrow, you will, please God,
have passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me.”

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o’clock we three--Arthur,
Quincey Morris, and myself--called for the Professor. It was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. We got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task, and the sexton, under the belief
that everyone had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we entered, closing
it behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and
also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their
own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient
to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy’s coffin we all
looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there
in all its death-beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, nothing
but loathing for the foul Thing which had taken Lucy’s shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur’s face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--

“Is this really Lucy’s body, or only a demon in her shape?”

“It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you shall see her
as she was, and is.”

She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there; the pointed
teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder
to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like
a devilish mockery of Lucy’s sweet purity. Van Helsing, in his
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame;
then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round
wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about three
feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and was
sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To
me, a doctor’s preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

“Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the Un-Dead become themselves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had
met that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last
night when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had
died, have become _nosferatu_, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and
would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with
horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun.
Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse;
but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood, and
by her power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood
with that so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the
tiny wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays
unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in the assimilation of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
To this I am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better
right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: ‘It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose’? Tell me if there be
such a one amongst us.”

We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

“My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!” Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

“Brave lad! A moment’s courage, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time.”

“Go on,” said Arthur hoarsely. “Tell me what I am to do.”

“Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. Then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in God’s name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love, and that the Un-Dead pass away.”

Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quincey and I followed as well as we
could. Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.

The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us courage, so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth ceased to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The
terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur’s hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. Great drops of sweat sprang out on his forehead, and
his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

There in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
there was there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur’s shoulder, and said to
him:--

“And now, Arthur, my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?”

The reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man’s hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

“Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace.” He put his hands on the Professor’s shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

“And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil’s Un-Dead. She is God’s true dead, whose soul is with Him!”

Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the
tomb; the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and
gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked the
door he gave the key to Arthur.

Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. There was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--

“Now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?”

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the
Professor as we moved off:--

“Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And then begins our great quest. But first
I shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to
dread. Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is
a terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare, we
must not draw back.”




CHAPTER XVII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._


When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

“Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--/Mina
Harker./”

The Professor was delighted. “Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina,” he said,
“pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your
house, friend John. You must meet her at the station. Telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared.”

When the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker’s diary at Whitby. “Take these,” he
said, “and study them well. When I have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need all
your faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day.
What is here told,” he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet
of papers as he spoke, “may be the beginning of the end to you and me
and many another; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk
the earth. Read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can
add in any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important.
You have kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes!
Then we shall go through all these together when that we meet.” He then
made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool
Street. I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen
minutes before the train came in.

The crowd melted away after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: “Dr. Seward, is it not?”

“And you are Mrs. Harker!” I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

“I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----” She stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for
it was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I
had sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a slight
shudder when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. So here I am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of looking
at the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open
before me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be careful not to frighten her. Here
she is!


/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_29 September._--After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr. Seward’s
study. At the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking
with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, “Come in,” I entered.

To my intense surprise, there was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much
interested.

“I hope I did not keep you waiting,” I said; “but I stayed at the door
as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you.”

“Oh,” he replied, with a smile, “I was only entering my diary.”

“Your diary?” I asked him in surprise.

“Yes,” he answered. “I keep it in this.” As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

“Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?”

“Certainly,” he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

“The fact is,” he began awkwardly, “I only keep my diary in it; and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----” He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

“You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I can know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very,
very dear to me.”

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

“Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!”

“Why not?” I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
At length he stammered out:--

“You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary.” Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he
said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the
naïveté of a child: “That’s quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!”
I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. “I gave myself away that
time!” he said. “But do you know that, although I have kept the diary
for months past, it never once struck me how I was going to find any
particular part of it in case I wanted to look it up?” By this time my
mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have
something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being,
and I said boldly:--

“Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on my
typewriter.” He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

“No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn’t let you know that terrible
story!”

Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on the great batch of typewriting
on the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his
thinking, followed their direction. As they saw the parcel he realised
my meaning.

“You do not know me,” I said. “When you have read those papers--my
own diary and my husband’s also, which I have typed--you will know me
better. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
expect you to trust me so far.”

He is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

“You are quite right. I did not trust you because I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
the only atonement in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the
meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things.” He carried the phonograph himself up
to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already....


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce
dinner, so I said: “She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour;”
and I went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker’s diary,
when she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes
were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to my heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

“I greatly fear I have distressed you.”

“Oh no, not distressed me,” she replied, “but I have been more touched
than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to almighty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out the
words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
I did.”

“No one need ever know, shall ever know,” I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

“Ah, but they must!”

“Must! But why?” I asked.

“Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy’s
death and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all the
knowledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the cylinders
which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know; but I
can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark mystery.
You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain point,
and I see already, though your diary only took me to 7 September, how
poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought out.
Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark.” She looked at me so appealingly, and at
the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. “You shall,” I said, “do as you
like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There are terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on the road to
poor Lucy’s death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and I will answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were
present.”


/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy’s death, and--and all that followed,
was done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not of
a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if
I had not known Jonathan’s experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn’t know what to believe, and so got out of
my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--

“Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything,
and I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell
them when they come.” He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace,
and I began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder.
I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had
done with all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward
went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had
finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel
too lonely whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; the world
seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I
left him I remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the Professor’s
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station
at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed
the files of “The Westminster Gazette” and “The Pall Mall Gazette,” and
took them to my room. I remember how much “The Dailygraph” and “The
Whitby Gazette,” of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand
the terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o’clock. He had got his
wife’s wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. If his journal be true--and
judging by one’s own wonderful experiences it must be--he is also a
man of great nerve. That going down to the vault a second time was
a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has
got the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the
carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his
wife’s typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here
he is....

Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be the
Count’s hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the
conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the
purchase of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had only had
them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies!
Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that
by dinner-time they will be able to show a whole connected narrative. He
thinks that in the meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has
been a sort of index to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see
this yet, but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good
thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have
found the dates otherwise....

I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands folded,
smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw.
I sat down and talked with him on a lot of subjects, all of which he
treated naturally. He then, of his own accord, spoke of going home, a
subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here.
In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I
believe that, had I not had the chat with Harker and read the letters
and the dates of his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for
him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious.
All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that his
instinct is satisfied as to the vampire’s ultimate triumph? Stay; he
is himself zoophagous, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door
of the deserted house he always spoke of “master.” This all seems
confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came away; my friend
is just a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too
deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came
away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the attendant
a hint to look closely after him, and to have a strait-waistcoat ready
in case of need.


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington’s
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power,
I thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as I wanted. It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the Count’s to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father’s house, where they had decided that I must
stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all
knew that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington
had ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of
boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which
I had seen on the Count’s table before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle
which might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being
carried out. To use an Americanism, he had “taken no chances,” and the
absolute accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled was simply
the logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it:
“Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes.”
Also the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both
of these I got copies. This was all the information Mr. Billington
could give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the
Customs officers, and the harbour-master. They had all something to say
of the strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in
local tradition; but no one could add to the simple description: “Fifty
cases of common earth.” I then saw the station-master, who kindly put
me in communication with the men who had actually received the boxes.
Their tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except
that the boxes were “main and mortal heavy,” and that shifting them
was dry work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there
wasn’t any gentleman “such-like as yourself, squire,” to show some sort
of appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form; another put in a
rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which
had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took
care before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach.

_30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a line
to his old companion the station-master at King’s Cross, so that when
I arrived there in the morning I was able to ask him about the arrival
of the boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper
officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was
compelled to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

From thence I went on to Carter Paterson’s central office, where I
met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King’s Cross
office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the
delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found the tally agreeing
exactly; the carriers’ men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity,
through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying at a
later period this beneficent evil, one of the men remarked:--

“That ’ere ’ouse, guv’nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but
it ain’t been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick
in the place that you might have slep’ on it without ’urtin’ of yer
bones; an’ the place was that neglected that yer might ’ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn’t never git out quick enough. Lor’, I
wouldn’t take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark.”

Having been in the house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived
at Whitby from Varna in the _Demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel of Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from Dr. Seward’s diary I fear.

I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them. By following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave
a face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear,
good Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night.
I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity
any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is
not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward’s account of poor Lucy’s
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one’s heart.

_Later._--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we
expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan
with him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for
it brought back all poor dear Lucy’s hopes of only a few months ago.
Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr.
Van Helsing, too, had been quite “blowing my trumpet,” as Mr. Morris
expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over,
and came to the conclusion that the best thing I could do would be to
post them in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward’s diary
that they had been at Lucy’s death--her real death--and that I need not
fear to betray any secret before the time. So I told them, as well as I
could, that I had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

“Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?”

I nodded, and he went on:--

“I don’t quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that
all I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. I
have had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man
humble to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor
Lucy----” Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands.
I could hear the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive
delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked
quietly out of the room. I suppose there is something in woman’s nature
that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings
on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his
manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down
on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and
took his hand. I hope he didn’t think it forward of me, and that if he
ever thinks of it afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I
wrong him; I _know_ he never will--he is too true a gentleman. I said to
him, for I could see that his heart was breaking:--

“I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won’t you let me be of some little service--for
Lucy’s sake?”

In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder, and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook
with emotion.

We women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt this big,
sorrowing man’s head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that
for days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had
been unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to the terrible circumstances with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. “I know now how I suffered,” he said,
as he dried his eyes, “but I do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy’s sake?”

“For dear Lucy’s sake,” I said as we clasped hands. “Ay, and for your
own sake,” he added, “for if a man’s esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring
to you a time when you need a man’s help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know.” He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--

“I promise.”

As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps. “How is Art?” he said. Then noticing
my red eyes, he went on: “Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him.”

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. I saw the
manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

“I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak.” He saw that I was in earnest, and
stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

“Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!” Then he went into the study to his friend.

“Little girl!”--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!




CHAPTER XVIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_30 September._--I got home at five o’clock, and found that Godalming
and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to
the carriers’ men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker
gave us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time
since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
finished, Mrs. Harker said:--

“Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!” She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: “Why?”

“She is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it,” I
answered. “Oh, very well,” he said: “let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up the place.” His method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: “Let the lady come in,” and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where
I could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

“Good evening, Mr. Renfield,” said she. “You see, I know you, for Dr.
Seward has told me of you.” He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

“You’re not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can’t be,
you know, for she’s dead.” Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

“Oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker.”

“Then what are you doing here?”

“My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward.”

“Then don’t stay.”

“But why not?” I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

“How did you know I wanted to marry any one?” His reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

“What an asinine question!”

“I don’t see that at all, Mr. Renfield,” said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

“You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is loved
and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of interest in
our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his household and
his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of them hardly
in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since I
myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but notice
that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates lean towards the
errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_.” I positively opened my
eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet lunatic--the most
pronounced of his type that I had ever met with--talking elemental
philosophy, and with the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if it
was Mrs. Harker’s presence which had touched some chord in his memory.
If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due to her unconscious
influence, she must have some rare gift or power.

We continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished,
for he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

“Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my
being put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to
take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion
I tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers
by the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of
his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, ‘For the
blood is the life.’ Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn’t that true,
doctor?” I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what I
ought to think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat
up his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch,
I saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told
Mrs. Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying
pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: “Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself,” to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

“Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!”

When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the boys behind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

“Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And
Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!”

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker’s suggestion; at
which the Professor interrupted me:--

“Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man’s brain--a brain that a
man should have were he much gifted--and woman’s heart. The good God
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things
to think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then
she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work,
and we go alone.” I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what
we had found in his absence: that the house which Dracula had bought was
the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. “Oh that we had known it before!” he said, “for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, ‘the milk
that is spilt cries not out afterwards,’ as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end.” Then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

“I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment.”

“Not up to this moment, Professor,” she said impulsively, “but up to
this morning.”

“But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it.”

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pocket, she
said:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in? It
is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. Must it go in?” The Professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

“It need not go in if you do not wish it; but pray that it may. It can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love.” She took it back with
another blush and a bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o’clock. The rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward’s study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o’clock, we unconsciously formed a sort
of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of the
table, to which Dr. Seward motioned him as he came into the room. He
made me sit next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary;
Jonathan sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward,
and Mr. Morris--Lord Godalming being next to the Professor, and Dr.
Seward in the centre. The Professor said:--

“I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers.” We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

“Then it were, I think good that I tell you something of the kind
of enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for
me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

“There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that
they exist. Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience,
the teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that
through long years I have trained myself to keep an open mind, I could
not have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. ‘See!
see! I prove; I prove.’ Alas! Had I known at the first what now I
know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared
to many of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must so work,
that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_
do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and
being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which
is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is
of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he
have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply,
the divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to
are for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil
in callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations,
appear at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to
him; he can, within his range, direct the elements: the storm, the fog,
the thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the
owl, and the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and
become small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are
we to begin our strife to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and
having found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a
terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make
the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win;
and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail
here, is not mere life or death. It is that we become as him; that we
henceforward become foul things of the night like him--without heart or
conscience, preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best.
To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to
us again? We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of
God’s sunshine; an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But we are
face to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say,
no; but then I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music, and his love, lie far behind. You others are
young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?”

Whilst he was speaking Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man’s hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman’s love to hear its music.

When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

“I answer for Mina and myself,” he said.

“Count me in, Professor,” said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

“I am with you,” said Lord Godalming, “for Lucy’s sake, if for no other
reason.”

Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up, and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

“Well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have resources of science; we are free
to act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours
equally. In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and
we are free to use them. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

“Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.

“All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do
not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and
death--nay of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied;
in the first place because we have to be--no other means is at our
control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and
superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest
for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us
would have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the
vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany
all over, in France, in India, even in the Chersonese; and in China,
so far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him
at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the
devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then,
we have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of
the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of
the time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of
the living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan
observe. He has the strength of many in his hand--witness again
Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the window at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at
the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship’s captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance
he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. He
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hair-breadth space at
the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from anything
or into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up
with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power
this, in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear
me through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is
even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his
cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to
obey some of nature’s laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere
at the first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to
come; though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as
does that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain
times can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the place whither
he is bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise
or sunset. These things are we told, and in this record of ours we
have proof by inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his
limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the
place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at
Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

“Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what
he has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won
his name against the Turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the
most cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the ‘land beyond
the forest.’ That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him
to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were,
says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions
who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One.
They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains
over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his
due. In the records are such words as ‘stregoica’--witch, ‘ordog,’ and
‘pokol’--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is
spoken of as ‘wampyr,’ which we all understand too well. There have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest.”

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. There was a little
pause, and then the Professor went on:--

“And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan
that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of these
boxes have been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be
to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the
latter, we must trace----”

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with
a bullet, which, ricocheting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the
window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris’s voice
without:--

“Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it.” A minute later he came in and said:--

“It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs.
Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly.
But the fact is that while the Professor was talking there came a big
bat and sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that I cannot stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art.”

“Did you hit it?” asked Dr. Van Helsing.

“I don’t know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood.” Without
saying any more he took his seat, and the Professor began to resume his
statement:--

“We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.

“And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night,
you no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are
men, and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are.”

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to
me good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their
safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

Mr. Morris resumed the discussion:--

“As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
another victim.”

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax,
with means to get into the house.

Manlike, they have told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary_

_1 October, 4 a.m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an urgent
message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see him at
once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me. I told
the messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in the morning; I
was busy just at the moment. The attendant added:--

“He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I
don’t know but what, if you don’t see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits.” I knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: “All right; I’ll go now;” and I asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my “patient.”

“Take me with you, friend John,” said the Professor. “His case in your
diary interested me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on
_our_ case. I should much like to see him, and especially when his mind
is disturbed.”

“May I come also?” asked Lord Godalming.

“Me too?” said Quincey Morris. I nodded, and we all went down the
passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was
an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had
ever met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons
would prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the room,
but none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I
would at once release him from the asylum and send him home. This he
backed up with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced
his own existing sanity. “I appeal to your friends,” he said; “they
will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you
have not introduced me.” I was so much astonished, that the oddness
of introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment;
and, besides, there was a certain dignity in the man’s manner, so much
of the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction: “Lord
Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr.
Renfield.” He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

“Lord Godalming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the
Windham; I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. He was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in
his youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be proud of your great
state. Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics may hold
allegiance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of Treaty may yet prove
a vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him
to one of a class. You gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or
by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of their liberties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances.” He made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man’s character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impulse
to tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about
the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction
of meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

“But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire
to go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may.
Time presses, and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it
is of the essence of the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to
put before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment.” He looked at me keenly, and
seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

“Is it possible that I have erred in my supposition?”

“You have,” I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally.
There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

“Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask
for this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to
implore in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of
others. I am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons; but
you may, I assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound
and unselfish, and springing from the highest sense of duty. Could you
look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments
which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and
truest of your friends.” Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a
growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual
method was but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so
determined to let him go on a little longer, knowing from experience
that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the end. Van
Helsing was gazing at him with a look of the utmost intensity, his bushy
eyebrows almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He
said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the time, but
only when I thought of it afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an
equal:--

“Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.
Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility,
the privilege you seek.” He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. The Professor went on:--

“Come sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in
the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish.” He still shook
his head as he said:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not
my own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me.” I thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went
towards the door, simply saying:--

“Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night.”

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient.
He moved towards me so quickly that for the moment I feared that he
was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request
of which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when
he wanted a cat; and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth
a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks and his
whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--

“Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me
out of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you
will; send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in
a strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let
me go out of this. You don’t know what you do by keeping me here. I am
speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don’t know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me
out of this and save my soul from guilt! Can’t you hear me, man? Can’t
you understand? Will you never learn? Don’t you know that I am sane and
earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!”

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

“Come,” I said sternly, “no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly.”

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments.
Then without a word he rose, and moving over, sat down on the side of
the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasions, just as I had
expected.

When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

“You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to convince you tonight.”




CHAPTER XIX.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./


_1 October, 5 a.m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

“Say, Jack, if that man wasn’t attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic I ever saw. I’m not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance.” Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

“Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I’m glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say.
All is best as they are.” Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

“I don’t know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an
ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can’t forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear
my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count ‘lord and
master,’ and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn’t above trying to use a respectable lunatic.
He certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man.” The Professor stepped over, and laying a hand on
his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

“Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good God?” Lord Godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but he now returned. He held up a little silver
whistle as he remarked:--

“That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I’ve got an antidote on
call.” Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took
out a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four
little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:--

“My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual. Remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his is not
amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but yet they cannot hurt
him as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from
his touch. Keep this near your heart”--as he spoke he lifted a little
silver crucifix and held it out to me, I being nearest to him--“put
these flowers round your neck”--here he handed to me a wreath of
withered garlic blossoms--“for other enemies more mundane, this revolver
and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which
you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last,
this, which we must not desecrate needless.” This was a portion of
sacred wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the
others was similarly equipped. “Now,” he said, “friend John, where are
the skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break
house by the window, as before at Miss Lucy’s.”

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as
a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit;
after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
Dr. Seward’s diary of the opening of Miss Westenra’s tomb; I fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.

“_In manus tuas, Domine!_” he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we might possibly attract attention from the road. The
Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry to make our exit. Then we all lit
our lamps and proceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was caked. The
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spiders’ webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They
had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, like that exposed when the Professor lifted the
keys. He turned to me and said:----

“You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you
know at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?” I had
an idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been
able to get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong
turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with
iron bands. “This is the spot,” said the Professor, as he turned his
lamp on a small map of the house, copied from the file of my original
correspondence regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found
the key on the bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some
unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air
seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an
odour as we encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at
close quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting
stage of his existence in his rooms or, when he was bloated with fresh
blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was
small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul.
There was an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the
fouler air. But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was
not alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with
the pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption
had become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every
breath exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and
intensified its loathsomeness.

Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and the high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we
began:----

“The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
examine every hole and corner and cranny, and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of the rest.” A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mistaking them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted
door into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count’s evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only for a moment, for
as Lord Godalming said, “I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shadows,” and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction,
and stepped into the passage. There was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew
back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was
seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward’s house by the yelping of dogs, and after about
a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved I
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had
elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were
multiplying in thousands, and moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in in the same manner, had but small
prey ere the whole mass had vanished.

With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening
of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding
ourselves in the open, I know not; but most certainly the shadow of
dread seemed to slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming
lost something of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a
whit in our resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked
it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We
found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and
all untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

“So far,” he said, “our night has been eminently successful. No harm
has come to us such as I feared might be, and yet we have ascertained
how many boxes are missing. More than all do I rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina
or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count’s command are yet themselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother’s cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We have other matters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity
to cry ‘check’ in some way in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night’s work. It may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink.”

The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from Renfield’s room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing
so softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler
than usual. I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it
is settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and
yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be
a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that
all is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world.
I daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and tomorrow I shall keep
dark over to-night’s doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.

_1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for
a few seconds she did not recognise me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in
the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it
be that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to
trace them all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and
the sooner the matter is attended to the better. I shall look up Thomas
Snelling today.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor
walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and
it is quite evident that last night’s work has helped to take some of
the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the
night he suddenly said:----

“Your patient interests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound.” I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against
getting any false impression from my patient. “But,” he answered, “I
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?”

“Excuse me,” I said, “but the answer is here.” I laid my hand on the
typewritten matter. “When our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered the room.” Van Helsing smiled in turn. “Good!” he said.
“Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?” I went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. “Do I interrupt?” he asked politely as he
stood at the door.

“Not at all,” I answered. “Come in. My work is finished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.”

“It is needless; I have seen him!”

“Well?”

“I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.
When I entered the room he was sitting on a stool in the centre,
with his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a
measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. ‘Don’t
you know me?’ I asked. His answer was not reassuring: ‘I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutchmen!’ Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at
all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this
so clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a
few happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
worried, with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help,
it is better so.”

“I agree with you with all my heart,” I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. “Mrs. Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her.”

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey
and Art are both out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. I
shall finish my round of work, and we shall meet to-night.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_1 October._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am
today; after Jonathan’s full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all.
This morning I slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count’s house. And yet he must
have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn further into this awful work, and
I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband’s great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men....

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has
doubted of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible
excitement.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told
me to. I didn’t feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety.
I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came
to see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn’t gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn’t taken to visiting the churchyard
till I came, and if she hadn’t come there in the daytime with me she
wouldn’t have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn’t gone there
at night and asleep, that monster couldn’t have destroyed her as he
did. Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There now, crying again! I wonder
what has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he
knew that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on
my own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

I can’t quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember
hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like
praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield’s room, which
is somewhere under this. And then there was silence over everything,
silence so profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of
the window. All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the
moonlight seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a thing
seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so
that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible
slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience
and a vitality of its own. I think that the digression of my thoughts
must have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay awhile, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it lying thick against the
wall, as though it were stealing up to the windows. The poor man was
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not remember anything until the
morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and
a little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and
my hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at
the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to
dawn upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim around
me. The gas-light which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that I
had shut the window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker, and I could see now how it came in,
for I could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the
top of which I could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye.
Things began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words “a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night.” Was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascination for me; till, as I
looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes; such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary’s
Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling
mist in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all
became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made
was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. I
must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one’s reason if
there was too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to
prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear
to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into
their fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If
I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral;
that cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night’s sleep.
Last night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

_2 October, 10 p.m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must
have slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but
the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and
spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he
was very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade God
bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him.
This is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. Jonathan would be
miserable if he knew I had been crying. He and the others were out until
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
together, as they said, but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see from Jonathan’s
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.




CHAPTER XX.


/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal
Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything.
The very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to
him had proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected
debauch. I learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor
soul, that he was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates
was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr.
Joseph Smollet at home and in his shirt-sleeves, taking a late tea out
of a saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good,
reliable type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered
all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog’s-eared
notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes.
There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from Carfax and
left at 197 Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which
he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were
chosen at the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now
fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the
very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back
to Smollet and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had been
taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

“Well, guv’nor, you’ve treated me wery ’an’some”--I had given him half
a sovereign--“an’ I’ll tell yer all I know. I heeard a man by the name
of Bloxam say four nights ago in the ’Are an’ ’Ounds, in Pincher’s
Alley, as ’ow he an’ his mate ’ad ’ad a rare dusty job in a old ’ouse at
Purfleet. There ain’t a-many such jobs as this ’ere, an’ I’m thinkin’
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut.” I asked if he could tell
me where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the address it
would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

“Look, ’ere, guv’nor, there ain’t no sense in me a-keepin’ you ’ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn’t; but anyhow he ain’t like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I’ll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye’d better be up arter ’im soon in the mornin’, or maybe ye won’t ketch
’im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore.”

This was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny
to buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. When
she came back I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet
had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my
way to home. We’re on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want
sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look
as though she had been crying. Poor dear, I’ve no doubt it frets her to
be kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the
Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.

_2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By the first
post I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter’s pencil in a sprawling hand:--

“Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for
the depite.”

I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where
I was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I
should have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some
difficulty, Potter’s Court. Mr. Smollet’s spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter’s Court instead of Potter’s Court. However, when I had found
the court I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran’s lodging-house.
When I asked the man who came to the door for the “depite,” he shook his
head, and said: “I dunno ’im. There ain’t no such person ’ere; I never
’eard of ’im in all my bloomin’ days. Don’t believe there ain’t nobody
of that kind livin’ ’ere or anywheres.” I took out Smollet’s letter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. “What are you?” I asked.

“I’m the depity,” he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put
the deputy’s knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam,
who had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at
Corcoran’s, had left for his work at Poplar at five o’clock that
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a “new-fangled ware’us;”
and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve
o’clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner.
One of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel
Street a new “cold storage” building; and as this suited the condition
of a “new-fangled ware’us,” I at once drove to it. An interview with a
surly gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day’s wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--“main
heavy ones”--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I
asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

“Well, guv’nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from
a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old ’ouse, too, though nothin’ to the dustiness of the ’ouse we
tooked the bloomin’ boxes from.”

“How did you get into the house if they were both empty?”

“There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin’ in the ’ouse at
Purfleet. He ’elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse
me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an’ him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn’t throw
a shadder.”

How this phrase thrilled through me!

“Why, ’e took up ’is end o’ the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin’ an’ a-blowin’ afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an’ I’m no
chicken, neither.”

“How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?” I asked.

“He was there too. He must ’a’ started off and got there afore me, for
when I rung of the bell he kem an’ opened the door ’isself an’ ’elped me
to carry the boxes into the ’all.”

“The whole nine?” I asked.

“Yus; there was five in the first load an’ four in the second. It
was main dry work, an’ I don’t so well remember ’ow I got ’ome.” I
interrupted him:--

“Were the boxes left in the hall?”

“Yus; it was a big ’all, an’ there was nothin’ else in it.” I made one
more attempt to further matters:--

“You didn’t have any key?”

“Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door ’isself
an’ shut it again when I druv off. I don’t remember the last time--but
that was the beer.”

“And you can’t remember the number of the house?”

“No, sir. But ye needn’t have no difficulty about that. It’s a ’igh ’un
with a stone front with a bow on it, and ’igh steps up to the door. I
know them steps, ’avin’ ’ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin’s, an’
they seem’ they got so much, they wanted more; but ’e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw ’im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin’.” I thought that with this description I could
find the house, so having paid my friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience: the Count
could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was
precious; for, now he had achieved a certain amount of distribution,
he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task unobserved. At
Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab, and walked westward; beyond
the Junior Constitutional I came across the house described, and was
satisfied that this was the next of the lairs arranged by Dracula. The
house looked as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were
encrusted with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was
black with time, and from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away.
It was evident that up to lately there had been a large notice-board
in front of the balcony; it had, however, been roughly torn away, the
uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of
the balcony I saw there were some loose boards, whose raw edges looked
white. I would have given a good deal to have been able to see the
notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the
ownership of the house. I remembered my experience of the investigation
and purchase of Carfax, and I could not but feel that if I could find
the former owner there might be some means of gaining access to the
house.

There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side,
and nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if
anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active,
the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two
of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me
anything about the empty house. One of them said he had heard it had
lately been taken, but he couldn’t say from whom. He told me, however,
that up to very lately there had been a notice-board of “For sale” up,
and that perhaps Mitchell, Sons & Candy, the house agents, could tell
me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm
on the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant
know or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so
I did not lose any time. Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons &
Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in
Sackville Street.

The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that
the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
“mansion”--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

“It is sold, sir.”

“Pardon me,” I said, with equal politeness, “but I have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it.”

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. “It is sold,
sir,” was again his laconic reply.

“Surely,” I said, “you do not mind letting me know so much.”

“But I do mind,” he answered. “The affairs of their clients are
absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons & Candy.” This was
manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

“Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their
confidence. I am myself a professional man.” Here I handed him my card.
“In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of
Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was,
he understood, lately for sale.” These words put a different complexion
on affairs. He said:--

“I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially
would I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter
of renting some chambers for him when he was the Honourable Arthur
Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship’s address I will consult
the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night’s post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship.”

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward’s, and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company
and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but
she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful; it wrung my heart
to think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking
on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our
confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or
else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we made
our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

I could not tell the others of the day’s discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to
me as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of
and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

When I came down again I found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:--

“This has been a great day’s work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death.” We all sat silent awhile, and all at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

“Say! how are we going to get into that house?”

“We got into the other,” answered Lord Godalming quickly.

“But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing
to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I
don’t see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find
us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in
the morning.” Lord Godalming’s brows contracted, and he stood up and
walked about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one
to another of us:--

“Quincey’s head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we
can find the Count’s key basket.”

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell’s,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so
rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after
his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding
destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not
really care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds
and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I
thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked
him:--

“What about the flies these times?” He smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio--as
he answered me:--

“The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature: its wings are typical
of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!”

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said
quickly:--

“Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?” His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

“Oh no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want.” Here he brightened
up: “I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right;
I have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoophagy!”

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

“Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?” He smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

“Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If
I may state my intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!” This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall
Enoch’s appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt
that by doing so I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--

“And why Enoch?”

“Because he walked with God.” I could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

“So you don’t care about life and you don’t want souls. Why not?” I put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

“I don’t want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don’t. I couldn’t use them
if I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn’t eat
them or----” He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over
his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. “And, Doctor,
as to life, what is it after all? When you’ve got all you require, and
you know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good
friends--like you Doctor Seward;” this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning, “I know that I shall never lack the means of
life!”

I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come
without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him
that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are
Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over
the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

“What about souls?” It was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with
the lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. “What about them
yourself?” I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

“I don’t want any souls!” he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to “be
cruel only to be kind.” So I said:--

“You like life, and you want life?”

“Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn’t worry about that!”

“But,” I asked, “how are we to get the life without getting the soul
also?” This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:--

“A nice time you’ll have some time when you’re flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You’ve got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!” Something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

“Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again!” He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

“Not much! flies are poor things, after all!” After a pause he added,
“But I don’t want their souls buzzing round me, all the same.”

“Or spiders,” I went on.

“Blow spiders! What’s the use of spiders? There isn’t anything in them
to eat or”--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

“So, so!” I thought to myself, “this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word ‘drink’; what does it mean?” Renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

“I don’t take any stock at all in such matters. ‘Rats and mice and such
small deer’ as Shakespeare has it; ‘chicken-feed of the larder’ they
might be called. I’m past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before
me.”

“I see,” I said. “You want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?”

“What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!” He was getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. “I wonder,” I said
reflectively, “what an elephant’s soul is like!”

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

“I don’t want an elephant’s soul, or any soul at all!” he said. For a
few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. “To
hell with you and your souls!” he shouted. “Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven’t I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls?” He looked so hostile that I thought he
was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

“Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so
worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I
want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am
sure you will understand!” He had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

“Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me
that I am very very grateful to you!” I thought it well to leave him in
this mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder
over in this man’s state. Several points seem to make what the American
interviewer calls “a story,” if one could only get them in proper order.
Here they are:--

Will not mention “drinking.”

Fears the thought of being burdened with the “soul” of anything.

Has no dread of wanting “life” in the future.

Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!

And the assurance--?

Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my
suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.


_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming_

“_1 October._

“My Lord,

“We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with
regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your
behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes ‘over the counter,’ if your Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

    “We are, my Lord,
    “Your Lordship’s humble servants,
    “/Mitchell, Sons & Candy./”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield’s room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire in
the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and
discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result, and
we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

Before going to bed I went round to the patient’s room and looked in
through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his chest
rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked
him if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was
something about his manner so suspicious that I asked point-blank if he
had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having “dozed” for a
while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched.

To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey are
looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
British Museum, looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The
old physicians took account of things which their followers do not
accept, and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which
may be useful later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track,
and our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder
if Renfield’s quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so
followed the doings of the Count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- that
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....




CHAPTER XXI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield’s room I found him lying on the floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the
body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could
see that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against
the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

“I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg
and the whole side of his face are paralysed.” How such a thing could
have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

“I can’t understand the two things. He could mark his face like that
by beating his own head on the ground. I saw a young woman do it once
at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I
suppose he might have broke his back by falling out of bed, if he got
in an awkward kink. But for the life of me I can’t imagine how the two
things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn’t beat his head; and
if his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be
marks of it.” I said to him:--

“Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an instant’s delay.” The man ran off, and within a very few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing-gown and slippers appeared. When
he saw Renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment and then
turned to me. I think he recognized my thought in my eyes, for he said
very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

“Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much
attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you.”

The patient was now breathing stertorously, and it was easy to see
that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

“Send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation.” So I said:--

“I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate.
Let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere.”

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.
The wounds of the face were superficial; the real injury was a depressed
fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The
Professor thought a moment and said:--

“We must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late.” As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, Arthur and
Quincey in pyjamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

“I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey, or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of
us these times. I’ve been thinking that to-morrow night will not see
things as they have been. We’ll have to look back--and forward a little
more than we have done. May we come in?” I nodded, and held the door
open till they had entered; then I closed it again. When Quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

“My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!” I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time at all events. He went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

“We shall wait,” said Van Helsing, “just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing.”

The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had
a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing’s face I gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. I
dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to
think; but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read
of men who have heard the death-watch. The poor man’s breathing came
in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his
eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath,
and he would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was
to sick-beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could
almost hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through
my temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became
agonising. I looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

At last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at the Professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

“There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear.”

Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless
stare. This was continued for a few moments; then it softened into
a glad surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. He moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

“I’ll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What’s wrong with my face? It feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully.” He tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again, so I gently put it back. Then Van
Helsing said in a quiet, grave tone:--

“Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield.” As he heard the voice his face
brightened through its mutilation, and he said:--

“That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some
water, my lips are dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed”--he
stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to Quincey--“The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!” He flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I
shall never forget, and said:--

“I must not deceive myself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality.”
Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

“If I were not sure already, I should know from them.” For an instant
his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he
were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

“Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before my
poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you
left me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn’t speak then,
for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, except in that
way, as I am now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after
you left me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My
brain seemed to become cool again, and I realized where I was. I heard
the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!” As he spoke
Van Helsing’s eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine
and gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded
slightly, and said: “Go on,” in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:--

“He came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man’s when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when He turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn’t ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them.” He
was interrupted by a word from the Professor:--

“How?”

“By making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs.” Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

“The _Acberontia atropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the
‘Death’s-head moth!’” The patient went on without stopping.

“Then he began to whisper: ‘Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!’ I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could
do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to the window. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire;
and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that
there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His,
only smaller. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought
He seemed to be saying: ‘All these lives will I give you, ay, and many
more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and
worship me!’ And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to
close over my eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found myself
opening the sash and saying to Him: ‘Come in, Lord and Master!’ The rats
were all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it
was only open an inch wide--just as the Moon herself has often come in
through the tiniest crack, and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour.”

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval, for his story was further advanced. I was about to call
him back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: “Let him go on.
Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at
all if once he lost the thread of his thought.” He proceeded:--

“All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn’t even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn’t hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.
Harker had come into the room.”

The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his
face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without
noticing:--

“When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn’t the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered.” Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

“I didn’t know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn’t look the
same. I don’t care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn’t think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been taking the life out of her.” I could feel that
the rest quivered, as I did; but we remained otherwise still. “So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn’t
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned
into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door.” His voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

“We know the worst now,” he said. “He is here, and we know his purpose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare.” There was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the Count’s house. The Professor had his ready and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

“They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that the dear Madam Mina should suffer.” He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

Outside the Harkers’ door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

“Should we disturb her?”

“We must,” said Van Helsing grimly. “If the door be locked, I shall
break it in.”

“May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady’s
room!” Van Helsing said solemnly:--

“You are always right; but this is life and death. All chambers are
alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to me
to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if the door does not
open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends.
Now!”

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw
appalled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the
room was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed, and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
Kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw it we all recognised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker’s hands, keeping them away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man’s bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten’s nose into a saucer of milk
to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard described seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth,
champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred
Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under Quincey’s match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. For a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood. Her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
Count’s terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--

“Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vampire can produce.
We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she
recovers herself; I must wake him!” He dipped the end of a towel in
cold water and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all
the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that
was heart-breaking to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. There was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great yew
tree. It puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at the instant
I heard Harker’s quick exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness,
and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well be, was a look
of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and then full
consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he started up.
His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to him with her
arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly, however, she
drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands
before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

“In God’s name what does this mean?” Harker cried out. “Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,
what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to
this!” and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. “Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!” With a quick
movement he jumped from the bed, and began to pull on his clothes--all
the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. “What has
happened? Tell me all about it!” he cried without pausing. “Dr. Van
Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot
have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!” His wife,
through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him;
instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried
out:--

“No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must
stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!” Her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bedside, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

“Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you
no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be
calm and take counsel together.” She shuddered and was silent, holding
down her head on her husband’s breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. The instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

“Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear.” To this he spoke out resolutely:--

“Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!” He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After
a while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said
to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to the utmost:--

“And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been.” I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the Count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see that whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the
door. They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at
me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage
of their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy
husband and wife from each other and from themselves; so on my nodding
acquiescence to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which
Lord Godalming answered:--

“I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in the study, but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had,
however----” He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

“Go on friend Arthur. We want no more concealments. Our hope now is in
knowing all. Tell freely!” So Art went on:--

“He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes;
the cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the
wax had helped the flames.” Here I interrupted. “Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!” His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: “I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Renfield’s room; but there was no trace there except----!” Again
he paused. “Go on,” said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head, and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: “except that the poor fellow
is dead.” Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us as she said solemnly:--

“God’s will be done!” I could not but feel that Art was keeping back
something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.
Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:--

“And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?”

“A little,” he answered. “It may be much eventually, but at present I
can’t say. I thought it well to know if possible where the Count would
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield’s window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some
shape go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!”

He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker’s head:--

“And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may so be; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn.”

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing, who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

“I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but
for a long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and
myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble.”
Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: “Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I
need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medicine do its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remembered no
more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that
I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will
find it in my diary which I shall show you later. I felt the same vague
terror which had come to me before, and the same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught and not I. I
tried, but could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I looked
around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed,
as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist had
turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall,
thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the descriptions of the
others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell
in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth
showing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the sunset
on the windows of St. Mary’s Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the red scar
on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant my heart
stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was paralysed.
In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he
spoke to Jonathan:--

“‘Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.’ I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so: ‘First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
appeased my thirst!’ I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity
me! He placed his reeking lips upon my throat!” Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were the injured one, and went on:--

“I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful sneering mouth away. I
saw it drip with the fresh blood!” The remembrance seemed for a while
to overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband’s sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--

“Then he spoke to me mockingly: ‘And so you, like the others, would
play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me
and frustrate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part
already, and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path.
They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst
they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and
intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they
were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one,
are now to me flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my
bountiful wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and
my helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be punished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says “Come!” to you, you shall cross land or sea
to do my bidding; and to that end this!’ With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the--Oh,
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my
days? God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!” Then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

Of this I am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




CHAPTER XXII.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./


_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o’clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh, my God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then Renfield
had called out loudly several times, “God! God! God!” After that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard “voices” or “a voice,” and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that the word “God” was spoken by the patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it.
As it was, he thought that on the attendant’s evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to the same result.

When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. “There must be no more concealment,” she said. “Alas! we have
had too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that
can give me more pain than I have already endured--than I suffer now!
Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!”
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

“But, dear Madam Mina are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?” Her face grew set in
its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

“Ah no! for my mind is made up!”

“To what?” he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

“Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!”

“You would not kill yourself?” he asked hoarsely.

“I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such
a pain, and so desperate an effort!” She looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:--

“My child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For myself
I could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for
you, even at this moment, if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But, my
child----” for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

“There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must
not die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own.
Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must
not die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would
make you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive
to live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight
Death himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day,
or the night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul I charge you
that you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be
past.” The poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shivered, as I
have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We
were all silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm, and
turning to him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out
her hand:--

“I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this horror
may have passed away from me.” She was so good and brave that we all
felt that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her,
and we began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was
to have all the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and
phonographs we might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she
had done before. She was pleased with the prospect of anything to
do--if “pleased” could be used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

“It is perhaps well” he said, “that at our meeting after our visit
to Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that
lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose,
and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such
an effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. Nay more, in all probability he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilize his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge
as to their disposition, that, when we have examined the house in
Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations
of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a door-way, he
must open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilize them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure.” Here I started up for I
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina’s life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was possible. But Van Helsing held up his
hand warningly. “Nay, friend Jonathan,” he said, “in this, the quickest
way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all act, and
act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in all
probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly. The
Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt, ‘stop the earths’ and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?”

“Then let us come at once,” I cried, “we are wasting the precious,
precious time!” The Professor did not move, but simply said:--

“And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?”

“Any way!” I cried. “We shall break in if need be.”

“And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?”

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

“Don’t wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am
in.”

“Ah, my child, that I do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement? Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?” I nodded.

“Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and
could not still get it; and think there was to you no conscience of the
housebreaker, what would you do?”

“I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me.”

“And your police, they would interfere, would they not?”

“Oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed.”

“Then,” he looked at me keenly as he spoke, “all that is in doubt is
the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as
to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one.
Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in
reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no,
my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty houses
in this your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as
such things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly
done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so
fine house in your London, and when he went for months of summer to
Zwitzerland and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at
back and got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and
walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police.
Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big
notice; and when the day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all the
goods of that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he
sell him that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take
all away within a certain time. And your police and other authority help
him all they can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in
Zwitzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This
was all done _en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We
shall not go so early that the policeman who have then little to think
of, shall deem it strange; but we shall go after ten o’clock when there
are many about, and when such things would be done were we indeed owners
of the house.”

I could not but see how right he was, and the terrible despair of Mina’s
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--

“When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End.”

Lord Godalming stood up. “I can be of some use here,” he said. “I shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most
convenient.”

“Look here, old fellow,” said Morris, “it is a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don’t you think that one
of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byeway at
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to.”

“Friend Quincey is right!” said the Professor. “His head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may.”

Mina took a growing interest in everything, and I was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the
terrible experience of the night. She was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.

When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of
the disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was
finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the
Count’s lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

As to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that,
after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly;
that the two doctors and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed
them. It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the
Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we
might be able to cope with him then and there. At any rate we might be
able to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, in
so far as my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay
and protect Mina. I thought that my mind was made up on the subject;
but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be
some law matter in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count’s
papers might be some clue which I could understand out of my experience
in Transylvania; and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster
was required to cope with the Count’s extraordinary power. I had to
give in, for Mina’s resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last
hope for _her_ that we should all work together. “As for me,” she said,
“I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever
may happen must have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my
husband! God can, if He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any
one present.” So I started up crying out: “Then in God’s name let us
come at once, for we are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly
earlier than we think.”

“Not so!” said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

“But why?” I asked.

“Do you forget,” he said, with actually a smile, “that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?”

Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall
her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part
in the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he
had said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort
her. “Oh Madam Mina,” he said, “dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I,
of all who so reverence you, should have said anything so forgetful.
These stupid old lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve
so; but you will forget it, will you not?” He bent low beside her as he
spoke; she took his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said
hoarsely:--

“No, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember; and with it
I have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
together. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong.”

Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

“Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy’s
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?” We all assured
him. “Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if--we shall
return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of the things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me
guard yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in
the name of the Father, the Son, and----”

There was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. As he
placed the Wafer on Mina’s forehead, it had seared it--had burned into
the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling’s brain told her the significance of the fact as quickly as her
nerves received the pain of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that her
overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words
to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased to
ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her knees
on the floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over
her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

“Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day.” They
all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired and was stating things outside himself:--

“It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God Himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam
Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God’s knowledge of what has been, shall pass away
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God see right to lift the burden
that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did in
obedience to His will. It may be that we are chosen instruments of His
good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through
stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears,
and all that makes the difference between God and man.”

There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation.
Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man’s hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.

It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which
neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be
a vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and
terrible land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire
meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred
earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly
ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as we already knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, nor any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

“And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise
this earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God.” As he spoke he took from his bag a screw-driver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on the Professor. Taking from his box a piece of the
Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of the Host.

When we closed the door behind us, the Professor said solemnly:--

“So much is already done. If it may be that with all the others we can
be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine on Madam
Mina’s forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!”

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the
window of my room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nodded to tell
that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply
to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in
farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station and just
caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the platform.

I have written this in the train.

_Piccadilly, 12.30 o’clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street
Lord Godalming said to me:

“Quincey and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us
in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn’t seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are
a solicitor, and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you
should have known better.” I demurred as to my not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: “Besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had
better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in the Green Park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door open and the
smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the look out
for you, and will let you in.”

“The advice is good!” said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming
and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the coming of the others.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris
paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two
ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered
along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he proceeded to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. All at once the
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing’s went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we saw the
workman come out and take in his bag. Then he held the door partly open,
steading it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he
finally handed to Lord Godalming, who took out his purse and gave him
something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his coat and
departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole transaction.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.

“The place smells so vilely,” said the latter as we came in. It did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using
the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping
together in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy
to deal with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be
in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall,
we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the nine which
we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should
have found the missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window
which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face
of a stable, pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There
were no windows in it, so we were not afraid of being overlooked. We did
not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those others in the chapel. It was evident to us that the Count
was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for any of
his effects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms from basement to attic,
we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to the Count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room
table. There were title-deeds of the Piccadilly house in a great
bundle; deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
notepaper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. There were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming
and Quincey Morris, taking accurate notes of the various addresses of
the houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us
are, with what patience we can, awaiting their return--or the coming of
the Count.




CHAPTER XXIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_3 October._--The time seemed terribly long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. I could see his beneficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong youthful face,
full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard
old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and
grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact he
is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go
well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a
kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I thought
my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows this
well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has
been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. As well
as I can remember, here it is:--

“I have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands,
all the papers relating to this monster; and the more I have studied,
the greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through
there are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his
knowledge of it. As I learned from the researches of my friend Arminius
of Buda-Pesth, he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman,
and alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the
science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even
to attend the Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his
time that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of
man’s stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life.”

Harker groaned and said: “And this is all arrayed against my darling!
But how is he experimenting? The knowledge may help us to defeat him!”

“He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto.”

“I fail to understand,” said Harker wearily. “Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain.” The Professor laid
his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

“Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally? How he has been
making use of the zoophagous patient to effect his entry into friend
John’s home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto
by an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we
not see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by others?
He knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he
might not himself move the box. So he begin to help; and then, when he
found that this be all right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground.
So that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change
his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding
place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him just
too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilize as for him;
and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even
more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour, and already, if all
be well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are
five of us when those absent ones return.”

Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door,
the double postman’s knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to
the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us
to keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
despatch. The Professor closed the door again and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read it aloud:--

“Look out for D. He has just now, 12.45, come from Carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the south. He seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: Mina.”

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker’s voice:--

“Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!” Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

“God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings.”

“I care for nothing now,” he answered hotly, “except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!”

“Oh, hush, hush, my child!” said Van Helsing, “God does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not
keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us; we
are all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time
is coming for action; to-day this Vampire is limit to the powers of
man, and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arrive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey arrive first.”

About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker’s telegram, there
came a quiet resolute knock at the hall door. It was just an ordinary
knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the Professor’s heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the moral in the right. Van
Helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:--

“It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each, and we
destroyed them all!”

“Destroyed?” asked the Professor.

“For him!” We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey said:--

“There’s nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn’t turn up
by five o’clock, we must start off; for it won’t do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sunset.”

“He will be here before long now,” said Van Helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. “_Nota bene_, in Madam’s telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o’clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. You must have been at Bermondsey only a
short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went
to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!” He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall-door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. With a swift glance round the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just behind the door so that when it was opened the Professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready
to move in front of the window. We waited in a suspence that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.

Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way
past us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was
something so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it
seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act
was Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. As the Count saw us,
a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth
long and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare
of lion-like disdain. His expression again changed, as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he
had ready his great Kukri knife, and made a fierce and sudden cut at
him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the
Count’s leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had
shorn through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his
coat, making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of
gold fell out. The expression of the Count’s face was so hellish, that
for a moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible
knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with
a protective impulse, holding the crucifix and wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without surprise that I
saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
the Count’s face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under Harker’s arm ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, and
threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling
glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the
shivering glass I could hear the “ting” of the gold, as some of the
sovereigns fell on the flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

“You think to baffle me, you----with your pale faces all in a row,
like sheep in a butcher’s. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You
think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My
revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my
side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them
you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to
be my jackals when I want to feed. Bah!” With a contemptuous sneer, he
passed quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us
to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved towards the hall.

“We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You
follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For
me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return.” As he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the Count. He had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
Professor when he said:--

“Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor, dear Madam Mina. All we can
do just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. But we
need not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to
find it; when that is done all may yet be well.” I could see that he
spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was
quite broken down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not
suppress--he was thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker
awaiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death; for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:--

“I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!” as she spoke
she took her husband’s grey head in her hands and kissed it--“Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect
us if He so will it in His good intent.” The poor fellow only groaned.
There was no place for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and I think it cheered
us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to
hungry people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or
the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all
less miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope.
True to our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed;
and although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to
the part where Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung
to her husband’s arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right
up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband’s hand
she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh that I could give any idea of
the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant
beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead
of which she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

“Jonathan,” she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips, it
was so full of love and tenderness, “Jonathan dear, and you all, my
true, true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all
this dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy
even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live
hereafter; but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought
all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his
joy when he too is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may
have spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him too, though it
may not hold your hands from his destruction.”

As she spoke I could see her husband’s face darken and draw together,
as though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively the clasp on his wife’s hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost
tearing his hand from hers as he spoke:--

“May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!”

“Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don’t say such things,
Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just
think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I too may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,
my husband! my husband, indeed I would have spared you such a thought
had there been another way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heartbroken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. Oh God, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come.”

We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. She wept too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with God.

Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband’s sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us
will be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done, I, too, shall go
to bed.


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_3-4 October close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change
must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our
next step was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew
was that one earth-box remained, and that the Count alone knew where
it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and
in the meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of
it even now. This I know: that if ever there was a woman who was all
perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand
times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own
hate of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the
world to be the poorer by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to
me. We are all drifting reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor.
Thank God! Mina is sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what
her dreams might be like, with such terrible memories to ground them
in. She has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset.
Then, for a while, there came over her face a repose which was like
spring after the blasts of March. I thought at the time that it was the
softness of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it had
a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy myself, though I am weary--weary to
death. However, I must try to sleep; for there is to-morrow to think
of, and there is no rest for me until....

_Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awakened by Mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

“Hush! there is someone in the corridor!” I got up softly, and crossing
the room, gently opened the door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

“Hush! go back to bed; it is all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don’t mean to take any chances!”

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed, and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

“Oh, thank God for good brave men!” With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

_4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:--

“Go call the Professor. I want to see him at once.”

“Why?” I asked.

“I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is getting close.”
I went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

“Is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

“No,” I replied; “but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once.”

“I will go,” he said, and hurried into the Professor’s room.

Two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward
at the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a
positive smile--ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as
he said:--

“Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!” Then
turning to her, he said cheerfully: “And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for nothings.”

“I want you to hypnotise me!” she said. “Do it before the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is
short!” Without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving
of her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Professor made a
few more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. There was a faraway look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to
impose silence, the Professor motioned me to bring the others in. They
came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the foot of
the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see them. The stillness was
broken by Van Helsing’s voice speaking in a low level tone which would
not break the current of her thoughts:--

“Where are you!” The answer came in a neutral way:--

“I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own.”

For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor
stood staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe.
The room was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina’s face,
Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the
day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed
to diffuse itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke
again:--

“Where are you now?” The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
was as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

“I do not know. It is all strange to me!”

“What do you see?”

“I can see nothing; it is all dark.”

“What do you hear?” I could detect the strain in the Professor’s patient
voice.

“The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear them on the outside.”

“Then you are on a ship?” We all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came
quick:--

“Oh, yes!”

“What else do you hear?”

“The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. There is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the ratchet.”

“What are you doing?”

“I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!” The voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina’s shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a
few moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to
see us all around her. “Have I been talking in my sleep?” was all she
said. She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling; though
she was eager to know what she had told. The Professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

“Then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!” Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door, but the Professor’s calm
voice called them back:

“Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. There are many ships weighing anchor at the moment in
your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you seek? God
be thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead
us we know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of
men, since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas! but
that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the
Count’s mind when he seize that money, though Jonathan’s so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily,
and we must follow with wile. I too am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortable since he be not in the same land with
us.” Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

“But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?” He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

“Ask me nothing as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all
questions.” He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sorrowfully:--

“Because, my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell?” She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

“Why?”

“Because,” he answered solemnly, “he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat.”

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




CHAPTER XXIV.

/Dr. Seward’s Phonograph Diary, Spoken by Van Helsing./


This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.
This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earthwork I might say did I wish _double entente_. He
is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and so
he decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he came, and
he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we
have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will comfort
you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope when you
think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue,
he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in one day,
when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is finite,
though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do. But we
are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong together.
Take heart afresh dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun,
and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch
over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return.

/Van Helsing./


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing’s message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the
certainty that the Count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that this horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air, in the bright
sunlight--

Alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling’s white forehead. Whilst that lasts,
there can be no disbelief. And afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the diaries again and again. Somehow, although the reality
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and
the others after their investigations.

The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o’clock.


_Mina Harker’s Journal_

_5 October, 5 p.m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van
Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--

“As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion
of my Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd’s, where are note of all ships that
sail, however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound
ship go out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail
from Doolittle’s Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up
the Danube. ‘Soh!’ said I, ‘this is the ship whereon is the Count.’ So
off we go to Doolittle’s Wharf, and there we find a man in an office
of wood so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we
inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he
red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when
Quincey give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it
up, and put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing,
he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and
ask many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when
they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom and
of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

“They make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five
o’clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high
nose and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be
all in black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or
the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what
ship sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office
and then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore
end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The captain
come, when told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at
the first he agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him
where horse and cart can be hired. He go there, and soon he come again,
himself driving cart on which is a great box; this he himself lift
down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give
much talk to captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but
the captain like it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him
that if he like he can come and see where it shall be. But he say ‘no;’
that he come not yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain
tell him that he had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will
leave the place--of blood--before the turn of the tide--with blood. Then
the thin man smile, and say that of course he must go when he think
fit; but he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear
again, polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say
that he will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues,
tell him that he doesn’t want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and
also with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after
asking where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase
ships forms, he departed.

“No one knew where he went ‘or bloomin’ well cared,’ as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as
was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it
grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around
her. The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began
to fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly
mood, when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank
again and asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain
replied that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away,
and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language
that was of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain’s
swears exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were in movement up
and down the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any of
fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However the ship went
out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the river
mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

“And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. There
are days for us in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at Varna, we say ‘no;’ for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way.”

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if it were certain
that the Count had remained on board the ship. He replied: “We have
the best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance
this morning.” I asked him again if it were really necessary that they
should pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I
know that he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing
passion, at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry
and more forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at
least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master
amongst men:--

“Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. Were another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of
nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. The very place where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations
of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from, and
are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have infect
you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for good
of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do no
more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and so
in time, death, which is of man’s common lot and with God’s sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn together
that it must not. Thus are we ministers of God’s own wish: that the
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to redeem
more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause.” He paused and I said:--

“But will not the Count take his rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven
from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from
which he has been hunted?”

“Aha!” he said, “your simile of the tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Your man-eater, as they of India call the tiger who has
once taste blood of the human, care no more for other prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go
over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child-brain that was
to him he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city.
What does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promise
for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task.
He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers.
He study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a
new land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse
that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it
help him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he
was at the first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone!
from a ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the
greater world of thought is open to him? He that can smile at death, as
we know him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off
whole peoples. Oh! if such an one was to come from God, and not the
Devil, what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours.
But we are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence,
and our efforts all in secret; for this enlightened age, when men
believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his
greatest strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and
his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even
our own souls for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind,
and for the honour and glory of God.”

After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow at breakfast we are to meet
again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall
decide on some definite course of action.

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. Perhaps....

My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I was still
unclean.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature.
Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even
by death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment.
More than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder
whether the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only
when I caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker’s forehead that
I was brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely resolving
the matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all
our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of
her trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are
to meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker’s tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The
Count had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called “the
Vampire’s baptism of blood.” Well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker’s silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think
further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall
try to open the subject with him.

_Later._--When the Professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted
to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After
beating about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

“Friend John, there is something that you and I must talk of alone,
just at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the others
into our confidence;” then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

“Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina, is changing.” A cold shiver
ran through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing
continued:--

“With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the silence now
often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?” I nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

“Then what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a painful
task! Oh! so painful that it heartbreak me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us.” He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for
at any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the
effect was as I expected.

It is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

_Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief
was experienced by both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at
each other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my
own part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it
was much pain as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances
we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence of our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van
Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:--

“The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will
take her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks
to reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three
days. Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship’s voyage, owing
to such weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear;
and if we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur
to us, then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be
quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any
rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical.” Here Quincey Morris
added:--

“I understand that the Count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he will get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn’t we have given then for a repeater
apiece!”

“Good!” said Van Helsing. “Winchesters it shall be. Quincey’s head
is level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, though my
metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man.
In the meantime we can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna is not
familiar to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait
here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all
be well, we four can set out on our journey.”

“We four?” said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

“Of course!” answered the Professor quickly. “You must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!” Harker was silent for a while and then said
in a hollow voice:--

“Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with
Mina.” I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lip and
turned away.


/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina’s determination
not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could
not argue the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever
from a solution now. The way the others received it, too, puzzled me;
the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams
with happiness. Thank God there are such moments still for her.

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina’s happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking
lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

“Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour.
A promise made to me, but made holily in God’s hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once.”

“Mina,” I said, “a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I may have
no right to make it.”

“But, dear one,” she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, “it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise.”

“I promise!” I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
She said:--

“Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed
for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!” and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

“I promise!” and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I myself felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dreamless sleep.

_6 October, morning._--Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the Professor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the others might come too.

“No,” she said quite simply, “it will not be necessary. You can tell
them just as well. I must go with you on your journey.”

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment’s pause he
asked:--

“But why?”

“You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer
too.”

“But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been.” He paused
embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

“I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even Jonathan.” God saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. She went on:--

“You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I myself do not know.” Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

“Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve.” When he had
spoken, Mina’s long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. Van Helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.
He told them what Mina had said, and went on:--

“In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a new
factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to
tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are warned
in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be ready to
act the instant when that ship arrives.”

“What shall we do exactly?” asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor
paused before replying:--

“We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was
man’s faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well.”

“I shall not wait for any opportunity,” said Morris. “When I see the box
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!” I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.

“Good boy,” said Dr. Van Helsing. “Brave boy. Quincey is all man, God
bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. There are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways;
and when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack.
Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which
touch on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none
of us can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own
affairs are regulate; and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go make
arrangement for the travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey.”

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she
survive is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us will have remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina’s uneasiness calls my
attention to it. I am sure that there is something on her mind which
the time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming
harrowing times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some
new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God’s will be means to
a good end. I write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

She is calling to me.




CHAPTER XXV.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before the time of sunset. We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and
lasts till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow
with the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute
freedom quickly follows; when however the freedom ceases the change-back
or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence.

To-night, when we met she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle. I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband’s hand
in hers she began:--

“We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to the end.” This was to
her husband, whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. “In
the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be
in store for any of us. You are going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!” She looked
appealingly at us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

“What is that way?” asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. “What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?”

“That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor Lucy’s. Were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way, I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, is God’s will. Therefore, I on my part, give up here the certainty
of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the blackest
things that the world or the nether world holds!” We were all silent,
for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. The faces of the
others were set, and Harker’s grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better
than any of us what was coming. She continued:--

“This is what I can give into the hotch-pot.” I could not but note
the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. “What will each of you give? Your lives, I know,” she went
on quickly; “that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God’s, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?” She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband’s face. Quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. “Then I shall
tell you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in
this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even
you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me.”

“What is that time?” The voice was Quincey’s but it was low and
strained.

“When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a moment’s delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!”

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

“I’m only a rough fellow, who hasn’t, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred
and dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the
duty that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has
come!”

“My true friend!” was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

“I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!” said Van Helsing.

“And I!” said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. I followed, myself. Then her husband turned to her,
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

“And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?”

“You too, my dearest,” she said, with infinite yearning of pity in
her voice and eyes. “You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest
and all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life
and all time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men
have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling
into the hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the more
because those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men’s
duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And
oh, my dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it
be at the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy’s case to him who loved”--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--“to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband’s life that it was his loving hand
which set me free from the awful thrall upon me.”

“Again I swear!” came the Professor’s resonant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

“And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall_ be--leagued
with your enemy against you.”

“One more request;” she became very solemn as she said this, “it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will.” We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

“I want you to read the Burial Service.” She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: “You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will, I hope, read it,
for then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!”

“But oh, my dear one,” he pleaded, “death is afar off from you.”

“Nay,” she said, holding up a warning hand. “I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!”

“Oh, my wife, must I read it?” he said, before he began.

“It would comfort me, my husband!” was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

“How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness? Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of
her husband’s voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service for the Burial
of the Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!”....

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker’s coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o’clock. Lord Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any telegram
had arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--the
Odessus. The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. Until the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour
is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she
slept nearly all the time. Before sunrise and sunset, however, she is
very wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
always asks her what she can see and hear. She answers to the first:--

“Nothing; all is dark.” And to the second:--

“I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is
high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam.”
It is evident that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening
on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _Czarina Catherine_ had not been reported to Lloyd’s from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early. To-morrow we are to see the
Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on board between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man’s form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he will get from us will not count for much.
We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the
seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I
think!

_16 October._--Mina’s report still the same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass the Dardanelles we are sure to have some report.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his
own risk. The owner gave him a paper telling the captain to give him
every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also
a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent,
who was much impressed with Godalming’s kindly manner to him, and we
are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be
done. We have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open.
If the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at
once and drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I
shall prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we
shall have ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count’s
body, it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us
and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully
if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out
our intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant
the _Czarina Catherine_ is seen, we are to be informed by a special
messenger.

_24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only the same story: “Not yet reported.” Mina’s morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.


_Telegram, October 24th._

_Rufus Smith, Lloyd’s, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H.B.M.
Vice-Consul, Varna_

“_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_24 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen
is irksome to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
excitement to-day when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd’s. I know
now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not
to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it;
but in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied. We
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It
would break poor Harker’s heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that
we had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells
me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition,
for he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no
active danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would
be necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have
to be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
“Euthanasia” is an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to
whoever invented it.

It is only about 24 hours’ sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the
rate the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before then, we are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one
o’clock, so as to be ready.

_25 October, Noon._--No news yet of the ship’s arrival. Mrs. Harker’s
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are as cold as ice,
and an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. It will be a bad look out for the
Count if the edge of that “Kúkri” ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silent to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She had
been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

_Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she has
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

_26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still journeying _somewhere_
is apparent, for Mrs. Harker’s hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same. It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: “lapping
waves and rushing water,” though she added that “the waves were very
faint.” The telegrams from London have been the same: “no further
report.” Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:--

“I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina’s. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance.” I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must try to-night,
at sunset, to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.


_28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming, care
of H.B.M. Vice-Consul, Varna_

“_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o’clock to-day.”


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_28 October._--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz
I do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should
know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels,
even if it be a will-o’-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience, and
we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his hands over his head
for a moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said
not a word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set.
Lord Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself
half stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant “action.” Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark
bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his action
belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of the
great Kukri knife and rested there. “When does the next train start for
Galatz?” said Van Helsing to us generally.

“At 6.30 to-morrow morning!” We all stared, for the answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

“How on earth do you know?” said Art.

“You forget--or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter
I always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
the time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say.”

“Wonderful woman!” murmured the Professor.

“Can’t we get a special?” asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: “I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. Quincey Morris, you see the Vice-Consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since I am here
with Madam to make report.”

“And I,” said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, “shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!”
The three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the
time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
Harker’s journal at the castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

“We mean the same! speak out!”

“There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us.”

“Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?”

“No!” said I, “unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone.”

“You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you something. And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration come to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.
He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that he in his tomb for centuries, that
grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore
small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance! She know
it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want
all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great brain
which is trained like man’s brain, but is of sweet woman and have a
special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never
feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!”

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. Then, holding the pages between his finger
and thumb, he said:--

“Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from, and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that he be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the “Ugly Duck” of my friend
Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I
read here what Jonathan have written:--

“That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over the Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph.”

“What does this tell us? Not much! no! The Count’s child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my
man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another
word from some one who speak without thought because she too know not
what it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are elements which
rest, yet when in nature’s course they move on their way and they
touch--then pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven’s wide,
that blind and kill and destroy some; but that show up all earth
below for leagues and leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain.
To begin, have you ever study the philosophy of crime? ‘Yes’ and
‘No.’ You, John, yes; for it is a study of insanity. You, no, Madam
Mina; for crime touch you not--not but once. Still, your mind works
true, and argues not _a particulari ad universale_. There is this
peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant, in all countries and
at all times, that even police, who know not much from philosophy,
come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to be empiric. The
criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems
predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has
not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but
he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much.
Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he too have
child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done. The little
bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but
empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to him the ground
to start from to do more. ‘_Dos pou sto_,’ said Archimedes. ‘Give me
a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!’ To do once, is the fulcrum
whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to
do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he have
done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened, and that to
you the lightning flash show all the leagues,” for Mrs. Harker began to
clap her hands, and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

“Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes.” He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

“The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso
would so classify him, and _qua_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed
mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past
is a clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a
‘tight place,’ he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. He came again, better equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube
from Turkey land.”

“Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!” said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later
he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

“Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope.” Turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

“But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
Speak, without fear!”

“I will try to; but you will forgive me if I seem egotistical.”

“Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think.”

“Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. So, his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat of
the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I
felt it, Oh! I felt it. Thank God for His great mercy! My soul is freer
than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me is a
fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for his
ends.” The Professor stood up:--

“He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from
us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is
in God’s Providence, the very thing that the evil doer most reckoned
on for his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter
is taken in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he
think he is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us
with so many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him
to sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your
mind, there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail!
That terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to
him in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when
the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by
his; and this power to good of you and others, you have won from your
suffering at his hands. This is now all more precious that he know it
not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge
of our where. We, however, are not all selfish, and we believe that God
is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We
shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril ourselves
that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great hour; and it
have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe and write
him all down, so that when the others return from their work you can
give it to them; then they shall know as we do.”

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us.




CHAPTER XXVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./


_29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more strenuous effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

“I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only
a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear
men’s voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of it seems far away.
There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air
blowing upon me.”

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting
a weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
Harker’s hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his kúkri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

“Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!” We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

“You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land; he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did at
Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he be
carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men may
discover what the box contains. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on shore
to-night, or before dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him. We
may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come on
him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his true
self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered.”

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise
was so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his
whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

“All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood.” She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw
more light on what is happening.

_Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a time
when there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. I am in fear that her power of reading the Count’s
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the Count’s power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

“Something is going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves.” She stopped, and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in answer to the Professor’s imperative questioning. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

_30 October, 7 a.m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may not have time to
write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

“All is dark. I hear the water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound, a
queer one like--” she stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

“Go on; Go on! Speak, I command you!” said Van Helsing in an agonized
voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen
sun was reddening even Mrs. Harker’s pale face. She opened her eyes,
and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
concern:--

“Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can’t? I don’t remember
anything.” Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

“What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was
lying here, half asleep, and I heard you say ‘go on! speak, I command
you!’ It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad
child!”

“Oh, Madam Mina,” he said sadly, “it is proof, if proof be needed,
of how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I
am proud to obey!”

The whistles are sounding; we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language. The forces were distributed
much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice-Consul as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _Czarina Catherine_.

_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the
Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o’clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I
called on Messrs Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm
of Hapgood. They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming’s telegraphed request, asking them to show us any civility
in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us
at once on board the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at anchor out in
the river harbour. There we saw the captain, Donelson by name, who told
us of his voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so
favourable a run.

“Man!” he said, “but it made us afeared, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi’ some rare piece o’ ill luck, so as to keep up the
average. It’s no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi’ a wind
ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin’ on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An’ a’ the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi’ us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi’oot bein’ able to signal; an’ till we
came to the Dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o’ aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if
the Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to
do it whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no
to our miscredit wi’ the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an’ the Old
Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin’ him.” This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

“Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!” The skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

“When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o’ them,
the Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer-lookin’ old man just before we had started
frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the
supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us,
I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn’t say it
was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn’t let up
for five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to
get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a’reet. An’ if he didn’t,
well, we’d keep a sharp look out anyhow. Sure enuch, we had a fair way
and deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin’ sun
came through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite
Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take
out the box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi’ them aboot it
wi’ a handspike; an’ when the last o’ them rose off the deck, wi’ his
head in his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye,
the property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in
the river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I’d let it
lie till we discharged in the port an’ get rid o’t athegither. We didn’t
do much clearin’ that day, an’ had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in
the mornin’, braw an’ airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came aboord
wi’ an order, written to him from England, to receive a box marked for
one Count Dracula. Sure enuch the matter was one ready to his hand. He
had his papers a’ reet, an’ glad I was to be rid o’ the dam’ thing, for
I was beginnin’ masel’ to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any
luggage aboord the ship, I’m thinkin’ it was nane ither than that same!”

“What was the name of the man who took it?” asked Dr. Van Helsing, with
restrained eagerness.

“I’ll be tellin’ ye quick!” he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed “Immanuel Hildesheim.” Burgen-strasse
16 was the address. We found out that this was all the captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were pointed
with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little bargaining
he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but important.
He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to
receive, if possible before sunrise, so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to
give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with Slovaks who
traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by an
English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube
International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. That was all
he knew.

We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated
by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten
and eleven o’clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking, one came running and breathlessly gasped
out that the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the
churchyard of St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if
by some wild animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the
horror, the women crying out, “This is the work of a Slovak!” We hurried
away lest we should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so
detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. We were all
convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was
released from my promise to her.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn-out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the moment. I feel so grateful to the man who invented the
“Traveller’s” typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me.
I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to write with a
pen....

It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. He lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit;
his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I
can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts.
Oh! if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can....

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that
I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow the Professor’s example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

I do believe that under God’s Providence I have made a discovery. I
shall get the maps and look over them....

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready,
so I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


_Mina Harker’s Memorandum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula’s problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for, had
he power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or
wolf, or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusion may help us.
By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving a
city.

(_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) There are, or there might be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his greatest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track. True, he might escape at night; but where would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here is the safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent
invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
The proof of this is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is
also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. This we must only guess at;
but there must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson’s
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the Count’s game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the
Count’s arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along. The customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my husband’s diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing
with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man’s
remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general
feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation.

My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his
Castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the Castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks
who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped for London.
Thus the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map, and find that the river most suitable for the
Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in
the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling
level with my ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is working against stream. There
would be no such sound if floating down stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza,
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as
close to Dracula’s Castle as can be got by water.


_Mina Harker’s Journal--continued._

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The
others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

“Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have seen where
we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream, where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now,
men, to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each
and all shall do.”

“I shall get a steam launch and follow him,” said Lord Godalming.

“And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land,” said Mr.
Morris.

“Good!” said the Professor, “both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms.” All the men smiled, for amongst them
they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

“I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd,
and there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other
precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points.” Dr.
Seward said:--

“I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don’t suppose these fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time;
we shall not rest until the Count’s head and body have been separated,
and we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate.” He looked at Jonathan as
he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was
silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

“Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at
the last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which
has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina;
she will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to
run as once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be,
or to fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can
fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men.
Now let me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming,
and friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river,
and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might
be landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the enemy’s
country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went--from Bistritz over
the Borgo--and find our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina’s
hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all dark and
unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we near that fateful
place. There is much to be done, and other places to be made sanctify,
so that that nest of vipers be obliterated.” Here Jonathan interrupted
him hotly:--

“Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil’s illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!” He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

“Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and ever speck
of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo? Have you
felt the Vampire’s lips upon your throat?” Here he turned to me, and as
his eyes lit on my forehead, he threw up his arms with a cry: “Oh, my
God, what have we done to have this terror upon us?” and he sank down on
the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor’s voice, as he spoke in
clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all:--

“Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful
place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that
place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with our own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are in
terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century; and then
in time our dear one”--he took my hand--“would come to him to keep
him company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You
have told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as
they clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder;
and well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving,
if need be, my life? If it were that anyone went into that place to
stay, it is I who would have to go, to keep them company.”

“Do as you will;” said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, “We
are in the hands of God!”

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men
worked. How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so
true, and so brave! And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of
money! What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it
do when basely used! I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming is rich, and
that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment’s notice. Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris have half a dozen beautiful horses, well appointed. We
have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had.
Professor Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11.40 train to-night
for Veresti, where we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass.
We are bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage
and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can
trust in this matter. The Professor knows something of a great many
languages, so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for
me a large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed
like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar
on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling
me that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

_Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. There must be no tears now--unless it may be that
God will let them fall in gladness.


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch; Lord Godalming is firing up. He is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina’s guess was correct, and that if
any waterway was chosen for the Count’s escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one. We
took it that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be
the place chosen for crossing the country between the river and the
Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart
to make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells
me to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to
be on watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger
hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My
only comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith
it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the
trouble. Mr. Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before
we started; they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get
on higher lands, where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid
the following of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men
to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excite
curiosity. When they dismiss the men, which will be shortly, they will
themselves look after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join
forces; if so they can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a
movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the
furnace door....

_31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are
wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have overhauled every boat,
big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government
boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing
matters, so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have overhauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in
the night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to
tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists
that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness
to poor dear Mina and me.

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept so peacefully
and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish of me to have
slept so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am
a new man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can
do all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back
to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have
got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to
get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard,
they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I
am afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but
we cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder
how Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless
streams running down from the mountains into this river, but as none of
them are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza. I wish it wasn’t so cold. There are signs of snow coming;
and if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge
and go on, Russian fashion.

_4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapid. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope, and steering with knowledge. Some went
up only a few hours before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they
got up the Rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry tell us that after she got upon the smooth water again, she
kept stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must
push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all
I could say was: “Dark and quiet.” He is off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting;
if only it were under different conditions, how delightful it would be
to see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We
are truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray
Him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will
watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may
know that I loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my
latest and truest thought will be always for him.




CHAPTER XXVII.

/Mina Harker’s Journal./


_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed.
The horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they
go willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them
well to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or
tea; and off we go. It is a lovely country; full of beauties of all
imaginable kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and
seem full of nice qualities. They are very, very superstitious. In the
first house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar
on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me,
to keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to the trouble of putting
an extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can’t abide garlic.
Ever since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and
so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we
have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I
daresay that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the
way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest,
though he made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotized
me, and he says that I answered as usual “darkness, lapping water
and creaking wood;” so our enemy is still on the river. I am afraid
to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for
myself. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be
got ready. Dr. Van Helsing is sleeping. Poor dear, he looks very tired
and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror’s; even
in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started
I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days
before us, and he must not break down when most of all his strength
will be needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.

_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving
all night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange
heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean
that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered
“darkness, creaking wood and roaring water,” so the river is changing
as they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God’s hands.

_2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves.
Dr. Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass.
The houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last
horses we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to
change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we
have a rude four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and
they give us no trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and
so even I can drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not
want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest
in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place
where my poor darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided
aright, and that He will deign to watch over my husband and those dear
to us both, and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not
worthy in His sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until
He may deign to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who
have not incurred His wrath.


_Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing._

_4 November._--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D.,
of Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It
is morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she
was not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She, who
is usual so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even
have lost her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she
who write so faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all
is not well. However, to-night she is more _vif_. Her long sleep all
day have refresh and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright
as ever. At sunset I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect;
the power has grown less and less with each day, and to-night it fail
me altogether. Well, God’s will be done--whatever it may be, and
whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography,
I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I
saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual,
but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As
before, came the answer: “darkness and the swirling of water.” Then
she woke, bright and radiant, and we go on our way and soon reach the
Pass. At this time and place she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

“This is the way.”

“How know you it?” I ask.

“Of course I know it,” she answer, and with a pause, add: “Have not my
Jonathan travel it and wrote of his travel?”

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be only
one such by-road. It is used but little, and very different from the
coach road from Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself
to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I
may not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I
harm her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all--in--all to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something; I find myself bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever.
I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off
sunset time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow
flood, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so
steep. For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky,
as though it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when
we first enter the Count’s house. I am amaze, and not at ease then;
but she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget
all fear. I light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us,
and she prepare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in
shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper
ready. I go to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat
already--that she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not,
and I have grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent
of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie
beside the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently
I forget all of watching; and when I sudden remember that I watch,
I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright
eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before
morning. When I wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut
her eyes obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up;
and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not
wake. I have to lift her up and place her sleeping in the carriage when
I have harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep,
and sleep; and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder than
before. And I like it not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am
afraid of all things--even to think; but I must go on my way. The stake
we play for is life and death, or more than these, and we must not
flinch.

_5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though
you and I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first
think that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so
long strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seemed to have
held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and
though I did have hunger and appeased it, I could not waken her--even
for food. I began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon
her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. “Well,” said I to
myself, “if it be that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I
do not sleep at night.” As we travel on the rough road, for a road of
an ancient and imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept.
Again I waked with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam
Mina still sleeping, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed;
the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top
of a steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such as castle as
Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now,
for good or ill, the end was near. I woke Madam Mina, and again tried
to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the
great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected
the gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great twilight--I
took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a
fire; and near it I made Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than
ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would
not eat, simply saying that she had not hunger. I did not press her,
knowing her unavailingness. But I myself eat, for I must needs now be
strong for all. Then, with the fear on me of what might be, I drew a
ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina sat; and over the
ring I passed some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all was
well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she
grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was not more pale; and no
word she said. But when I drew near, she clung to me, and I could know
that the poor soul shook her from head to feet with a tremor that was
pain to feel. I said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet:--

“Will you not come over to the fire?” for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

“Why not go on?” I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

“I cannot!” and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till
I came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them,
they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet
for a time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it
arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time
my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to
die, and I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow
came in flying sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there
was a light of some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as
though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women
with trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence, only that the
horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to
fear--horrible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings were
of the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through,
and all the terrible anxiety. It was as though my memories of all
Jonathan’s horrid experience were befooling me; for the snow flakes and
the mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though
a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And then
the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in
pain. Even the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could
break away. I feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures
drew near and circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and
smiled at me; when I would have stepped to the fire to replenish it,
she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one
hears in a dream, so low it was:--

“No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!” I turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

“But you? It is for you that I fear!” whereat she laughed--a laugh low
and unreal, and said:--

“Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them
than I am,” and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise, till--if God have not
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before
me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room,
when they would have kissed his throat. I knew the swaying round forms,
the bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--

“Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!” In fear I turned to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them.
I seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of
the Wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. They drew back before me,
and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them
not; for I knew that we were safe within our protections. They could
not approach me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained
within the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could
enter. The horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the
snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was
for the poor beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn began to fall through the
snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror;
but when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me
again. At the first coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the
whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which
I could not wake her. I tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she
made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I
have made my fire and have seen the horses; they are all dead. To-day I
have much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high; for
there may be places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow
and mist obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will to my terrible
work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we
follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean to fight. Oh, if
only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no
more, Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 November._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us
dashing away from the river with their leiter-waggon. They surrounded
it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling
lightly and there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be our
own excited feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear
the howling of wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains,
and there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are
nearly ready, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God
alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_Dr. Van Helsing’s Memorandum._

_5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that
mercy at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. When I
left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the
castle. The blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriage from Veresti
was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered I might not get out. Jonathan’s bitter experience served
me here. By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for
I knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if
there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either
there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in terrible
plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not dare to
take into this place, but left safe from the Vampire in that Holy
circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work
lay here, and that as to the wolves we must submit, if it were God’s
Will. At any rate it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose
for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy; the maw
of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the Vampire! So I
make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in
her Vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder
as though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time,
when such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as
mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he
delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination
of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on, and on,
till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful
eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth
present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in
the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the
Un-Dead!...

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour
such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van
Helsing, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved
to a yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to
clog my very soul. It may have been that the need of natural sleep,
and the strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me.
Certain it was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of
one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came through the
snow-stilled air a long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke
me like the sound of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam
Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared
not pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I
should begin to be enthral; but I go on searching until, presently, I
find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other
fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out
of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly
beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in
me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made
my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of
my dear Madam Mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell
could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work.
By this time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I
could tell; and as there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms
around us in the night, I took it that there were no more of active
Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the
rest; huge it was, and nobly proportioned. On it was but one word

DRACULA.

This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many
more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I
knew. Before I began to restore these women to their dead selves
through my awful work, I laid in Dracula’s tomb some of the Wafer, and
so banished him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one,
it had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after
I had been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with the
sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who
had survived through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the
passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their
foul lives?...

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen
the repose in the first face, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have
endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror
and left my work undone. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity
them now and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of
death, for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my
knife severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt
away and crumble into its native dust, as though the death that should
have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once
and loud “I am here!”

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can
the Count enter there Un-Dead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from
her sleep, and seeing me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

“Come!” she said, “come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet
my husband, who is, I know, coming towards us.” She was looking thin
and pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I
was glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of
the fresh horror of that ruddy Vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to
meet our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_
are coming to meet us.


_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_6 November._--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I
took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We
did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to
take heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of
being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some
of our provisions too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so
far as we could see through the snow-fall, there was not even the sign
of a habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the
heavy walking and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where
the clear line of Dracula’s castle cut the sky; for we were so deep
under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the
Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We
could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. The rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.

In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a
rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took
me by the hand and drew me in: “See!” he said, “here you will be in
shelter; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one.” He
brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some
provisions and forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to
do so was repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please
him, I could not bring myself to the attempt. He looked very sad, but
did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood
on the top of the rock, and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he
called out:--

“Look! Madam Mina, look! look!” I sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries, and I could see a long way round. From the height where
we were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond
the white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black
ribbon in kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us
and not far off--in fact so near that I wondered we had not noticed
before--came a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of
them was a cart, a long leiter-waggon, which swept from side to side,
like a dog’s tail wagging, with each stern inequality of the road.
Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see from the men’s
clothes that they were peasants or gipsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for
I felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude
all pursuit. In fear I turned to the Professor; to my consternation,
however, he was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

“At least you shall be safe here from _him_!” He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
“See,” he said, “they come quickly; they are flogging the horses,
and galloping as hard as they can.” He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

“They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God’s will be
done!” Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole
landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:--

“Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the
south. It must be Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look, before the
snow blots it all out!” I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr.
Seward and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of them was
Jonathan. At the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off;
looking around I saw on the north side of the coming party two other
men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan,
and the other I took, of course, to be Lord Godalming. They, too,
were pursuing the party with the cart. When I told the Professor he
shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a
snowfall made sight impossible, he laid his Winchester rifle ready for
use against the boulder at the opening of our shelter. “They are all
converging,” he said. “When the time comes we shall have the gipsies
on all sides.” I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we
were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the
snowstorm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the
snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond, the sun
shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain
tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could see here and there dots
moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves
were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us
in circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm’s length before
us; but at others as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set.

It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than an hour
that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to
converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter
sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven
the snow-clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow
fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the
pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem
to realize, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they seemed,
however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and
lower on the mountain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouched down
behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was
determined that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of
our presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: “Halt!” One was my Jonathan’s,
raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris’s strong resolute
tone of quiet command. The gipsies may not have known the language,
but there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other. The leader of the gipsies, a splendid looking fellow, who sat
his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave
to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses, which
sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and
in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same moment Dr.
Van Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded, the men tightened their reins and
drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man
of the gipsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and
held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out
in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the
hill-tops--and then to the castle, said something which I did not
understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves
from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have felt
terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of
battle must have been upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no
fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing a quick
movement of our parties, the leader of the gipsies gave a command;
his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined
endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness
to carry out the order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it
was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the
levelled weapons or the flashing knives of the gipsies in front, or the
howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their attention.
Jonathan’s impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his purpose,
seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they cowered
aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the cart,
and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box,
and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris
had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of Szgany.
All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had, with the
tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had seen
the knives of the gipsies flash as he won a way through them, and they
cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first I
thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside
Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that with
his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was
spurting through his fingers. He did not delay notwithstanding this,
for as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prise off the lid with his great kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gipsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters,
and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and
made no further resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain
tops, and the shadows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I
saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the
rude falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale,
just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible
vindictive look which I knew too well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan’s great
knife. I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the
same moment Mr. Morris’ bowie knife plunged in the heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every
stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of
the setting sun.

The gipsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away
as if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter-waggon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. The
wolves, which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake,
leaving us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding
his hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his
fingers. I flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back;
so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man
laid back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble
effort, my hand in that of his own which was unstained. He must have
seen the anguish of my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and
said:--

“I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!” he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, “It
was worth this to die! Look! look!”

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. With one
impulse the men sank on their knees, and a deep and earnest “Amen”
broke from all as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger as the
dying man spoke:--

“Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!”

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




NOTE.

Seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It
is an added joy to Mina and to me that our boy’s birthday is the same
day as that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend’s spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we got to talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily
married. I took the papers from the safe where they have been ever
since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all
the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly
one authentic document; nothing but a mass of type-writing, except
the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing’s
memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept
these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he
said, with our boy on his knee:--

“We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. Already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake.”

/Jonathan Harker./







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Romeo and Juliet
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Romeo and Juliet

Author: William Shakespeare


        
Release date: November 1, 1998 [eBook #1513]
                Most recently updated: September 18, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1513

Credits: the PG Shakespeare Team, a team of about twenty Project Gutenberg volunteers


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROMEO AND JULIET ***




THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET

by William Shakespeare




Contents

THE PROLOGUE.

ACT I
Scene I. A public place.
Scene II. A Street.
Scene III. Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. A Hall in Capulet’s House.

ACT II
CHORUS.
Scene I. An open place adjoining Capulet’s Garden.
Scene II. Capulet’s Garden.
Scene III. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. Capulet’s Garden.
Scene VI. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

ACT III
Scene I. A public Place.
Scene II. A Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene III. Friar Lawrence’s cell.
Scene IV. A Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene V. An open Gallery to Juliet’s Chamber, overlooking the Garden.

ACT IV
Scene I. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene II. Hall in Capulet’s House.
Scene III. Juliet’s Chamber.
Scene IV. Hall in Capulet’s House.
Scene V. Juliet’s Chamber; Juliet on the bed.

ACT V
Scene I. Mantua. A Street.
Scene II. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.




 Dramatis Personæ

ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince, and friend to Romeo.
PARIS, a young Nobleman, kinsman to the Prince.
Page to Paris.

MONTAGUE, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Capulets.
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo.
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.

CAPULET, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Montagues.
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
CAPULET’S COUSIN, an old man.
NURSE to Juliet.
PETER, servant to Juliet’s Nurse.
SAMPSON, servant to Capulet.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
Servants.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, a Franciscan.
FRIAR JOHN, of the same Order.
An Apothecary.
CHORUS.
Three Musicians.
An Officer.
Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations to both houses;
Maskers, Guards, Watchmen and Attendants.

SCENE. During the greater part of the Play in Verona; once, in the
Fifth Act, at Mantua.




THE PROLOGUE


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Two households, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-cross’d lovers take their life;
Whose misadventur’d piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.
The fearful passage of their death-mark’d love,
And the continuance of their parents’ rage,
Which, but their children’s end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

 [_Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. A public place.


 Enter Sampson and Gregory armed with swords and bucklers.

SAMPSON.
Gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals.

GREGORY.
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON.
I mean, if we be in choler, we’ll draw.

GREGORY.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o’ the collar.

SAMPSON.
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY.
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou
art moved, thou runn’st away.

SAMPSON.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.

GREGORY.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

SAMPSON.
True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to
the wall: therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall, and
thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON.
’Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the
men I will be civil with the maids, I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY.
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense
thou wilt.

GREGORY.
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and ’tis known I am a
pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY.
’Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John.
Draw thy tool; here comes of the house of Montagues.

 Enter Abram and Balthasar.

SAMPSON.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY.
How? Turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON.
Fear me not.

GREGORY.
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON.
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

SAMPSON.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to
them if they bear it.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
Is the law of our side if I say ay?

GREGORY.
No.

SAMPSON.
No sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY.
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAM.
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON.
But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAM.
No better.

SAMPSON.
Well, sir.

 Enter Benvolio.

GREGORY.
Say better; here comes one of my master’s kinsmen.

SAMPSON.
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM.
You lie.

SAMPSON.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.

 [_They fight._]

BENVOLIO.
Part, fools! put up your swords, you know not what you do.

 [_Beats down their swords._]

 Enter Tybalt.

TYBALT.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward.

 [_They fight._]

 Enter three or four Citizens with clubs.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Clubs, bills and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

 Enter Capulet in his gown, and Lady Capulet.

CAPULET.
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET.
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

CAPULET.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

 Enter Montague and his Lady Montague.

MONTAGUE.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

 Enter Prince Escalus, with Attendants.

PRINCE.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,—
Will they not hear? What, ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper’d weapons to the ground
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb’d the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona’s ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker’d with peace, to part your canker’d hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

 [_Exeunt Prince and Attendants; Capulet, Lady Capulet, Tybalt,
 Citizens and Servants._]

MONTAGUE.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO.
Here were the servants of your adversary
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar’d,
Which, as he breath’d defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hiss’d him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE.
O where is Romeo, saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO.
Madam, an hour before the worshipp’d sun
Peer’d forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursu’d my humour, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn’d who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE.
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO.
Have you importun’d him by any means?

MONTAGUE.
Both by myself and many other friends;
But he, his own affections’ counsellor,
Is to himself—I will not say how true—
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

 Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
See, where he comes. So please you step aside;
I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let’s away,

 [_Exeunt Montague and Lady Montague._]

BENVOLIO.
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO.
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO.
But new struck nine.

ROMEO.
Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO.
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?

ROMEO.
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO.
In love?

ROMEO.
Out.

BENVOLIO.
Of love?

ROMEO.
Out of her favour where I am in love.

BENVOLIO.
Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.

ROMEO.
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here’s much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O anything, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO.
No coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO.
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO.
At thy good heart’s oppression.

ROMEO.
Why such is love’s transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it prest
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purg’d, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes;
Being vex’d, a sea nourish’d with lovers’ tears:
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

 [_Going._]

BENVOLIO.
Soft! I will go along:
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO.
Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here.
This is not Romeo, he’s some other where.

BENVOLIO.
Tell me in sadness who is that you love?

ROMEO.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO.
Groan! Why, no; but sadly tell me who.

ROMEO.
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,
A word ill urg’d to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO.
I aim’d so near when I suppos’d you lov’d.

ROMEO.
A right good markman, and she’s fair I love.

BENVOLIO.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO.
Well, in that hit you miss: she’ll not be hit
With Cupid’s arrow, she hath Dian’s wit;
And in strong proof of chastity well arm’d,
From love’s weak childish bow she lives uncharm’d.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms
Nor bide th’encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O she’s rich in beauty, only poor
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO.
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty starv’d with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO.
Be rul’d by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO.
O teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO.
’Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who pass’d that passing fair?
Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO.
I’ll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Street.

 Enter Capulet, Paris and Servant.

CAPULET.
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and ’tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS.
Of honourable reckoning are you both,
And pity ’tis you liv’d at odds so long.
But now my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET.
But saying o’er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET.
And too soon marr’d are those so early made.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
And she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom’d feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well apparell’d April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, [_gives a paper_] and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

 [_Exeunt Capulet and Paris._]

SERVANT.
Find them out whose names are written here! It is written that the
shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to
find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what
names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good
time!

 Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning,
One pain is lessen’d by another’s anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another’s languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO.
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO.
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO.
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO.
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp’d and tormented and—God-den, good fellow.

SERVANT.
God gi’ go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

SERVANT.
Perhaps you have learned it without book.
But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO.
Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

SERVANT.
Ye say honestly, rest you merry!

ROMEO.
Stay, fellow; I can read.

 [_He reads the letter._]

_Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
The lady widow of Utruvio;
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;
Lucio and the lively Helena. _


A fair assembly. [_Gives back the paper_] Whither should they come?

SERVANT.
Up.

ROMEO.
Whither to supper?

SERVANT.
To our house.

ROMEO.
Whose house?

SERVANT.
My master’s.

ROMEO.
Indeed I should have ask’d you that before.

SERVANT.
Now I’ll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet,
and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.

 [_Exit._]

BENVOLIO.
At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov’st;
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither and with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drown’d, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself pois’d with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh’d
Your lady’s love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO.
I’ll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE.
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What ladybird!
God forbid! Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
How now, who calls?

NURSE.
Your mother.

JULIET.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET.
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again,
I have remember’d me, thou’s hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age.

NURSE.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET.
She’s not fourteen.

NURSE.
I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET.
A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she,—God rest all Christian souls!—
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
’Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean’d,—I never shall forget it—,
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:
Nay, I do bear a brain. But as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
Shake, quoth the dovehouse: ’twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by th’rood
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before she broke her brow,
And then my husband,—God be with his soul!
A was a merry man,—took up the child:
‘Yea,’ quoth he, ‘dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying, and said ‘Ay’.
To see now how a jest shall come about.
I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. ‘Wilt thou not, Jule?’ quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said ‘Ay.’

LADY CAPULET.
Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.

NURSE.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying, and say ‘Ay’;
And yet I warrant it had upon it brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel’s stone;
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
‘Yea,’ quoth my husband, ‘fall’st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ it stinted, and said ‘Ay’.

JULIET.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.

NURSE.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nurs’d:
And I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET.
It is an honour that I dream not of.

NURSE.
An honour! Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck’d wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, think of marriage now: younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief;
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the world—why he’s a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET.
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE.
Nay, he’s a flower, in faith a very flower.

LADY CAPULET.
What say you, can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face,
And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen.
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content;
And what obscur’d in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea; and ’tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE.
No less, nay bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris’ love?

JULIET.
I’ll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady
asked for, the Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity.
I must hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight.

LADY CAPULET.
We follow thee.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE.
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Street.

 Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six Maskers;
 Torch-bearers and others.

ROMEO.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO.
The date is out of such prolixity:
We’ll have no Cupid hoodwink’d with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will,
We’ll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO.
Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO.
Not I, believe me, you have dancing shoes,
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO.
You are a lover, borrow Cupid’s wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO.
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in: [_Putting on a mask._]
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO.
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO.
A torch for me: let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
For I am proverb’d with a grandsire phrase,
I’ll be a candle-holder and look on,
The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO.
Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word:
If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.

ROMEO.
Nay, that’s not so.

MERCUTIO.
I mean sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO.
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But ’tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO.
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO.
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO.
And so did I.

ROMEO.
Well what was yours?

MERCUTIO.
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO.
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Over men’s noses as they lie asleep:
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners’ legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spider’s web;
The collars, of the moonshine’s watery beams;
Her whip of cricket’s bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick’d from the lazy finger of a maid:
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love;
O’er courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight;
O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail,
Tickling a parson’s nose as a lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscados, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night;
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she,—

ROMEO.
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,
Thou talk’st of nothing.

MERCUTIO.
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger’d, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO.
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO.
I fear too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night’s revels; and expire the term
Of a despised life, clos’d in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my suit. On, lusty gentlemen!

BENVOLIO.
Strike, drum.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.

FIRST SERVANT.
Where’s Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!

SECOND SERVANT.
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men’s hands, and they
unwash’d too, ’tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVANT.
Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the
plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me,
let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!

SECOND SERVANT.
Ay, boy, ready.

FIRST SERVANT.
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the
great chamber.

SECOND SERVANT.
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk awhile, and
the longer liver take all.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Capulet, &c. with the Guests and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.

CAPULET.
Welcome, gentlemen, ladies that have their toes
Unplagu’d with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She I’ll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear,
Such as would please; ’tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone,
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall, give room! And foot it, girls.

 [_Music plays, and they dance._]

More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlook’d-for sport comes well.
Nay sit, nay sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days;
How long is’t now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET’S COUSIN.
By’r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET.
What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much:
’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask’d.

CAPULET’S COUSIN.
’Tis more, ’tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET.
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO.
What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVANT.
I know not, sir.

ROMEO.
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT.
This by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Come hither, cover’d with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET.
Why how now, kinsman!
Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET.
Young Romeo, is it?

TYBALT.
’Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET.
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern’d youth.
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT.
It fits when such a villain is a guest:
I’ll not endure him.

CAPULET.
He shall be endur’d.
What, goodman boy! I say he shall, go to;
Am I the master here, or you? Go to.
You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You’ll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man!

TYBALT.
Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.

CAPULET.
Go to, go to!
You are a saucy boy. Is’t so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.
You must contrary me! Marry, ’tis time.
Well said, my hearts!—You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—For shame!
I’ll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts.

TYBALT.
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
[_To Juliet._] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.

ROMEO.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO.
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do:
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.

ROMEO.
Then move not while my prayer’s effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg’d.
[_Kissing her._]

JULIET.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg’d!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET.
You kiss by the book.

NURSE.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO.
What is her mother?

NURSE.
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nurs’d her daughter that you talk’d withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.

BENVOLIO.
Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e’en so? Why then, I thank you all;
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let’s to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late,
I’ll to my rest.

 [_Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse._]

JULIET.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?

NURSE.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET.
What’s he that now is going out of door?

NURSE.
Marry, that I think be young Petruchio.

JULIET.
What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE.
I know not.

JULIET.
Go ask his name. If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE.
What’s this? What’s this?

JULIET.
A rhyme I learn’d even now
Of one I danc’d withal.

 [_One calls within, ‘Juliet’._]

NURSE.
Anon, anon!
Come let’s away, the strangers all are gone.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan’d for and would die,
With tender Juliet match’d, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is belov’d, and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
But to his foe suppos’d he must complain,
And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. An open place adjoining Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

 [_He climbs the wall and leaps down within it._]

 Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
He is wise,
And on my life hath stol’n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO.
He ran this way, and leap’d this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, I’ll conjure too.
Romeo! Humours! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but ‘Ah me!’ Pronounce but Love and dove;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua lov’d the beggar-maid.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO.
This cannot anger him. ’Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it, and conjur’d it down;
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest, and, in his mistress’ name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open-arse and thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle-bed.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO.
Go then; for ’tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

 Juliet appears above at a window.

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun!
Arise fair sun and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, ’tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.

JULIET.
Ay me.

ROMEO.
She speaks.
O speak again bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o’er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name.
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO.
[_Aside._] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET.
’Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What’s Montague? It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O be some other name.
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call’d,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

ROMEO.
I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I’ll be new baptis’d;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET.
What man art thou that, thus bescreen’d in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO.
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue’s utterance, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO.
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET.
How cam’st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO.
With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO.
I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET.
By whose direction found’st thou out this place?

ROMEO.
By love, that first did prompt me to enquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash’d with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET.
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say Ay,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear’st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I’ll frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;
And therefore thou mayst think my ’haviour light:
But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard’st, ere I was ’ware,
My true-love passion; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,—

JULIET.
O swear not by the moon, th’inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO.
What shall I swear by?

JULIET.
Do not swear at all.
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I’ll believe thee.

ROMEO.
If my heart’s dear love,—

JULIET.
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight;
It is too rash, too unadvis’d, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say “It lightens.” Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO.
O wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO.
Th’exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.

JULIET.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO.
Would’st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET.
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have;
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.
[_Nurse calls within._]
Anon, good Nurse!—Sweet Montague be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
O blessed, blessed night. I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

 Enter Juliet above.

JULIET.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE.
[_Within._] Madam.

JULIET.
I come, anon.— But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee,—

NURSE.
[_Within._] Madam.

JULIET.
By and by I come—
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO.
So thrive my soul,—

JULIET.
A thousand times good night.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.

 [_Retiring slowly._]

 Re-enter Juliet, above.

JULIET.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer’s voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of my Romeo’s name.

ROMEO.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET.
Romeo.

ROMEO.
My dear?

JULIET.
What o’clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO.
By the hour of nine.

JULIET.
I will not fail. ’Tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO.
And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET.
’Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton’s bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO.
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET.
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly Sire’s cell,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence with a basket.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
The grey-ey’d morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day’s pathway, made by Titan’s fiery wheels
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and night’s dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that’s nature’s mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb:
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find.
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strain’d from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometime’s by action dignified.

 Enter Romeo.

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs,—grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO.
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper’d head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff’d brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uprous’d with some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
God pardon sin. Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO.
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name, and that name’s woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
That’s my good son. But where hast thou been then?

ROMEO.
I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man; for lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO.
Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combin’d, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
We met, we woo’d, and made exchange of vow,
I’ll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash’d thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash’d off yet.
If ere thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline,
And art thou chang’d? Pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there’s no strength in men.

ROMEO.
Thou chidd’st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO.
And bad’st me bury love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO.
I pray thee chide me not, her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come young waverer, come go with me,
In one respect I’ll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households’ rancour to pure love.

ROMEO.
O let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Street.

 Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO.
Not to his father’s; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, torments him so
that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, hath sent a letter to his father’s
house.

MERCUTIO.
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO.
Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO.
Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead, stabbed with a white wench’s black
eye; run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart
cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt-shaft. And is he a man to encounter
Tybalt?

BENVOLIO.
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO.
More than Prince of cats. O, he’s the courageous captain of
compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance,
and proportion. He rests his minim rest, one, two, and the third in
your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist;
a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah,
the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hay.

BENVOLIO.
The what?

MERCUTIO.
The pox of such antic lisping, affecting phantasies; these new tuners
of accent. By Jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good
whore. Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should
be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers,
these pardon-me’s, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot
sit at ease on the old bench? O their bones, their bones!

 Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou
fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to
his lady, was but a kitchen wench,—marry, she had a better love to
berhyme her: Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gypsy; Helen and Hero hildings
and harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bonjour! There’s a French salutation to your French slop. You
gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO.
The slip sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO.
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as
mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO.
That’s as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow
in the hams.

ROMEO.
Meaning, to curtsy.

MERCUTIO.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO.
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO.
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO.
Right.

ROMEO.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO.
Sure wit, follow me this jest now, till thou hast worn out thy pump,
that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the
wearing, solely singular.

ROMEO.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!

MERCUTIO.
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO.
Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or I’ll cry a match.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done. For thou hast
more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits, than I am sure, I have in my
whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO.
Thou wast never with me for anything, when thou wast not there for the
goose.

MERCUTIO.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO.
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.

ROMEO.
And is it not then well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO.
O here’s a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an
ell broad.

ROMEO.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which added to the goose, proves
thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou
sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as
well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO.
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO.
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short, for I was come to the
whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.

 Enter Nurse and Peter.

ROMEO.
Here’s goodly gear!
A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO.
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

NURSE.
Peter!

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO.
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan’s the fairer face.

NURSE.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO.
God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE.
Is it good-den?

MERCUTIO.
’Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the
prick of noon.

NURSE.
Out upon you! What a man are you?

ROMEO.
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

NURSE.
By my troth, it is well said; for himself to mar, quoth a? Gentlemen,
can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO.
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him
than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.

NURSE.
You say well.

MERCUTIO.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i’faith; wisely, wisely.

NURSE.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.

BENVOLIO.
She will endite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!

ROMEO.
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO.
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something
stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[_Sings._]
    An old hare hoar,
    And an old hare hoar,
  Is very good meat in Lent;
    But a hare that is hoar
    Is too much for a score
  When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father’s? We’ll to dinner thither.

ROMEO.
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, lady, lady, lady.

 [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._]

NURSE.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his
ropery?

ROMEO.
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak
more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

NURSE.
And a speak anything against me, I’ll take him down, and a were lustier
than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, I’ll find those
that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of
his skains-mates.—And thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to
use me at his pleasure!

PETER.
I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had, my weapon should
quickly have been out. I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another
man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.

NURSE.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy
knave. Pray you, sir, a word: and as I told you, my young lady bid me
enquire you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first
let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fool’s paradise, as they
say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say; for the
gentlewoman is young. And therefore, if you should deal double with
her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and
very weak dealing.

ROMEO. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
thee,—

NURSE.
Good heart, and i’faith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will
be a joyful woman.

ROMEO.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

NURSE.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a
gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO.
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence’ cell
Be shriv’d and married. Here is for thy pains.

NURSE.
No truly, sir; not a penny.

ROMEO.
Go to; I say you shall.

NURSE.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO.
And stay, good Nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains;
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE.
Now God in heaven bless thee. Hark you, sir.

ROMEO.
What say’st thou, my dear Nurse?

NURSE.
Is your man secret? Did you ne’er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO.
I warrant thee my man’s as true as steel.

NURSE.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord! When ’twas a
little prating thing,—O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that
would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her that
Paris is the properer man, but I’ll warrant you, when I say so, she
looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO.
Ay, Nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE.
Ah, mocker! That’s the dog’s name. R is for the—no, I know it begins
with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it,
of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO.
Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE.
Ay, a thousand times. Peter!

 [_Exit Romeo._]

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
Before and apace.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so.
O, she is lame. Love’s heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun’s beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion’d doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She’d be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.

 Enter Nurse and Peter.

O God, she comes. O honey Nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

NURSE.
Peter, stay at the gate.

 [_Exit Peter._]

JULIET.
Now, good sweet Nurse,—O Lord, why look’st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou sham’st the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE.
I am aweary, give me leave awhile;
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I had!

JULIET.
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come, I pray thee speak; good, good Nurse, speak.

NURSE.
Jesu, what haste? Can you not stay a while? Do you not see that I am
out of breath?

JULIET.
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that;
Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied, is’t good or bad?

NURSE.
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man.
Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than any man’s, yet his
leg excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though
they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the
flower of courtesy, but I’ll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET.
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE.
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o’ t’other side,—O my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down.

JULIET.
I’faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?

NURSE.
Your love says like an honest gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous,—Where is your mother?

JULIET.
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest.
‘Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
‘Where is your mother?’

NURSE.
O God’s lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET.
Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE.
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET.
I have.

NURSE.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’ cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I’ll to dinner; hie you to the cell.

JULIET.
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO.
Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

 Enter Juliet.

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap’d like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music’s tongue
Unfold the imagin’d happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET.
Conceit more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A public Place.


 Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, Page and Servants.

BENVOLIO.
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
For now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO.
Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of
a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says ‘God send me no
need of thee!’ and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the
drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO.
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO.
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy; and as
soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO.
And what to?

MERCUTIO.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would
kill the other. Thou? Why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a
hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel
with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy
head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast
quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall
out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? with
another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO.
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee
simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO.
The fee simple! O simple!

 Enter Tybalt and others.

BENVOLIO.
By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO.
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good-den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO.
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; make it a
word and a blow.

TYBALT.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me
occasion.

MERCUTIO.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT.
Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? And thou make minstrels of
us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here’s my fiddlestick, here’s
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO.
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO.
Men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.

 Enter Romeo.

TYBALT.
Well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man.

MERCUTIO.
But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him man.

TYBALT.
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: Thou art a villain.

ROMEO.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know’st me not.

TYBALT.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO.
I do protest I never injur’d thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
[_Draws._] Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT.
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO.
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that I mean to
make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest
of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears?
Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

TYBALT.
[_Drawing._] I am for you.

ROMEO.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO.
Come, sir, your passado.

 [_They fight._]

ROMEO.
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage,
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!

 [_Exeunt Tybalt with his Partizans._]

MERCUTIO.
I am hurt.
A plague o’ both your houses. I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO.
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, ’tis enough.
Where is my page? Go villain, fetch a surgeon.

 [_Exit Page._]

ROMEO.
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO.
No, ’tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but ’tis
enough, ’twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a
grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o’ both
your houses. Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to
death. A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic!—Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.

ROMEO.
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o’ both your houses.
They have made worms’ meat of me.
I have it, and soundly too. Your houses!

 [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._]

ROMEO.
This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain’d
With Tybalt’s slander,—Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften’d valour’s steel.

 Re-enter Benvolio.

BENVOLIO.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio’s dead,
That gallant spirit hath aspir’d the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO.
This day’s black fate on mo days doth depend;
This but begins the woe others must end.

 Re-enter Tybalt.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO.
Again in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective lenity,
And fire-ey’d fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the ‘villain’ back again
That late thou gav’st me, for Mercutio’s soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT.
Thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO.
This shall determine that.

 [_They fight; Tybalt falls._]

BENVOLIO.
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amaz’d. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO.
O, I am fortune’s fool!

BENVOLIO.
Why dost thou stay?

 [_Exit Romeo._]

 Enter Citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Which way ran he that kill’d Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO.
There lies that Tybalt.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince’s name obey.

 Enter Prince, attended; Montague, Capulet, their Wives and others.

PRINCE.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO.
O noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother’s child!
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill’d
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin.

PRINCE.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urg’d withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow’d
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
‘Hold, friends! Friends, part!’ and swifter than his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And ’twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain’d revenge,
And to’t they go like lightning; for, ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain;
And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE.
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio’s friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE.
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hate’s proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus’ lodging. Such a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway’s eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk’d of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties: or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play’d for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmann’d blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night, come Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back.
Come gentle night, come loving black-brow’d night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess’d it; and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy’d. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my Nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.

 Enter Nurse, with cords.

Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there?
The cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE.
Ay, ay, the cords.

 [_Throws them down._]

JULIET.
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE.
Ah, well-a-day, he’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he’s gone, he’s kill’d, he’s dead.

JULIET.
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE.
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET.
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar’d in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but Ay,
And that bare vowel I shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer Ay.
If he be slain, say Ay; or if not, No.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

NURSE.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark!—here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub’d in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.

JULIET.
O, break, my heart. Poor bankrout, break at once.
To prison, eyes; ne’er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.

NURSE.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had.
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead.

JULIET.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter’d and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone?

NURSE.
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that kill’d him, he is banished.

JULIET.
O God! Did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?

NURSE.
It did, it did; alas the day, it did.

JULIET.
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical,
Dove-feather’d raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace.

NURSE.
There’s no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjur’d,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where’s my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo.

JULIET.
Blister’d be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is asham’d to sit;
For ’tis a throne where honour may be crown’d
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE.
Will you speak well of him that kill’d your cousin?

JULIET.
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three-hours’ wife have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill’d my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death,
That murder’d me. I would forget it fain,
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners’ minds.
Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.
That ‘banished,’ that one word ‘banished,’
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there.
Or if sour woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be rank’d with other griefs,
Why follow’d not, when she said Tybalt’s dead,
Thy father or thy mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have mov’d?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt’s death,
‘Romeo is banished’—to speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word’s death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?

NURSE.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET.
Wash they his wounds with tears. Mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil’d,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exil’d.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come cords, come Nurse, I’ll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead.

NURSE.
Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
I’ll to him, he is hid at Lawrence’ cell.

JULIET.
O find him, give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Friar Lawrence’s cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enanmour’d of thy parts
And thou art wedded to calamity.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.

ROMEO.
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
A gentler judgment vanish’d from his lips,
Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.

ROMEO.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say death;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO.
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banish’d from the world,
And world’s exile is death. Then banished
Is death misterm’d. Calling death banished,
Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath brush’d aside the law,
And turn’d that black word death to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou see’st it not.

ROMEO.
’Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
They are free men but I am banished.
And say’st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix’d, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess’d,
To mangle me with that word banished?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little,

ROMEO.
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I’ll give thee armour to keep off that word,
Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO.
Yet banished? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a Prince’s doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, then I see that mad men have no ears.

ROMEO.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

 [_Knocking within._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.

 [_Knocking._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo, arise,
Thou wilt be taken.—Stay awhile.—Stand up.

 [_Knocking._]

Run to my study.—By-and-by.—God’s will,
What simpleness is this.—I come, I come.

 [_Knocking._]

Who knocks so hard? Whence come you, what’s your will?

NURSE.
[_Within._] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Welcome then.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,
Where is my lady’s lord, where’s Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

NURSE.
O, he is even in my mistress’ case.
Just in her case! O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament. Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man.
For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO.
Nurse.

NURSE.
Ah sir, ah sir, death’s the end of all.

ROMEO.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain’d the childhood of our joy
With blood remov’d but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My conceal’d lady to our cancell’d love?

NURSE.
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand
Murder’d her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

 [_Drawing his sword._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amaz’d me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper’d.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady, that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou sham’st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow’d to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember’d with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew’st Tybalt; there art thou happy.
The law that threaten’d death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But like a misshaped and sullen wench,
Thou putt’st up thy Fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE.
O Lord, I could have stay’d here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE.
Here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
How well my comfort is reviv’d by this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguis’d from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand; ’tis late; farewell; good night.

ROMEO.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and Paris.

CAPULET.
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lov’d her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
’Tis very late; she’ll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS.
These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
Tonight she’s mew’d up to her heaviness.

CAPULET.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child’s love. I think she will be rul’d
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next,
But, soft, what day is this?

PARIS.
Monday, my lord.

CAPULET.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be; a Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We’ll keep no great ado,—a friend or two,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET.
Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very very late that we
May call it early by and by. Good night.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. An open Gallery to Juliet’s Chamber, overlooking the Garden.

 Enter Romeo and Juliet.

JULIET.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierc’d the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou need’st not to be gone.

ROMEO.
Let me be ta’en, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye,
’Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia’s brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, death, and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is’t, my soul? Let’s talk. It is not day.

JULIET.
It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes.
O, now I would they had chang’d voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day.
O now be gone, more light and light it grows.

ROMEO.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Madam.

JULIET.
Nurse?

NURSE.
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke, be wary, look about.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO.
Farewell, farewell, one kiss, and I’ll descend.

 [_Descends._]

JULIET.
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO.
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET.
O thinkest thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO.
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET.
O God! I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.

ROMEO.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.

 [_Exit below._]

JULIET.
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renown’d for faith? Be fickle, Fortune;
For then, I hope thou wilt not keep him long
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET.
[_Within._] Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET.
Who is’t that calls? Is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom’d cause procures her hither?

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET.
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET.
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughter’d him.

JULIET.
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET.
That same villain Romeo.

JULIET.
Villain and he be many miles asunder.
God pardon him. I do, with all my heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET.
Ay madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death.

LADY CAPULET.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish’d runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom’d dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET.
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him—dead—
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex’d.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him nam’d, and cannot come to him,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughter’d him.

LADY CAPULET.
Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man.
But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I look’d not for.

JULIET.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET.
Now by Saint Peter’s Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed.

LADY CAPULET.
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

 Enter Capulet and Nurse.

CAPULET.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother’s son
It rains downright.
How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Who raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you deliver’d to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET.
Soft. Take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET.
How now, how now, chopp’d logic? What is this?
Proud, and, I thank you, and I thank you not;
And yet not proud. Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?

JULIET.
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what,—get thee to church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE.
God in heaven bless her.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET.
And why, my lady wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE.
I speak no treason.

CAPULET.
O God ye good-en!

NURSE.
May not one speak?

CAPULET.
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET.
You are too hot.

CAPULET.
God’s bread, it makes me mad!
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match’d, and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied,
Stuff’d, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion’d as one’s thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender,
To answer, ‘I’ll not wed, I cannot love,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.’
But, and you will not wed, I’ll pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to’t, think on’t, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to’t, bethink you, I’ll not be forsworn.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET.
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
O God! O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.
What say’st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, Nurse.

NURSE.
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne’er come back to challenge you.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he’s a lovely gentleman.
Romeo’s a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET.
Speakest thou from thy heart?

NURSE.
And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET.
Amen.

NURSE.
What?

JULIET.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeas’d my father, to Lawrence’ cell,
To make confession and to be absolv’d.

NURSE.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath prais’d him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I’ll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

 [_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.


 Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS.
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
You say you do not know the lady’s mind.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.

PARIS.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death,
And therefore have I little talk’d of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway;
And in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
[_Aside._] I would I knew not why it should be slow’d.—
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

 Enter Juliet.

PARIS.
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS.
That may be, must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET.
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
That’s a certain text.

PARIS.
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET.
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS.
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET.
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS.
Poor soul, thy face is much abus’d with tears.

JULIET.
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS.
Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander’d it.

JULIET.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.—
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS.
God shield I should disturb devotion!—
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye,
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
O shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET.
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hear’st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I’ll help it presently.
God join’d my heart and Romeo’s, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo’s seal’d,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc’d time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
’Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die,
If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop’st with death himself to scape from it.
And if thou dar’st, I’ll give thee remedy.

JULIET.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears;
Or hide me nightly in a charnel-house,
O’er-cover’d quite with dead men’s rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain’d wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow;
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest,
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes; thy eyes’ windows fall,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part depriv’d of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death.
And in this borrow’d likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes, uncover’d, on the bier,
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET.
Give me, give me! O tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, Nurse and Servants.

CAPULET.
So many guests invite as here are writ.

 [_Exit first Servant._]

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SECOND SERVANT.
You shall have none ill, sir; for I’ll try if they can lick their
fingers.

CAPULET.
How canst thou try them so?

SECOND SERVANT.
Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers;
therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET.
Go, begone.

 [_Exit second Servant._]

We shall be much unfurnish’d for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE.
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET.
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-will’d harlotry it is.

 Enter Juliet.

NURSE.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET.
How now, my headstrong. Where have you been gadding?

JULIET.
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests; and am enjoin’d
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever rul’d by you.

CAPULET.
Send for the County, go tell him of this.
I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence’ cell,
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET.
Why, I am glad on’t. This is well. Stand up.
This is as’t should be. Let me see the County.
Ay, marry. Go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now afore God, this reverend holy Friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET.
Go, Nurse, go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.

 [_Exeunt Juliet and Nurse._]

LADY CAPULET.
We shall be short in our provision,
’Tis now near night.

CAPULET.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
I’ll not to bed tonight, let me alone.
I’ll play the housewife for this once.—What, ho!—
They are all forth: well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim’d.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Juliet’s Chamber.

 Enter Juliet and Nurse.

JULIET.
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight;
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know’st, is cross and full of sin.

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET.
No, madam; we have cull’d such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET.
Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.

 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._]

JULIET.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I’ll call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse!—What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

 [_Laying down her dagger._]

What if it be a poison, which the Friar
Subtly hath minister’d to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour’d,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There’s a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are pack’d,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort—
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad.
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers’ joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin’s ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier’s point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, here’s drink! I drink to thee.

 [_Throws herself on the bed._]

SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.

NURSE.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

 Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow’d,
The curfew bell hath rung, ’tis three o’clock.
Look to the bak’d meats, good Angelica;
Spare not for cost.

NURSE.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, you’ll be sick tomorrow
For this night’s watching.

CAPULET.
No, not a whit. What! I have watch’d ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._]

CAPULET.
A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

 Enter Servants, with spits, logs and baskets.

Now, fellow, what’s there?

FIRST SERVANT.
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET.
Make haste, make haste.

 [_Exit First Servant._]

—Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVANT.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

 [_Exit._]

CAPULET.
Mass and well said; a merry whoreson, ha.
Thou shalt be loggerhead.—Good faith, ’tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.

 [_Play music._]

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!

 Re-enter Nurse.

Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up.
I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste I say.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Juliet’s Chamber; Juliet on the bed.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb, why, lady, fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry and amen. How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He’ll fright you up, i’faith. Will it not be?
What, dress’d, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady’s dead!
O, well-a-day that ever I was born.
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! My lady!

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What noise is here?

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
What is the matter?

NURSE.
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET.
O me, O me! My child, my only life.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

 Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.

NURSE.
She’s dead, deceas’d, she’s dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET.
Alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!

CAPULET.
Ha! Let me see her. Out alas! She’s cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
O woful time!

CAPULET.
Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

 Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris with Musicians.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET.
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath death lain with thy bride. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all; life, living, all is death’s.

PARIS.
Have I thought long to see this morning’s face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET.
Accurs’d, unhappy, wretched, hateful day.
Most miserable hour that e’er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch’d it from my sight.

NURSE.
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day.
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woeful day, O woeful day.

PARIS.
Beguil’d, divorced, wronged, spited, slain.
Most detestable death, by thee beguil’d,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET.
Despis’d, distressed, hated, martyr’d, kill’d.
Uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul, and not my child,
Dead art thou. Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Peace, ho, for shame. Confusion’s cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For ’twas your heaven she should be advanc’d,
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc’d
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She’s not well married that lives married long,
But she’s best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to church;
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.

CAPULET.
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris, everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lower upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

 [_Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris and Friar._]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For well you know this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

 [_Exit Nurse._]

 Enter Peter.

PETER.
Musicians, O, musicians, ‘Heart’s ease,’ ‘Heart’s ease’, O, and you
will have me live, play ‘Heart’s ease.’

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Why ‘Heart’s ease’?

PETER.
O musicians, because my heart itself plays ‘My heart is full’. O play
me some merry dump to comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Not a dump we, ’tis no time to play now.

PETER.
You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
No.

PETER.
I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What will you give us?

PETER.
No money, on my faith, but the gleek! I will give you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Then will I give you the serving-creature.

PETER.
Then will I lay the serving-creature’s dagger on your pate. I will
carry no crotchets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
And you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER.
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and
put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
    ‘When griping griefs the heart doth wound,
      And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
    Then music with her silver sound’—
Why ‘silver sound’? Why ‘music with her silver sound’? What say you,
Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER.
Prates. What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN.
I say ‘silver sound’ because musicians sound for silver.

PETER.
Prates too! What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN.
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER.
O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is
‘music with her silver sound’ because musicians have no gold for
sounding.
      ‘Then music with her silver sound
      With speedy help doth lend redress.’

 [_Exit._]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Hang him, Jack. Come, we’ll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay
dinner.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Mantua. A Street.


 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom’d spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead,—
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!—
And breath’d such life with kisses in my lips,
That I reviv’d, and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possess’d,
When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy.

 Enter Balthasar.

News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again;
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capel’s monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault,
And presently took post to tell it you.
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO.
Is it even so? Then I defy you, stars!
Thou know’st my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR.
I do beseech you sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO.
Tush, thou art deceiv’d.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR.
No, my good lord.

ROMEO.
No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I’ll be with thee straight.

 [_Exit Balthasar._]

Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let’s see for means. O mischief thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary,—
And hereabouts he dwells,—which late I noted
In tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples, meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff’d, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scatter’d, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
And if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut.
What, ho! Apothecary!

 Enter Apothecary.

APOTHECARY.
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO.
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharg’d of breath
As violently as hasty powder fir’d
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.

APOTHECARY.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

APOTHECARY.
My poverty, but not my will consents.

ROMEO.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

APOTHECARY.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would despatch you straight.

ROMEO.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men’s souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet’s grave, for there must I use thee.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar John.

FRIAR JOHN.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!

 Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal’d up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay’d.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who bare my letter then to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN.
I could not send it,—here it is again,—
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN.
Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee.

 [_Exit._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, clos’d in a dead man’s tomb.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.

 Enter Paris, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch.

PARIS.
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear’st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE.
[_Aside._] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.

 [_Retires._]

PARIS.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distill’d by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.

 [_The Page whistles._]

The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love’s rite?
What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.

 [_Retires._]

 Enter Romeo and Balthasar with a torch, mattock, &c.

ROMEO.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate’er thou hear’st or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady’s face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
But if thou jealous dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild;
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live, and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR.
For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

 [_Retires_]

ROMEO.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorg’d with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

 [_Breaking open the door of the monument._]

And in despite, I’ll cram thee with more food.

PARIS.
This is that banish’d haughty Montague
That murder’d my love’s cousin,—with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died,—
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.

 [_Advances._]

Stop thy unhallow’d toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursu’d further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O be gone.
By heaven I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm’d against myself.
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A madman’s mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS.
I do defy thy conjuration,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!

 [_They fight._]

PAGE.
O lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

 [_Exit._]

PARIS.
O, I am slain! [_Falls._] If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

 [_Dies._]

ROMEO.
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book.
I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A grave? O no, a lantern, slaught’red youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr’d.

 [_Laying Paris in the monument._]

How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! Which their keepers call
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife,
Death that hath suck’d the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquer’d. Beauty’s ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death’s pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin. Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous;
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee,
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest;
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace! And, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark.
Here’s to my love! [_Drinks._] O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

 [_Dies._]

 Enter, at the other end of the Churchyard, Friar Lawrence, with a
 lantern, crow, and spade.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Saint Francis be my speed. How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Who’s there?
Who is it that consorts, so late, the dead?

BALTHASAR.
Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels’ monument.

BALTHASAR.
It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who is it?

BALTHASAR.
Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR.
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR.
I dare not, sir;
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Stay then, I’ll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo! [_Advances._]
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour’d by this place of peace?

 [_Enters the monument._]

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steep’d in blood? Ah what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The lady stirs.

 [_Juliet wakes and stirs._]

JULIET.
O comfortable Friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

 [_Noise within._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

JULIET.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.

 [_Exit Friar Lawrence._]

What’s here? A cup clos’d in my true love’s hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
O churl. Drink all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.

 [_Kisses him._]

Thy lips are warm!

FIRST WATCH.
[_Within._] Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET.
Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief. O happy dagger.

 [_Snatching Romeo’s dagger._]

This is thy sheath. [_stabs herself_] There rest, and let me die.

 [_Falls on Romeo’s body and dies._]

 Enter Watch with the Page of Paris.

PAGE.
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH.
The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you, whoe’er you find attach.

 [_Exeunt some of the Watch._]

Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go tell the Prince; run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues, some others search.

 [_Exeunt others of the Watch._]

We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

 Re-enter some of the Watch with Balthasar.

SECOND WATCH.
Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.

FIRST WATCH.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

 Re-enter others of the Watch with Friar Lawrence.

THIRD WATCH. Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

FIRST WATCH.
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

 Enter the Prince and Attendants.

PRINCE.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning’s rest?

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and others.

CAPULET.
What should it be that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET.
O the people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH.
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill’d.

PRINCE.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

FIRST WATCH.
Here is a Friar, and slaughter’d Romeo’s man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men’s tombs.

CAPULET.
O heaven! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista’en, for lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter’s bosom.

LADY CAPULET.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

 Enter Montague and others.

PRINCE.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son’s exile hath stopp’d her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE.
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE.
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excus’d.

PRINCE.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife.
I married them; and their stol’n marriage day
Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death
Banish’d the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin’d.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth’d, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks, bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrow’d grave,
Being the time the potion’s force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay’d by accident; and yesternight
Return’d my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her Nurse is privy. And if ought in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrific’d, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE.
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say to this?

BALTHASAR.
I brought my master news of Juliet’s death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threaten’d me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.

PRINCE.
Give me the letter, I will look on it.
Where is the County’s Page that rais’d the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE.
He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE.
This letter doth make good the Friar’s words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish’d.

CAPULET.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE.
But I can give thee more,
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET.
As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardon’d, and some punished,
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

 [_Exeunt._]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROMEO AND JULIET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bidwell's Travels, from Wall Street to London Prison: Fifteen Years in Solitude
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bidwell's Travels, from Wall Street to London Prison: Fifteen Years in Solitude

Author: Austin Bidwell


        
Release date: March 2, 2008 [eBook #24739]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/24739

Credits: Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIDWELL'S TRAVELS, FROM WALL STREET TO LONDON PRISON: FIFTEEN YEARS IN SOLITUDE ***




Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









BIDWELL'S TRAVELS.

FROM

Wall Street

To London Prison


_Fifteen Years in Solitude._


  FREED A HUMAN WRECK, A WONDERFUL SURVIVAL AND A MORE
    WONDERFUL RISE IN THE WORLD.
  TO-DAY HE HAS A NATIONAL REPUTATION AS A WRITER, SPEAKER
    AND IS CONSIDERED AN AUTHORITY ON ALL SOCIAL PROBLEMS.
  HE WAS TRIED AT THE OLD BAILEY AND SENTENCED FOR LIFE.
    CHARGED WITH THE L1,000,000 FORGERY ON THE BANK
      OF ENGLAND.

  THIS STORY SHOWS THAT THE EVENTS OF HIS LIFE SURPASS THE
    IMAGINATIONS OF OUR FAMOUS NOVELISTS, ITS THRILLING
      SCENES, HAIR-BREADTH ESCAPES AND MARVELOUS ADVENTURES
        ARE NOT A RECORD OF CRIME,
          BUT ARE PROOFS OF THAT

_IN THE WORLD OF WRONGDOING SUCCESS IS FAILURE._



490 Pages. 80 Graphic Illustrations.


Copyrighted 1897 by BIDWELL PUBLISHING COMPANY, HARTFORD, CONN.


Editorial New York Herald.

_Referring to a Whole Page._

"If an American dramatist or novelist had taken for the ground work of a
play or work of fiction the story of the Bidwell family to-day related
on another page of the Herald, all European critics would have told him
that the story was too 'American,' too vast in its outlines, too high in
its colors, too merely 'big' in fact.

"The story has its lesson. The play is not a mere spectacle. The lesson
is that in the doing and undoing of wrong the Bidwell family expended
enough ability and energy to stock a good many reigning European
families for generations.

"Let the Comedie Humaine write itself and it will outwrite Balzac."


Hon. Lyman J. Gage.

Having read the Bidwell book I believe it will benefit every one to read
this marvellous history of human experience.

Aside from its dramatic interest there are great moral lessons involved
of especial value to young men and employees in positions of trust.

Therefore, I recommend this book as unique and a valuable acquisition
for home and office.


From Chas. M. Stead, Union League Club, New York.

"_Dear Sir_--I read your book with a good deal of interest, and would
like to change it for a higher-priced binding if you have one."


The Worcester Spy.

"Mr. Bidwell's book has been compared with Dumas' famous 'Monte
Christo.' The extraordinary character of its adventures, indeed, would
render it dramatic and powerful as fiction; as human truth, it is simply
overwhelming. No one can read this book unmoved. From every conceivable
standpoint, physiological, sociological, and literary, it is a marvel."


Philip W. Moen.

Mr. Moen, of Washburn & Moen, Worcester, Mass., writes: "I have read Mr.
George Bidwell's book with the deepest interest. It is a book that
deserves to be widely read, and I am very glad to recommend it."


A Niece of Oliver Wendell Holmes

writes: "_Few books have so stirred my mind_ for years as the book by
George Bidwell. Hearing of the book, prejudice immediately seized me
against it. The history given by himself, to be interesting at all must
be sensational, therefore disastrous to morals. _So avowed prejudiced
thought; and, determined to find fault, I began this remarkable
history._ IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND FAULT WITH THE BOOK, WHICH IS
VALUABLE AND WONDERFULLY ABSORBING."


From Ira D. Sankey, Esq.

"MR. GEORGE BIDWELL, _Dear Sir_--I have read with great interest your
book, and believe it will do much good among young men wherever read.
Your life is a proof and your book a burning record of the truth that
'Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.' I believe in throwing
light into all the dark places of this life, that men, seeing the
dangers, they may avoid them. I wish you success."


From Hon. Robert G. Ingersoll.

"GEORGE BIDWELL, ESQ.:

_My Dear Sir_--Knowing as I do that you will tell a candid story of your
career, I believe you will do good. Crime springs mostly from a lack of
intelligence and imagination. Only the foolish can think that the
practice of vice is the road to joy. As a matter of fact, the wrong does
not pay. You have, in your remarkable book, made this fact perfectly
clear, and you will enforce this great truth on the platform. _In the
world of crime success is failure._ Good luck to you."


Rev. Dr. Edward Beecher

writes; "I recommend this book to the friends of morality."


Office of Street's Insurance Agency, Hartford, Conn.

"MR. GEORGE BIDWELL, _Dear Sir_--A clergyman consulted with me regarding
his son, who had fallen into bad associations, taken part in many small
thefts, and seemed hardened against shame or dread of exposure. I
believe the mean, dangerous boy has become a man by reading your book."
Yours very truly,

F. F. STREET, Hartford, Conn.


Hartford Daily Times.

"This autobiography is a story of thrilling interest."




CONTENTS.


  A NEW YORK HERALD EDITORIAL.


  CHAPTER I.

  Brooklyn Public Schools in the Sixties--Old. No. 13--Parents Suited
  to the Golden Age--A Curious Preparation for the Battle of
  Life--Knew that Brutus Slew Caesar--George the Third Was a
  Bad Fellow Who Got a Tea Kettle Thrown at His Head In
  Boston Harbor--My Model Home Library--An Innocent Leaves
  Home.                                                               19


  CHAPTER II.

  In a Broker's Office--A Nice Old Gentleman--Situation in Wall
  Street--An Up-to-Date Young Man--Visions of Wealth--Speculations--Wall
  Street in the Sixties--The Hon. John Morrissey,
  ex-Pugilist--His Famous Gambling House--I Try a Game of
  Faro--Midnight Banquets--I Have Entered the Primrose
  Way.                                                                24


  CHAPTER III.

  Pleasure Before Business--Result of That Method--On Financial
  Rocks--James, Otherwise "Jimmy," Irving--He Was a Model
  Chief of Detectives--Police Headquarters, 300 Mulberry Street,
  in the Early Seventies--He Takes Me for a Drive out Harlem
  Lane--A Trio of Detectives--They Make a Startling Proposition--A
  $10,000 Temptation--Mental Conflicts--I Dare Not Be Poor--C'est
  le Premier Pas Qui Coute.                                           28


  CHAPTER IV.

  History of the Famous Lord Bond Steal--"On the Office"--Three
  Sneaks Stumble on a Fortune--A $1,250,000 Tin Box--Dazed
  Crooks--What to Do with Their White Elephant--Excitement
  at Police Headquarters--Bullard et al.--A Violin Virtuoso--Superintendent
  of Police Kelso Presents a $500 Silver Punch
  Bowl to the Daughter of Boss Tweed--Paid for with Stolen
  Cash.                                                               36


  CHAPTER V.

  Police Protectors--New York Gangs--Irving & Co. Give Me $80,000
  Lord Bonds to Sell Abroad--A Midnight Farewell--Alone on
  the Sea--When Jim Fisk Owned Our Judges--Chief Irving
  Plans a Famous Bank Robbery--His Three Burglar Confederates.        48


  CHAPTER VI.

  The Bank Looted--Irving Notified by Bank Officials--His Feigned
  Surprise--Hunts the Burglars, but Divides the Plunder at His
  Own House--Count Shinburne and His Palace on the Rhine--Twenty
  Years Later.                                                        58


  CHAPTER VII.

  I Arrive in Paris--Field of Waterloo--Meet the Antwerp Chief of
  Police--He Is on Trail--A Dutch Van Tromp and the Countess
  Winzerode--His Dream of Bliss and Tragic Death--My Negotiations
  in Frankfurt-on-the-Main.                                           65


  CHAPTER VIII.

  Marpurgo & Weisweller, Bankers--Francoise Blanc, the Gambler
  King--His Casinos at Monte Carlo, Homburg and Wiesbaden--I
  Meet Van Tromp's Countess--Outlived Her Beauty--Now a
  Hanger-on at the Rouge et Noir Tables--Takes My Advice--Marries
  a Rich Burgher--Becomes a Good Stepmother--Her
  Pious End and Epitaph.                                              73


  CHAPTER IX.

  I Sell the $80,000 Bonds--Reach London Safely--Drifting--Success
  in Crime a Failure--A Desolate Woman--Beautiful Barmaid
  Show--Westminster Abbey--Good Resolutions--Sail Home--Irving
  at the Wharf--Meet at Taylor's Hotel--The Total: "I
  Have Another Job for You"--A Fool's Game.                           84


  CHAPTER X.

  Edwin James, Q.C., and a Possible Lord Chancellor of England--His
  Extravagance--On the Border Land of Crime--He Oversteps--Disbarred--Comes
  to New York--Richard O'Gorman's
  Great Heart--The Brea Will Case--A Dark Plot--$20,000 out of
  Wall Street--Jay Cooke & Co. Narrowly Escape Loss of $240,000--Chief
  Irving in the Plot--Detective George Elder Not in Our
  Ring--Accidentally He Appears and Thwarts Our Plans.                94


  CHAPTER XI.

  Eastward Ho!--The James and Brea Exit--Ezra, the Shrewd Lawyer--Three
  Unhappy Daughters--He Marries One--Detects
  Forged Will--Flight of Brea to Montana--A Sunrise Surprise
  at Butte City--James Returns to London--Fills a Pauper's
  Grave Instead of a Lord Chancellor's.                              114


  CHAPTER XII.

  Bordeaux, Marseilles and Lyons "Donate" $50,000--A Bad Quarter
  of an Hour--Eggs and Peasant Women--"Sweets to the Sweet"--A
  Mysterious Stranger Disappears Among the Tombs.                    123


  CHAPTER XIII.

  A Starry Talk--Contrast Between Mac's Philosophy and His Errand--A
  Financial Trip Through Germany--From Leipsic Fair
  to London--Return Loaded with Thalers.                             132


  CHAPTER XIV.

  A Drive to Hampton Court--Send $10,000 Police Tribute to New
  York--Discussing the Bank of England in the Throne Room
  at Windsor Castle--Believe It to Be a Fossil Institution--Greene,
  the Tailor--Introduces Me to Bank--No References
  Required--Joy That Ends in Sorrow.                                 142


  CHAPTER XV.

  Voyage to Rio Janeiro--The Lady of the Lucitania--A Swedish
  Colonel's Party of English Engineers--A Bibulous Chaplain--Modern
  Buccaneers--Scenes at Bordeaux--Crossing the Line--Father
  Neptune's Visit--Fun at Sea--Arrival in Rio--Maua &
  Co.--Our Plans.                                                    154


  CHAPTER XVI.

  Fifty Thousand Dollars on Bogus Letters of Credit--Visit to a
  Coffee Plantation--Slaves Dining--Dangerous Errors in Letters
  of Credit--A Nervous Day--An Eagle-Eyed Hebrew--"Show
  Me Your Letter of Credit"--Mac in a Corner--A Bold Coup--Strategy--Can
  We Get Out of Brazil?                                              160


  CHAPTER XVII.

  Brazilian Law--Visit Police Headquarters--A Douceur to the Chief--In
  a Tight Spot--A "Doctored" Passport--A Detective on
  Trail. Who Ingratiates Himself into Mac's Confidence--Manoeuvres--The
  Detective on a "Wild Goose Chase"--Safely on
  Board--A Distinguished Party in a Rowboat--A Stern Chase--Off
  at Last.                                                           173


  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Rio to Buenos Ayres--Return and Meet Mac in Paris--Determine
  to Abandon a Dangerous Business--Vienna--Watching the
  Game--Must Have More Money--Good Resolutions Vanish--Return
  to London--Determine to Assault the Bank of England--Deposit
  $67,000.                                                           186


  CHAPTER XIX.

  Bank of England Requires No References--Letter from Paris--A
  Gilded American Young Man--Duped into Marriage with a
  Parisienne Moendaine--A Ghost at Monte Carlo--In a Greenwood
  Mausoleum--Earthly Happiness and the World to
  Come.                                                              193


  CHAPTER XX.

  A Council of War--Description of Bills of Exchange--Frederick
  Albert Warren, the Great American Railway Contractor--The
  Great Bank Proves Fallible--Discounts Bogus Bills of Exchange.     200


  CHAPTER XXI.

  Draw Fabulous Sums--Bags of Sovereigns by the Cab Load--In a
  French Railway Wreck--Baron Alfonse de Rothschild, Head
  of the Paris House--A Famous L6,000 Draft.                         206


  CHAPTER XXII.

  Last Call at the Bank of England--Noyes Arrives in London--An
  Artful Plot--Introduce Noyes--Plan Now Complete--Our Wise
  Forefathers--No Change in a Century--Our Paper Is Discounted--Prepare
  for Flight--Thou Shalt Not.                                        214


  CHAPTER XXIII.

  Fifty Thousand Dollars a Day--The Golden Shower Continues to
  Fall--Operations Shrouded in Midnight Darkness--No Possibility
  of Discovery--Finish and Begin Again--Amazing Oversight--Pitcher
  Goes Once Too Often--Noyes Arrested--Unparalleled
  Excitement on the Stock Exchange.                                  224


  CHAPTER XXIV.

  Consternation--A Mob of Bankers--The Financial World Shaken--Noyes
  Taken to Newgate--Mac Cables Irving--His Flight to
  France--Sails from Havre on Board Thuringia--Arrested at
  Quarantine--The Pinkertons on Trail.                               236


  CHAPTER XXV.

  Hunted Through Ireland--$2,500 Reward for My Capture--Detectives
  "Spot" Me at the Cork Railway Station--Obliged to
  Abandon Taking Passage by the Ill-Fated Atlantic--A Game
  of "Hare and Hounds"--Eluding a Detective "Trap"--English
  Misrule in Ireland--Am Taken for a Priest--A Typographical
  Thunderbolt at Lismore--An Early Morning Walk--A Ride on
  an Irish Jaunting Car--"On the Road to Clonmel"--Shelter in
  a "Shebeen"--How Thirsty Souls Get the "Craythur" In Ireland--A
  Good Old Irish Lady--Pursuit and Refuge in a Ruined
  Cottage at Cahir.                                                  248


  CHAPTER XXVI.

  An Unceremonious Call--"I am a Fenian Leader"--A "Story" Told
  in the Dark--Maloy Helps My Escape on an Irish Jaunting
  Car--Eggs--A Policeman Anxious to Obtain the Five Hundred
  Pounds Reward--Dublin Again--A Jewess' Blessing--I Turn
  Russian, and Later Become a Frenchman--Belfast Detectives--Escape
  into Scotland--The Other Side of the Story--A Bow
  Street Detective's Adventures While Hunting Me Through Ireland
  --Cross-Questioning--My Jaunting Car Driver--"A Cold
  Water Cure"--Hot on the Trail--Not in the Fort--A Fruitless
  Hunt--Many Innocents Arrested--Maloy Becomes a "Know-Nothing."     261


  CHAPTER XXVII.

  A Marriage at the American Embassy in Paris--Anxious Moments
  at Versailles--Off for Spain--Crossing the Pyrenees--Gunshots--Train
  off the Track--Captured by Carlist Bandits--Released--Through
  the Pass on Ox Carts--A Mountain Blizzard--Camp
  in a Snowstorm--Mutiny--A Morning Dream.                           275


  CHAPTER XXVIII.

  A Carlist Officer--A Picturesque Caravan--Arrival at Burgos--Startling
  Telegrams--Revolution at Madrid--The Railway
  Seized--My Party in a Trap--Madrid Cathedral and a Bull
  Fight--A Special Train Proves a Slow Train--No News Good
  News.                                                              292


  CHAPTER XXIX.

  Arrival in Santander--Gloomy Forebodings--Sail for Cuba--Watch
  the Pyrenees Sink in the Sea--Two Sisters of Charity, Innocents
  on a Voyage--Circus at St. Thomas--Sunset Gun in Havana--Thirty
  Seconds Change My Destiny.                                         301


  CHAPTER XXX.

  Slavery in Cuba--Life in Havana--The Million-Pound Forgery
  Discovered--My Opinion Asked--Trip to the Isle of Pines--The
  Cuban Rebels--A Battle Field--A Slave Cook--The Missionary
  and the Cannibal--Going into the Interior.                         312

  CHAPTER XXXI.

  On the Caribbean--A Motley Cargo--Turning Turtles and Shark
  Fishing--A Dinner Party in Havana Proves a Surprise Party--Capt.
  John Curtin of the Pinkertons Appears on the Scene--Consternation
  Among the Diners--Offer the Captain $50,000 for
  Ten Minutes' Start--No--I Shoot Him--Struggle and Capture--In
  the Arsenal.                                                       327


  CHAPTER XXXII.

  Friendly Spanish Officials--Plots to Escape--Leap for Liberty--Escape
  out of Havana--Travel the Beach Nights--Refuge in
  the Jungle Days--Construct a Raft--Food and Water Gone,
  but Pluck at the Fore--I Will Join the Rebels And Win Military
  Laurels--Man Proposes, but----                                     338


  CHAPTER XXXIII.

  Creeping Across a Bridge--Sentries Discover Me--They Challenge:
  "Quien Va?"--They Fire--Flight and Escape on the Raft--A
  Tropical Night Swim--Sharks Everywhere--Knife Between My
  Teeth--Regain the Shore--Nearing the Rebel Camp--The Black
  Soldiers Surprise and Capture Me--I Strike the Captain--He
  Dashes at Me with a Bayonet--Stopped by a Woman--Desperation.      355


  CHAPTER XXXIV.

  Back in Havana--Curtin's Story--Extradited--Spain Delivers Me
  to England--Pinkertons Escort Me on Board Steamer--Arrival
  at Plymouth--Newgate at Last--When Time is Old and
  Hath Forgotten Himself.                                            372

  CHAPTER XXXV.

  Life in Newgate--Legal Sharks--A Pattern Solicitor--A Lame Defense
  --Before Lord Mayor Waterlow--Trial at the Old Bailey--Thronging
  Crowds--Days of Mental Torture--Jury Retires--Suspense--Guilty.    383


  CHAPTER XXXVI.

  A Modern Jeffreys--Penal Servitude for Life--End of the Primrose
  Way--A Resolve--Will Fortune Ever Smile Again?--Newgate to
  Chatham Prison--A Cocky Little Major--You Were Sent Here
  to Work--In the Mud--Night and Silence.                            387


  CHAPTER XXXVII.

  Events of the First Day--Hopeless Outlook--Lack of Mental and
  Physical Food--A Shakespeare Won and Hope Dawns--In the
  Infirmary--Effects of Prolonged Imprisonment.                      401


  CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  Prison Management--Warders Under Military Discipline--Their
  Long Hours and Small Pay--Their Character and Antecedents--English
  Prison System Not Reformatory--Turns Out Murderers--Prison
  Pets--Rats, Mice and Beetles.                                      404


  CHAPTER XXXIX.

  A Genius--Strange Story of Arthur Heep--Unwise Parents--Driven
  from Home--Temptation and Fall--In a Lunatic Asylum--Escapes
  Naked in a Storm--Clothes Secured from a Scarecrow--Rearrested--Serves
  Five Years--To America and Return--Again
  Behind the Bars.                                                   417


  CHAPTER XL.

  English Prisons Schools for Crime--Two Prison Aid Societies--United
  States Laws Evaded--Snug Berths for Reverend Barnacles--Contributions
  Go for Salaries--No Benefit to ex-Prisoners--How
  Discharged Prisoners Are Hustled to the United
  States.                                                            426


  CHAPTER XLI.

  Rev. Mr. Whiteley--How to Stop Influx of Foreign Criminals--Foster
  an Example--Whiteley, Secretary of Aid Society, Sends
  Foster to Sea--His Arrival in Chicago--Meets an Old Prison
  Chum--Turns Detective--Chicago Justices--Foster's Story--Human
  Tigers--A Plot and $20,000--A Letter and Diamond Pin--In
  the Toils Again.                                                   430


  CHAPTER XLII.

  A Gettysburg Veteran--In the Wethersfield, Ct., State Prison--Makes
  and Conceals a Set of Burglar's Tools--Liberated--Returns
  and Burglarizes the Prison--Boat Load of Plunder--Captured--Sixteen
  Years More in Prison--Then Goes to England--Gets
  Twenty Years--Joins Me at Chatham.                                 436


  CHAPTER XLIII.

  The Fenians at Chatham--Dr. Gallagher--McCarty, O'Brien and
  Others--We Become Friends--Excavating the Chatham Ship
  Basin--Starvation and Despair--Self-Mutilation of an Arm or
  Leg to Reach the Hospital--Release and Death of McCarty--Gallagher
  Breaks Down--Speedy Release or Death for Him.                      443


  CHAPTER XLIV.

  Fenian Prisoners in English Prisons--McCarthy, O'Brien--A Plan
  Miscarried--In the Tolls--Severe Punishments--Curtin, Daly,
  Egan--Poor Dr. Gallagher.                                          447


  CHAPTER XLV.

  A Dictionary and Life of the Prophet Jeremiah vs. a Shakespeare--Prison
  Hospital Proves a Paradise--Nature's Compensations--Reality
  Not So Terrible as Imagined--Human Nature Unchangeable.            453


  CHAPTER XLVI.

  Public Opinion Within Says the Same as Outside--A Sensible Fellow--Pluck
  Wins--Roses Scarce, Thorns Plenty--Woe to Mutineers
  for "More Bread"--Sentiment Banished--Resistance
  Crushed--English Judges Are Autocrats--No Appeal.                  459


  CHAPTER XLVII.

  Hard Lines--A Boaster--A Veneered Flunkey--Billy Treacle's Aunt
  Dies Again--Frederic Barton and His Vain Petitions--I Give
  Him a Pointer--His Inherited Fortune Fake--Surreptitious Mail
  Route--Warders as Letter Carriers.                                 463


  CHAPTER XLVIII.

  Sixteen-Thousand-Acre Tea Plantation in India and Sixty Thousand
  Pounds Imaginary Inheritance--Barton Becomes a Great
  Man--The Plot Thickens--Letters from London--Smith Discharged--Petition
  for Barton--Smith Presents It at Home Office--Home
  Secretary Swallows the Bait--Barton's Triumphant
  Release--His Imaginary Fortune Does Not Materialize.               466


  CHAPTER XLIX.

  Tantalizing the Home Secretary--Refused a Letter Sheet--Petition
  the Home Office for One--Sarcasm About Barton's Release on
  My Sub-Rosa Petition--Good Conduct Fails--Feigned Wealth
  Wins Freedom for Barton--Apropos Quotation from Goethe--Sir
  Vernon Harcourt and His Opinion--I Tread Dangerous
  Ground.                                                            471


  CHAPTER L.

  Niblo Clark--The Mysterious Three R's--His Characteristic Verses--My
  Tenth Anniversary at Chatham--All Efforts Fail and
  Fifteen Years Gone Forever--Despairing When Good News
  Comes--My Sister in England--George Freed--Hope Returns
  and Abides--George Gets James G. Blaine, J. Russell and
  Others to Intercede--Fresh Failures--Home Secretary Matthews
  Won't--George and My Sister Will--Which Will Wear
  the Other Out--George and Sister Win--Night and Gloom in
  My Cell--These Walls Have Frowned on Me for Twenty Years--Warder's
  Tramps on Stone Corridor Arouse Me--Door Opens--"You
  Are Free"--First Sight of Stars in Twenty Years--I
  Shout, 'Twas Like a Prayer: "God Is Good."                         478


     NOTE TO THE PUBLIC

     The Hon. Lyman J. Gage, Dr. Funk and hundreds of others have said
     that my book should be put at a price which would place it within
     the reach of every young man, etc.

     Hitherto, it has been sold by subscription at $3.50, $5 and $10 per
     copy--the five editions printed having been easily sold at those
     prices.

     Notwithstanding the thousands of friends their circulation has
     made, I did not care to have my family name go any further in this
     connection than financial needs required in working for the release
     of the men still undergoing life sentences in English prisons.

     At last, however, certain influence causes me to let it go in the
     revised and improved form here presented, and may it prove as
     valuable and engrossing to the general public as it has to 20,000
     subscribers to former editions. GEORGE BIDWELL.




CHAPTER I.

HAD THERE BEEN WISDOM THERE?


We lived in South Brooklyn, near to old No. 13, the Degraw Street Public
School. To that I was sent, and there got all the education I was ever
fated to have at any school, except the school of life and experience.

I attended for some years, and even now I cannot recall without a smile
the absurd incompetency of every one connected with the institution and
their utter ignorance of the art of imparting knowledge to children.

At home I had picked up that grand art of reading, and went to school to
learn the other two R's, with any trifle that I might come across
floating around promiscuously.

I certainly hope our much-lauded public schools are conducted on better
lines now than then; if not, they are frauds from the foundation. The
instruction in No. 13 was so lax and radically bad that the whole
governing body and the principal ought to have been sent to the
penitentiary on the charge of false pretense for drawing their salaries
and giving nothing in return. And yet I remember when examination day
came, instead of the committee investigating the progress of the pupils,
it usually turned into a mere hallelujah chorus upon our "grand public
school system."

Here is a remarkable fact: I seldom missed a promotion and passed from
grade to grade until within two years I found myself in Junior "A," the
next to the highest class in the school, just as ignorant as my
classmates, and that is saying much.

It was all very pitiful. My blood boils even now when I think of the
traitors chosen and paid to see me fully equipped and armed to begin the
battle of life who left me with phantom weapons which would shiver into
fragments at the first shock of conflict.

I left Junior A of old No. 13, with its algebra, logic, philosophy
(heaven save the word!) and advanced grammar, unable to write a
grammatical sentence. I had been taught spelling out of an expositor--a
sort of pocket dictionary containing about fifteen hundred words. Most
of these, with their definitions, parrotlike, I had learned to spell,
but never once in all my school experience had I been taught the
derivation of a single word. Indeed, I took it for granted that in the
good old days Adam had invented the words much as he named the animals,
and, of course, supposed that he spoke good English. The knowledge of
history I gained at No. 13 was strictly limited and exceedingly
primitive. I knew the Jews in the old days were a bad lot. That Brutus
had slain Caesar. That the Mayflower had landed our fathers on Plymouth
Rock. That wicked George III. was a tyrant, and that the boys in Boston
had thrown a tea-kettle at his head. I knew all about our George and the
cherry tree, and there my historical knowledge ended.

So here I was launched out in the world a model scholar! Stamped as
proficient in grammar, history, logic, philosophy and arithmetic, but
yet in useful knowledge a barbarian, unable to spell or even write a
grammatical letter and unversed in the ways of the world--a world, too,
where I would be cast entirely upon my own resources.

My home life was happy. My father had lost his grip on the world, but
his faith in the Unseen remained. My mother, caring little for this
life, lived in and for the spiritual. To her heaven was a place as much
as the country village where she was born. She was never tired of
talking to us children about its golden streets and the rest there after
the toils and pains of life. But, boylike, we discounted all she said,
and felt we wanted some of this world before we knocked at the gates of
the next.

We loved our mother, but her soul was too gentle to keep in restraint
hot, fiery youths like my brothers and myself. On the whole we were good
boys, and I suppose caused her no more pain than the average youngsters.
Perhaps the keynote of her character can best be found in the following
incident, if that which was of daily occurrence could be called an
incident:

Every night of my life in those days she would come to my bed to pray
over me, ever saying, as she kissed me or clasped my hand: "My son,
remember if you were to pass your whole life here in poverty and
hardship it would not much matter so long as you attain to the Heavenly
Rest." This teaching would have been well had she only taught me some
worldly wisdom with it, but that all-essential knowledge was kept from
me, I being left to learn the ways of man in that terrible school of
experience. The consequence being that when after some months I was
launched out in life I was a ripe and apt victim to be caught in the
world's huge snare. In fact, had my parents designed me to become a
traveler in the Primrose Way they could not have educated me to better
purpose.

Save when in the school I had never been permitted to associate with
other boys, but was kept in the house, and up to my sixteenth year
hardly dreamed there was evil in the world. I was told much about the
"wicked," but thought that meant those who smoked tobacco or drank
whisky. I hardly thought any women came under that category, but if any,
then it must mean those who came around selling apples and oranges. The
reader will see that when once away from the shelter of home, in
threading the world's devious ways, I would be crossing the roaring
torrent "on the perilous footing of a spear," all but certain to fall
into the flood beneath.

During my last year at school and for a long time after leaving it, my
father and mother were never tired of talking about my good education.
Possibly they were not very good judges, but I am confident that they,
after all, did not realize the importance of a boy being well equipped
in that regard. Their thoughts and minds were so bent on the other
world, and things unseen bulked so hugely on their mental vision, that
there was small space left for things of this earth. They, good, simple
souls, were made for and ought to have lived in the Golden Age, when all
men were brave and all women true, where neighborly eyes reflected the
love and faith within; but in our utilitarian days they were sadly out
of place, and little wonder if they had lost their way in this world.

In their intense longing for the life beyond the grave, their passionate
desire to walk the streets of gold, they, by their actions, seemed to
forget that we were on this earth, and that we were here with many sharp
reminders of the fact.

The same guilelessness was manifested in their choice of our home
reading. The books I was allowed access to in the house were "The Life
of King David," "The History of Jerusalem," "Baxter's Saints' Rest,"
"The Immortal Dreamer's Pilgrim" and Fox's "Book of Martyrs." His first
martyr is Stephen, and such was my gross ignorance of history that I
always supposed Stephen had been martyred by the Church of Rome. Here
was mental food for a boy who had his own way to make in the world.

[Illustration: A HOME CHRISTMAS DINNER VS. IN A CELL. "WHERE IS OUR
WANDERING BOY TO-NIGHT?"]

Craving other mental food than "The Life of David," I used to club
pennies with a chum and buy that delectable sheet, "Ned Buntline's Own,"
then in fear and trembling would creep to an upper room and read "The
Haunted House" or "The Ghost of Castle Ivy" until my hair stood on end
in a sort of ecstatic horror; or the stirring adventures of "Jack the
Rover" or "Pirate Chief" until my brain took fire and a mighty impulse
stirred every fibre impelling me to follow in their footsteps.

I had remained idly at home for some six months after my release from
school, when one night my father returned from New York and said: "My
son, I have found a situation for you." That was delightful news, and
when I went to bed that night I was too excited to sleep.

The future was full of color, red and purple, of course. Happily for me
the future in all its black misery was hidden behind those gilded
clouds.

So now at sixteen I was about to sail out of harbor, and how equipped!

Absolutely without education, void of worldly wisdom, and in my boyish
brain dividing the world into two sections. In one was King David
slaying the Phillistines or dancing before the Ark. In the other was
Jack the Rover and the Pirate Chief. How easy to guess the rest! Yet I
was not a bad boy--far from it. I only needed wise guidance and good
companionship, and as the ignorance and crudity of my character dropped
off, the innate virtue--mine by lawful heritage--would have been
developed. But pitchforked into the wild whirl of Wall street and its
fast set of gilded youth, the gates of the Primrose Way to destruction
were held wide open to my eager feet.




CHAPTER II.

"'TWAS EVER THUS." OF COURSE IT WAS.


The situation my father had obtained for me was with a sugar broker by
the name of Waterbury. He was a partner in a large refinery, his office
being in South Water street. He was a nice, conservative old man, and
let things run on easily. His chief clerk, Mr. Ambler, was every inch a
gentleman, who, quickly perceiving what an ignoramus I was, out of the
goodness of his heart resolved to teach me something.

There were two sharp young men in our office. They liked me well enough,
but used to guy me unmercifully for my simplicity and clumsiness. One of
them, Harry by name, was something of a scapegrace, and soon acquired
quite a power over me. I stood in much fear of his ridicule, and
frequently did things for which my conscience reproached me, rather than
stand the fire of his raillery. The greatest harm he did me was in
firing my imagination with stories of Wall street, of the fortunes that
were and could be made in the gold room or on 'Change. He made tolerably
clear the modus operandi of speculators, and I secretly resolved that
some day I, too, would try my fortune.

My friend Mr. Ambler's health was bad, and frequent attacks of illness
caused him to be away from the office for weeks at a time, and that
meant much loss to me. When I had been there about a year, he resigned
his position and went as manager for a factory in New Haven. But before
leaving he interested himself so far in my welfare as to secure me a
position with a firm of brokers in New street, at a salary of $10 a
week. My employers were good fellows, lovers of pleasure and men of the
world, not scrupling to talk freely with me of their various adventures
out of business hours. I had lost much of my awkwardness and gauche
manners, and under the $10 a week arrangement began to dress fairly
well. My employers did a brokerage business and speculated as well on
their own account. My duties were decidedly light and pleasant, and
brought me into contact with some of the sharpest as well as the most
famous men in the street. Among them was a brilliant young man of my own
age, who took a great fancy to me, and frequently proposed that we
should start for ourselves. Being doubtful of my powers, I shrank from
risking my scanty funds in any speculative venture. Much to my mother's
concern, I had begun attending the theatre, and one night, on my friend
Ed Weed's invitation, I went with him to Niblo's. After the performance
we went to supper at Delmonico's, and I was perfectly fascinated by the
company and surroundings, going home long past midnight a different man
than I had last left it.

The next day Ed came to the office and invited me to lunch, where, after
making some disparaging remarks about the country cut of my garments, he
offered to introduce me to his tailor, who was never in a hurry for his
money. After business that day we walked uptown together, and, prompted
by Ed, I ordered $150 worth of garments, then went to his outfitter and
ordered nearly an equal amount in shirts, ties, gloves, etc.

One amusing result was that when, a few days later, I walked down to our
office, comme il faut in garb, my employers raised my salary to $30 a
week, but this left me poorer than when I had husbanded my poor little
$10. Soon after, piloted by Ed, I ventured $50 on a margin in gold.
Unluckily, I won, invested again and again, and within fourteen days was
$284 ahead. I paid my tailor and outfitter's bill, bought a $100 watch
on credit, and gave a wine supper on borrowed money. Soon after this I
went to board at the old St. Nicholas, the then fashionable hotel. From
that time I began to drift more and more away from home influences.

Soon after the wine supper episode I threw up my position, and Ed and I
started on our own account under the name of E. Weed & Co. My partner's
parents were wealthy, and his father had been well known in the street,
which fact gave us standing.

The years I speak of were fortunate ones for Wall street, stocks of
every kind on the boom, the general wealth of the country massing up by
leaps and bounds, and every kind of speculative enterprise being
launched. Our firm history was the usual one of broker firms in that
tumultuous arena--the Wall street of those days--commissions in plenty,
a large income, but one's bank account never growing, for what was made
by day in the wild excitement of shifting values was thrown away amid
wilder scenes at night. Those, too, were, indeed, the flush times for
the professional gambler; for men were not content unless they burned
the candle at both ends. Day faro banks were open everywhere around the
Exchange, and enormous sums were nightly staked in the uptown games.
These were everywhere--all protected, and the proprietors invested their
money for rent, fixtures, etc., with as much confidence, and kept their
doors open as freely, as if embarked in a legitimate speculation.
Hundreds who spent the business hours of the day in the mad excitement
of the Exchange flocked around the green cloth at night, devoting the
same intensity of thought and brain to the turning of a card which
earlier in the day they had given to the market reports of the world.
Small wonder that death cut such wide swaths in the army of brokers.
Statistics show that it was more fatal to belong to that army than to an
army in the field.

Ed loved to have me with him, and I used to accompany him to a game,
then quite famous, run by John Morrissey, who later became a member of
Congress. At this time I never ventured a single bet, and did not like
to visit the place. But Ed would beg me to go, and always promised
faithfully not to remain more than twenty minutes. Of course, his twenty
minutes would lengthen into hours. Frequently I would take a chair into
a corner and go to sleep until he left the game, that being almost any
hour between midnight and morning. As usual, in such places, an elegant
supper was served free at midnight. The proprietor was always rather
attentive to me, and, to give him the credit due, seemed anxious that I
should not play. At supper he always reserved the chair next to himself
for me. One night while standing beside the roulette wheel, no one was
playing, and the dealer was idly whirling the ball, a sudden impulse
seized me, and the ball then rolling, I pulled a $20 bill from my pocket
and threw it down on the red remarking, "I'll lose that to pay for my
suppers." Unhappily I won, and, laughing, turned to the dealer and said:
"Here, give me my money. I am done," and a moment later went out with my
friend, fully determined never more to gamble. But, being in there the
next night, I, of course, ventured again. Again I was so unfortunate as
to win, and within a short time staked and lost or won nightly. But
something worse than gambling was ahead of me, just at the very door.




CHAPTER III.

A LICENSED PIRATE.


We had latterly somewhat neglected business--our real business being at
night, when we made the pursuit of pleasure hard work. Soon the finances
of our firm not only ran low, but were on three several occasions
exhausted, so that we not only had recourse to borrowing, but were
barely saved from bankruptcy by liberal donations from Ed's parents. His
father was a fine, jolly old gentleman, and took it quite a matter of
course that it was his duty to help us off the rocks when we ran on
them. My partner took everything easy, but I, having no indulgent parent
behind me ever ready to draw a check, began to be uneasy over the
financial situation. Strangely enough, however, it never occurred to me
to cut down my personal expenses, and I continued living at the same
extravagant rate as when money was plenty--dining and wining and being
dined and wined. Just here an important character, one destined to have
an influence for evil on my future life, came upon the scene, and I will
halt for a moment in my narrative to give some account of him.

This man was James Irving, popularly known as Jimmy Irving, chief of the
New York Detective Force, and a bad-hearted, worthless scamp he was. I
was with several friends in the Fifth Avenue Hotel one cold January
night when he came in, and one of our party, knowing him, introduced us.
He was a man of medium height, rather heavy set, blond mustache,
pleasant eyes, but with a weak mouth and chin, and a flushed face,
telling a tale of dissipation. It was when Boss Tweed ruled supreme in
New York and the whole administration was honeycombed with corruption.
Except under similar political conditions could such a man attain to so
responsible an office in a great city as that of chief of the detective
force--a position which at that time invested him with all but
autocratic power. An old rounder and barroom loafer, without one
attribute of true manliness and not possessed of any quality which would
point him out as a fit man for the place. Nevertheless, when the
position became vacant his political pull caused his selection. From
being a mere detective on the staff he became chief. And truly this
meant something in those days. The great civil war had but lately ended,
and the country was still reeling from the mighty conflict. The flush
times, resultant from the enormous money issue of the Government, kept
everything booming. The foundations of society were shaken and vice no
longer hid itself in the dark caves and dens of the great city. The
Tenderloin, with its multifarious and widereaching influence for evil,
was then created, and the police of the city reaped a royal revenue from
its thousand dens of vice for their protection. To be captain of the
Tenderloin precinct meant an extra weekly income of $1,000 at least. He
had the lion's share; about an equal amount went to Headquarters, to be
divided between the Chief of Police and the gang, Irving being one of
the half dozen who had pull enough to get in the ring. The Tenderloin
lieutenant, roundsman and sergeant came in for about $100, $50 and $25 a
week, while the common patrolman got what blackmail he could on his own
account from the unhappy women of the street. These were considered
lawful game, and woe betide the poor unfortunate who refused to pay the
tax. Too well she found it meant a violent arrest, accompanied with
brutal treatment, a night in a filthy cell, and then to be dragged
before the magistrate, who was some ward heeler, hand in glove with the
police. The form of a trial and a speedy "six months on the island" from
the lips of the judge followed.

From Spring street to Tenth, Broadway was full of night
games--faro--each and all paying large sums for protection. This money,
however, did not all go to Police Headquarters, there being a host of
parasites aside from the police. The shoulder-hitter politicians, each
with his pull, and each having a claim to his percentage. Most of the
Broadway games were known as square games, but then there was the host
of skin games in the Bowery, Chatham square, Houston, Prince and other
streets. The Eighth Ward and all Broadway were considered the lawful
happy hunting grounds for Headquarters detectives, and this by long
prescription. Outside of that they had no claim save only to a
percentage from the Tenderloin. But the protection money paid by the
swindling games around Chatham square, Bayard street, and the whole
length of the Bowery, by a sort of sacred prescription, belonged to the
captains of those precincts, save only that part absorbed by the
politicians of the district who had a pull. These usually were the
Aldermen and Councilmen with their henchmen.

[Illustration: "PULLING OUT A $20 BILL, I THREW IT DOWN."--Page 27.]

But to return to my friend, Capt. Jim Irving, who, before our party
separated, had opened three bottles of wine. Before leaving I had asked
him to call on me at the St. Nicholas. The next day he came and invited
me to take a drive with him to Fordham the following Sunday. On Sunday
he appeared behind a fast trotting horse, and in every respect an
elegant turnout. During our drive he casually remarked that he had paid
a thousand dollars for the rig, and as his pay was some two thousand
dollars per annum I easily figured that his rig and diamond pin had cost
him about a year's salary. It was a lovely morning, not cold, but
bracing, just the day for a ride. We started for Fordham, but changed
our minds and drove to the High Bridge, through Harlem lane, and well
out into Westchester County. Returning, we stopped at O'Brien's Hotel
for dinner. We fared sumptuously the whole day through, our dinner being
particularly fine, my companion paying for everything, and really it was
all highly enjoyable. He had a vast fund of anecdote, and many strange
stories of city life and adventure, which naturally would be expected
from one in his position. Many of those we passed or met during the day
were personally known to him, and some, both women as well as men, who
were then clothed in purple and fine linen, had histories, and many had
at some period of their lives looked on life from the seamy side, having
passed through strange vicissitudes.

Soon after dark we returned to my hotel, and after dinner, lighting our
cigars, we started for Police Headquarters. There he attended to some
routine business, having introduced me to two of his chief detectives.
Many who read this will recognize the men, but in this narrative they
will be known as Stanley and White. I will not further describe them
now; as they will appear in the story from time to time, the reader will
be able to judge what manner of men they were.

For the next eight weeks my life went on much the same as usual. In our
business we made some money, but by one unfortunate investment lost our
entire capital, and what proved worse for me, my partner's health began
to fail. Dissipation, late and heavy dinners and irregular hours began
to break a not over-strong constitution; consequently one Saturday he
abruptly announced his intention of withdrawing from the partnership to
take a trip to Europe. There was nothing to divide save the furniture in
our office, which he presented to me. The following Wednesday he sailed
with two members of his family. I saw him off, bidding him what proved
to be a last farewell. I left the wharf feeling very lonely and
miserable. It may be well to remark here that he died a year later in
Italy, one more victim of a fast life, while I was spared, but took no
warning from his fate. In truth, I was in the Primrose Way, which is
ever found a most tormenting and unhappy thoroughfare.

How I grieved all through the twenty years of captivity that I had not
had the moral courage to start afresh upon a basis of truth, sobriety
and honorable endeavor.

Instead of cutting down my expenses, I rather became more extravagant,
fearing my companions would suspect I was pressed for money. How much
more manly had I called them together and told them we must part
company.

Meeting Irving from time to time, he was most flattering in his
attentions, while I was young enough and silly enough to be pleased with
his notice. One evening about this time I met him while coming out of
Wallack's Theatre. Shaking hands warmly, he invited me to supper at what
was then known as upper Delmonico's. After supper, walking to the St.
Denis Hotel at Broadway and 11th street, we found Detectives Stanley and
White. Here wine was ordered, and long after midnight we parted, they
first having exacted a promise to dine with them the following night at
Delmonico's, at the same time stating that they wished to make me a
business proposition.

The next evening White came in and said we would dine at a restaurant at
Sixth avenue and 31st street, instead of at Delmonico's; then he left
me, upon my promise to be on hand.

At eleven I arrived, and entering the restaurant was at once recognized
by a waiter, evidently on the lookout, and ushered into a private room
upstairs. Only White had arrived, but soon Irving and Stanley came, and
supper was ordered. With such gentry as these wine is always in order.
Then they became confidential, and the conversation turned to the
subject of making money. Very skillfully they extracted the confession
that I had none. When excited by the talk and the wine I cried out, "By
heaven, I want money!" Stanley grasped my hand and said: "Of course you
do; a man's a fool without it." Irving interjected: "Are you game to do
us a favor and make ten thousand for yourself?" "But how?" I gasped. "Go
to Europe and negotiate some stolen bonds we have, will you?"

For $10,000 to become accessory to a crime!

It was an appalling proposition, and I shrank from it with an aversion I
could not conceal any more than he and his confederates could conceal
their chagrin over the way I took it, and over the fact that their
secret had been imparted to another. More wine was ordered, and before
we parted I had promised not only secrecy, but, worse still, I had also
promised to consider the proposition and give my answer the following
night.

As my evil genus would have it, that very morning I had a visit in my
office from the agent of my landlord, requesting arrears of rent, and
from a tradesman whom I was owing, demanding immediate payment of an
overdue bill.

Pressed for money as I was, the $10,000 seemed a large sum and offered
an easy way out of my difficulties. I shall never forget that day nor
how its slow minutes dragged during the mental struggle. Time after time
I said: "What could I not do with $10,000?" How vast the possibilities
before me with that sum at my command! Then, after all, had not the
owner of these bonds lost them forever, and why should not I have a
share instead of letting these villain detectives keep all? And through
all I kept saying to myself: "This, of course, is only speculation. I
will never do this thing."

At last the stars came out, and I started for a long walk alone up
Broadway to Fifth avenue and into the Park. Since that Park was formed
few men have ever passed its walks in whose bosoms raged such a tumult
as in mine. I was young, in love with pleasure, and poverty seemed a
fearful thing. I kept saying; "I cannot do this thing!" and then I would
add: "How am I to keep up appearances, and how am I to pay my debts?"
Unhappily, I had taken an enemy into the citadel. In the misery of the
struggle I drank heavily.

In my excitement I exaggerated my poverty until it seemed impersonated
and assumed the guise of an enemy threatening to enslave me. From 8
o'clock to 11 I paced that mall, and then left it to keep my appointment
with Irving & Co., with one thought surging through my brain, and that
was that I dared not be poor, the result being that before we parted, to
their renewed question: "Will you do this for us?" "Of course I will!" I
cried, and my feet had slipped a good many steps further down the
Primrose Way to death.

[Illustration: BURNING RETURNED BANK NOTES.]

[Illustration: IN FORT LAFAYETTE, NEW YORK HARBOR.]

[Illustration: IN FORT LAFAYETTE, NEW YORK HARBOR.]




CHAPTER IV.

FOOLS STUMBLING ON FORTUNES.


The present generation has become tolerably familiar with defalcations
and robberies involving enormous sums. Previous to 1861 they were
comparatively unknown, the reason being that the currency of the country
was strictly limited. There were absolutely no Government bonds or
currency, while the few bonds issued by corporations were not usually
made payable to bearer, and, therefore, were not negotiable, and were of
no use to the robber. But in 1861, to meet the expenses of the war, the
State banks were taxed out of existence and our present national
currency system came into being. In addition to the enormous issue of
greenbacks, bonds payable to bearer, amounting to hundreds of millions,
were issued by the general Government, by the individual States,
counties, towns and cities, all becoming popular investments.
Patriotism, and profit as well, led banks, corporations and individuals
all over the world to invest surplus funds in bonds, those of the
Government being most popular of all. The various issues authorized by
act of Congress were known as "seven-thirties," "ten-forties,"
"five-twenties," etc., these terms denoting either the rate of interest
or the period of years, dating from the first issue, wherein it was
optional with the Government to redeem them. Everywhere, at home, in the
theatres and public resorts not less than on the Exchange, were heard
animated discussions about "seven-thirties" and "ten-forties." The
business of the express companies of the United States took a new phase,
and for the first time in their history they began to be the carriers of
vast sums from city to city.

Then it was that those gentlemen who work without the pale of the law
discovered new prospects of wealth, and realized that even to crack a
safe or vault of a private firm would be rewarded by a find of bonds
that might amply repay all risks of robbery under police protection,
while to execute a successful raid on a car or even an express delivery
wagon on the street would mean wealth. To burglarize the vaults of a
bank meant, if undetected, anything from opening a magnificent bar or
hotel in New York to a steam yacht and Winter cruises in the tropics and
Summer nights on the Mediterranean.

The first coup in this line, which at once became famous, was startling
in its ease and magnitude. It was known, and still is, as "The Lord Bond
Robbery." Lord was a very wealthy man, who had inherited his millions.
His office was in Broad street, where he managed his estates. He had
invested $1,200,000 in seven-thirty bonds, all payable to bearer. For
the thief, if he had any knowledge of finance, and knew how to negotiate
them, such a sum as this in bonds was better than the same amount in
gold, it being more portable. One million two hundred thousand dollars
in gold would weigh upward of a ton, and would be difficult to handle,
but that sum in bonds would hardly fill a carpet-sack. In our day, with
safety deposit vaults everywhere, it seems strange that any sane man
would keep so vast a sum in an old-fashioned vault in his private
office, but Lord did so. His office was a very quiet one, with but few
visitors, there being no business transacted in it but that of his
estate.

[Illustration: "BY HEAVEN, I WANT MONEY."--Page 33.]

At this time there were three or four gangs in New York, all well known
and friendly with the police--that is, some or all were more or less
under "protection," and had pulls at Police Headquarters. But the pull
could not be depended upon at all times, particularly if the robbery
made a noise and the press took it up. Then there would be violent kicks
at Headquarters, and a general all-around scramble to get the thieves,
and so far as safe, stick to more or less of the plunder. The gang that
got Mr. Lord's bonds was what in police and thieves' slang was known as
"On the Office," so named because they went around visiting offices in
the business part of the city, one of the gang going in on pretense of
making some inquiry and so engaging the attention of one of the clerks.
Then the second member would come in and endeavor to attract the
attention of any remaining clerks, while the third would try to get in
without attracting attention, and, if unnoticed by those now busy
talking, would slip around behind the counter to the money drawer or
vault and carry off any cash box or package visible which appeared to be
of value. This gang consisted of three men, Hod Ennis, Charley Rose and
a man by the name of Bullard, afterward made notorious by engineering
the Boylston Bank robbery in Boston.

In the absence of Lord the office was under charge of two men,
old-fashioned fellows, who had grown gray in the service of the Lord
estate. The bonds were all in a tin box something larger than a soap
box. The interest on the bonds being due, the box had been taken out in
order to cut off the coupons, and was left in the door of the open
vault. None of these circumstances was known to these men; in fact,
while "looking for chances," they stumbled on the prize. The night
previous they had spent at a well-known faro game and had lost their
last dollar. At 9 o'clock in the morning they met at a saloon on Prince
street, where none but crooks consorted, and, borrowing a dollar from
the barkeeper, they took a South Ferry stage and started downtown on one
of many similar piratical expeditions. Of course, each paid his own
fare, as from the moment of starting until their return they appeared to
be strangers. Alighting at the ferry, they started up Front street, Rose
in lead, he being pilot-fish. From Front they turned into Broad, and up
Broad to No. 22, where there were a number of offices. Rose mounted the
staircase, it now being five minutes to 10, Bullard coming close behind.
Rose entered the first office to the left at the head of the stairs,
which was Lord's, and at once inquired by name for a member of a
well-known firm located a few doors down across the street. Lord was
away. The clerk, in his desire to serve the gentleman, went to the front
windows to point out the location of the firm. Bullard, who had lingered
in the hall, entered, leaving the office door open behind him, and at
once engaged the attention of the remaining clerk with a letter. Ennis,
seeing the coast clear, slipped in, went softly to the vault, and
perceiving the tin box, seized and carried it out, unseen by all save
his companions. They, seeing him safely off, found a quick pretext to
follow without any suspicion arising in the minds of the clerks. As a
matter of fact, they did not miss the box for nearly an hour.

Ennis carried it to Peck Slip, closely followed by his chums, and there
the three boarded a Second avenue car, all unsuspecting as to what a
prize they had. At the corner of the Bowery and Bayard street they got
out and entered that old red brick hotel on the corner--I forget the
name. They were acquainted and occasionally rendezvoused there, hiring
and paying for the room. They speedily opened the box, and were amazed
to find it packed full of bonds--five hundreds, thousands,
five-thousands, all payable to bearer. The very magnitude of their
plunder terrified them, and, knowing as much as I do about such men, I
am free to affirm that if a buyer of stolen property had appeared on the
scene and said: "Here, I'll give you $10,000 apiece," they would have
closed the deal at once and turned over the bonds, glad to get them off
their hands. What they did was this: Rose went out and bought a
second-hand carpet bag and put the bonds into it, save sixty
five-hundreds, which they divided, and Bullard resolved to leave the bag
with a friend of his. This friend, strangely enough, was the widow of a
policeman and sister of two others. But she knew nothing of Bullard's
character, believing him to be a workingman. Ennis and Rose were two
ignorant fellows, without the remotest idea of how to negotiate bonds,
but Bullard had, and, realizing how important it was to get some cash
before the thing was noised around, he started out to sell some,
agreeing to meet Rose and Ennis at No. 100 Third avenue, a large beer
saloon then, as now.

Going to different brokers' offices, he disposed of ten for $5,000
without any difficulty, and stopped at that. He met his two friends and
divided the $5,000 with them. Then, as a natural consequence with that
class of men, all got drunk, and before the next morning had spent,
loaned or gambled away every dollar of the $5,000.

I remember perfectly the tremendous sensation created when a rumor of
the robbery spread in Wall street and over the city, and what mystified
and intensified the matter was the fact that no complaint had been made
to the police. When Mr. Lord was interviewed by them and by reporters he
would not admit that he had been robbed, and said if he had been he
would prefer to lose the money rather than have a fuss made about the
affair.

This was really the first of many great bond robberies, and it struck
the popular fancy; but if it stirred Wall street greatly, who shall
describe the frenzy of excitement that broke out at 300 Mulberry
street--Police Headquarters--when the first vague rumors of a gigantic
robbery were fully confirmed, and it became known that Hod Ennis and his
gang had a million and more of plunder?

All rings and pulls and gangs were smashed, combined and recombined
again, while each and all were in an agony of fear lest the booty should
be returned to the owner--minus a percentage divided between the gang
and the ring, or sold to some clever fence, who would plant them away
safely and sell them in Europe from time to time, keeping all for
himself and they to have no share. What visions of diamond pins, of
eight or twelve carats, all Brazilian stones; of swift, high-stepping
horses; of the heaven of Harlem lane on Sunday afternoons, with a bottle
or two under the vest, haunted the sleep of all the detective force. I
say the police knew Hod Ennis and his gang had stolen the bonds, for in
those days there was not a gang of confidence men, card sharpers, bank
burglars, counterfeiters or forgers traveling the country but that the
gang and every member of it was well known to the Police Department of
each of our large cities. Whenever a job was done a score of detectives
all over the country could say such and such a gang did the job, and
they were almost always right.

Whether there was "something in" for the force to arrest and convict or
not, as a matter of fact the thieves were sooner or later hocus-pocussed
out of their share, either by the police, by some untrustworthy fence,
or by some lawyer who was pitched upon to work back the securities on a
percentage. In case the thief succeeded in saving part of the proceeds
he immediately lost it at faro or in revelry, and then risked his
liberty for more.

I know two men who to-day walk the streets of New York, the types of
conservative respectability, members of many fashionable clubs, who, in
the sixties, were known as fences, and were always ready to invest cash
for stolen bonds. Both of these men compromised with their conscience by
beating down the price and giving the thieves but a moiety of their
value. Both of them have their fads; one is a connoisseur in violins,
the other has a penchant for orchids, and has much local fame for the
rarities in his collection.

Before midnight of the day of the robbery it became known to the force
and many of the hangers-on of the gambling saloons and barrooms of the
Eighth Ward that Hod Ennis and his gang had money, and it was surmised
that it must be from the Lord business. In the mean time Bullard took
the bag of bonds up to Norwalk, Ct., and placed them for safe-keeping
with a trusty friend, first taking out one hundred bonds of five hundred
each and fifty of one thousand each, and, returning to the city, divided
them with his comrades. During his absence the photographs of the three
men had been shown at Police Headquarters to the two clerks, but they
were unable to identify them.

Within the next few days the $100,000 in bonds were completely
dissipated; some were sold to buyers of stolen goods for a percentage of
the value, some were lost at the gambling games--mostly at Morrissey's,
or at Mike Murray's on Broadway, near Spring street, and probably some
went Mulberry street way. Matters were thickening, and, fearing arrest,
Ennis fled to Canada, Bullard to Europe and Rose went West to
California. Eventually Ennis was convicted of a crime committed some
time before. He was sentenced to a long imprisonment, and came out an
old, broken-down man, without a dollar and without a friend. Rose was
sentenced to five years for another crime, and then disappeared. Bullard
settled down in Paris. He afterward returned and planned the Boylston
Bank affair in Boston. With his share of the plunder he went back to
Paris and opened an American bar at the Grand Hotel and flourished for
some years; but, wanting money, he committed a robbery in Belgium, was
arrested, and is now serving a long sentence for the same; no doubt, if
he survives, he will emerge friendless, penniless, a stranger in a
strange world.

If I were inclined to indulge in reminiscences, what a catalogue could
be given of men who had, like myself, drifted into the Primrose Way, and
all, or nearly all, have paid a terrible penalty for their
wrongdoing--none more terrible than myself. As for our violin virtuoso,
he seems to have conquered fate. So, too, with the connoisseur in
orchids; but let us wait until the end before we say all is well with
them.

Some time later on, meeting one of these detectives, now dead, who then
ranked as the best in New York, in the confidence of the bankers, he
said: "I am getting old and am now working for reputation, and
consequently am not taking any more percentages. Of course, I don't
molest any of my old friends, but those who are not under protection I
run in and send them up the river (Sing Sing) as fast as I get them to
rights."

This need not be considered a condemnation of all detectives, for there
were, even in my time, a few honest ones of the Pinkerton and John
Curtin class--the latter being now one of San Francisco's most reliable,
who, by unusually considerate judgment, has made honorable citizens of a
very large number of clerks whom he had been called upon to detect and
arrest. This he accomplished by extracting a confession in writing,
filing it among his secret papers, then saying to the trembling clerk:
"I shall have you reinstated in your position, but if you go wrong again
this confession will be made public."

The following incident will further enlighten the reader as to the way
things were done in those good old days:

When Boss Tweed was in the full zenith of his power and glory and of the
wealth so easily acquired by certain methods, his daughter was married.
All of the then chiefs and district officers of Tammany, city officials,
judges and heads of departments vied with each other in the presentation
of wedding gifts, among which was a check for $100,000 from the father.
Seldom has any bride received a more magnificent tribute, for, coming
from such sources, they were nothing less than a tribute. Especially was
this the case with one much-admired gift which was contributed by us
just after an illicit operation of $40,000 in Wall street, $4,000 of
which was paid to Irving.

In the column list of wedding gifts in the next morning's papers was:
"One solid silver punch bowl, value $500, presented by Superintendent
Kelso." Shortly after paying Irving the $4,000 percentage we met him one
evening at the St. Cloud Hotel. Mentioning the approaching Tweed
marriage, he suggested that it would be the thing, and make us more
solid with the Superintendent of Police, for us to make a fine present
to "the old man," one that he could use as a gift to the bride. As $500
was not much to our party in those days, we assented, and handed over
that amount.

Tiffany's was then located down Broadway, and among other things on
exhibition in the window was a large, handsome silver punch bowl. This
was purchased with our money, which was known to have been obtained by
forgery, and presented to Superintendent Kelso. A few days later the
bowl reappeared in the window of Tiffany's thus inscribed:

  +-----------------------------------------+
  |                                         |
  |           TO CATHERINE TWEED.           |
  |                                         |
  |               Presented by              |
  |                                         |
  |               JAMES KELSO,              |
  |                                         |
  |         Superintendent of Police.       |
  |                                         |
  |   "May loyalty and love know no end."   |
  |                                         |
  +-----------------------------------------+




CHAPTER V.

WHEN BOSS TWEED WAS NEW YORK'S OWNER AND JIM FISK, PROPRIETOR OF OUR
JUDGES.


What a look of relief and triumph swept over the faces of Irving,
Stanley and White when I gave my consent to their proposal to take the
stolen bonds to Europe and negotiate them there. We understood each
other now, and casting aside all reserve, their tongues wagged freely,
and they eagerly told me how confident they were of my ability to
dispose of the bonds successfully, and also of my good faith; and,
furthermore, told me I was the only man they would have trusted. Of
course, they had no security save my word, for under the circumstances
they could hardly ask me for a receipt, and even had I given one it
would have been valueless had I chosen to retain the proceeds of the
bonds. Thus, becoming the important member of the firm, I told them to
produce the securities and I would sail immediately. It was finally
settled that I should go by the steamer Russia of the Cunard line, which
was down for sailing at 7 a.m. Wednesday, and they were to deliver the
bonds to me on Tuesday night. Upon my demanding cash to pay expenses,
their faces fell, but quickly brightened when I told them to give me a
thousand-dollar bond and I would borrow that amount from a friend, using
it for security. There was no danger of the number of the bond being
inspected, and, of course, I would pay the note upon my return and
receive the bond again.

[Illustration: WALL STREET AND SOME OF ITS CHARACTERS IN MY TIME.--Page
26.]

They told me many amusing lies as to how the securities came into their
possession, and as to who were the rightful owners. The truth was, as I
afterward learned, they were a part of the stolen Lord bonds.

Bonds issued by our Government and held in Europe, chiefly in Holland
and Germany, were so enormous in volume and passed so freely from hand
to hand, that it was easy for a well-dressed, business-appearing man to
sell any quantity, even if stolen, as by law the innocent holder could
not be deprived of them. One great advantage a dishonest man had at that
date in Europe, especially an American, was that if he dressed well they
considered he must be a gentleman, and if he had money that was a proof
of respectability--one they never thought of questioning, nor how he
came by it; then, again, it was an article of their creed that all
Americans are rich.

The next morning (Tuesday), Irving met me near the Exchange, and, with
some trepidation, drew from an inner pocket an envelope containing the
thousand-dollar bond. Without waiting to examine it, I walked off,
saying: "I'll be back in ten minutes." He was evidently alarmed, and,
like all rogues, suspicious of every one. He probably had some wild idea
that I was laying a trap for him. In his ignorance of money methods he
thought it would be a long, perhaps difficult, negotiation to borrow
money on the bond, but, of course, I made short work of it; and "Jimmy"
was more than delighted when within the ten minutes I walked in with ten
one hundreds in my hand. A trifle like this made a great impression upon
Irving, and from that time on I had his entire confidence. Tuesday
evening I said good-bye to my mother, merely remarking in explanation of
my journey that I had a commission given me to execute in Europe.

Leaving her, I went to our rendezvous, near Broadway and Astor place,
where I found Irving, who handed me over his "boodle" (as he termed
it), remarking confidentially that I was to give him on my return his
share into his own hands; and, singularly enough, each of the others did
precisely the same thing. About 11 o'clock the other two came in, and
after some parley White handed over his bonds, and Stanley informed me
he would give me his on board before the steamer sailed the next
morning. I had already paid my bill and sent my baggage over to Jersey
City, so about midnight I set out, they accompanying me as far as the
ferry, and there, after shaking hands a half dozen times, we said
good-bye. Having bought my ticket and engaged my cabin, I went direct to
the steamer and went to bed. In the morning Stanley appeared and gave me
his bonds. Ten minutes later the hawsers were cast off and we were
steaming down the bay. Two hours later Fire Island sank beneath the
horizon, and we were alone on the sea.

Alone on the sea! and a fitting place to tell the story of a famous New
York bank robbery.

In the good old days when Bill Tweed was New York's owner, when Jim Fisk
was the proprietor of our judges and Kelso sat in Mulberry street, the
king of those good men, the police, who defend our lives and property,
this city became a spectacle to gods and men such as we thought then
could never be equaled. We thought so then, but we were not endowed with
second sight, nor with the gift of prophecy, or we might, perhaps, have
reserved our judgment. Still, our masters were a unique collection, and
if they have been equaled or surpassed since, they held with easy grasp
the pre-eminence among all American rulers who had shone and flourished
up to the time when those great men gave us new ideas upon the science
of government. The average and quiet citizen, shocked as he might be and
grumble as he did at the impudent plundering by our masters, their
contempt of public opinion and the cynical display of their luxury,
would doubtless have confined himself to grumbling and to calling for
slow-arriving thunderbolts to crash the oppressors who were despoiling
him had he felt certain that the plunder would be confined to them, that
his property would be safe, at least, from the attacks of those
insignificant, despicable but eminently dangerous plunderers who became
known to the police as common criminals. This, however, was not so.
After being flayed by iniquitous taxes, which he knew were destined to
add to the stores of Tweed, Connolly & Company, he had every day
abundant proof that what the big rascals left him, the little ones would
soon try, by burglary or robbery, to ravish from him, and that they
would do it with perfect immunity, unterrified either by the fear of
present arrest or of later punishment. The Mulberry street office was
divided into three or four little pools, each with its clientele of
dependents, all of whom faithfully and immediately reported to their
patrons the result of any little job they had been engaged in, handing
over to the representative of the pool the 20 per cent. of the result,
which was Headquarters' established commission. This was the ordinary
rate when gentlemen skilled in transferring other people's watches and
portemonnaies from the pockets of their owners to their own, or when
others who had devoted their talents to demonstrating practically the
enormous power of the jimmy and wedge originated and carried out by
themselves the operations peculiar to those classes of industries.

It sometimes happened that special cases offered, for which special
terms were arranged. Such cases stood by themselves. They were confided
only to the acknowledged heads of the profession. Standing outside of
all recognized rules, they were treated apart. Headquarters men were
always sent to the seat of operations to prevent interference, and, in
case of need, to protect their partners. Many a mysterious robbery was
perpetrated to which no clue was ever found; many an anxious search was
undertaken by the bloodhounds of the law to find the robbers, that they
might crack a bottle together and rejoice over the success of their
operations, and sometimes they were joined by men the mention of whose
names in such company would have excited incredulous and unbounded
amazement.

The gigantic heavings of the war were struggling to rest, but the men
whose minds were unhinged and thrown off their balance by the possession
of large sums flowing from transactions, a little irregular, perhaps,
but which the necessities of Government permitted, were endeavoring, by
any means, to open up new fountains of wealth in place of those which
the close of the war had exhausted.

One of the resources presenting itself most naturally to men in a
position to profit by it was speculating with other people's money, and
very naturally the result of such speculation was disastrous in the
highest degree. When detection became inevitable the defaulter generally
fled, hoping to find in a foreign land safety from the stroke of justice
and a shelter from the reproaches of his victims.

Occasionally, one more resolute, dreading flight as much as detection,
flung himself into schemes which, if they failed, meant the most hideous
and utter ruin, but which, if they succeeded, rendered discovery
impossible, and made his position more solid than ever before. One day,
late in the sixties, in the parlor of a bank in Greenwich street, a
gentleman was anxiously scanning the books of the establishment. He
alone in all the institution knew of a secret which would horrify his
brother officials and carry desolation to scores of homes, the first to
suffer being his own. Perhaps had it been possible to exempt this one
home, the misery of the others would not have greatly affected him. But
suffering must be kept from his own house, and all and any means to
banish it would be and must be good.

The gentleman in whose mind these thoughts were passing was the
president of the bank, who knew himself to be a defaulter to an enormous
amount, and who was now anxiously reflecting upon the means to cover up
his robberies. Fortunately for him he was acquainted with the one man
who more than any other in all America was able to help him. This was
Capt. Irving. The president was a man of nerve. He knew, as everybody
else knew, the relations in which the police stood to the thieves, and
he felt that if he could arrange to have his own bank robbed, his
difficulties would vanish, and his share in the defalcations be covered
up.

Little time was left to him before the inevitable discovery, but the
prompt and skillful use he made of it to extricate himself from the
fearful danger of his position makes one almost regret that a man of
such resolution and such opportunities should prove to the world that
high qualities may exist when the moral sense is entirely wanting.
Irving was quickly taken into his confidence, the position explained,
the proposition to rob the bank broached, all possible co-operation in
the way of leaving safes unlocked and doors open, or what, of course,
amounts to the same thing, of furnishing keys and information to open
everything, promised, and then Irving was asked if he could find men to
carry the job into execution. New York in those days was well supplied
with such artists, but the right men to carry out so momentous an
operation had to be sought. The difficulty, however, was not great, and
Irving promptly assured the honorable president that he might
confidently count on the right men at the right time.

Among the professionals who twenty-three or four years ago were
considered "valuable" men at Police Headquarters were Mike Hurley,
Patsey Conroy and Max Shinburn. These were the men whom Irving instantly
determined to employ, and whom he forthwith set about to find. That not
being a matter of any difficulty, the same night the three men met
Irving at his own house, and were delighted over the revelation he made
to them.

One would like to know with what sentiment a man occupying an honorable
and responsible position, a Sunday-school superintendent, the head of a
great financial institution, well known in the money world and respected
in society, slunk to a midnight meeting with burglars.

Did no feeling of shame crimson his face, no sinking of disgust oppress
his heart, as he slipped into a house, where, although he kept aloof
from actual contact with the ruffians, the details of an enormous crime
of which he was the author were debated and settled?

Prudential reasons doubtless kept him from forming a personal
acquaintance with his agents. The risk of exposing himself to future
blackmail must not be incurred, and one may well believe that he shrank
from clasping the hands of these men, who were eagerly awaiting him.
Whatever were his feelings, his desperate position suffered no halting.
The storm was ready to break at any moment. In an instant he might be a
wretched fugitive, with terror before him and infamy howling behind. But
one way led out of this labyrinth. He had resolutely planted his feet in
that way, determined to tread it to the end. He did tread it to the end,
and he came out victorious.

If the suspicions of any afterward pointed toward him, no syllable of
the suspicions was breathed. Who dared suspect that an honorable citizen
had ever, in the dead of night, crept like a robber to a meeting of
outlaws, to concoct the details of an outrageous breach of trust, of a
crime which--none knew it better than he--would carry life-long misery
and suffering to the families of nearly every man who trusted him?

[Illustration: "THE DETECTIVES SIGNALED THE BURGLARS: 'THE COAST IS
CLEAR.'"--Page 57.]

"The evil that men do lives after them," but where does the
responsibility of its author end? Who will ever say what crimes may
spring from the one act of wrongdoing, crimes committed, it may be,
by persons who were directly led into them by the consequences of an act
the perpetrator of which had never heard of those affected by it? How
far does the responsibility of the wrongdoer extend? What weight of
horror is he accumulating on his head?

Such questions may perhaps occur afterward, when the pleasure has been
tasted and is gone, and nothing remains of the detected crime but the
ruin it has wrought; but in the excitement of laying the plot, in the
glamour which the hope of success casts over the schemer, they probably
never intrude, conscience is smothered, and he is left to carry out his
schemes to the end.

Doubtless no such thoughts disturbed the president, as he waited that
night while Irving acted as go-between, carrying messages from him to
the agents and from the agents back again to him. At last the
arrangements were made. Duplicate keys of the safe were to be provided,
and a way, to be presently explained, was to be left open to each of
them. Whatever the robbers found in the safes was to be theirs, and the
task of getting it was to be of the easiest. This, of course, was highly
satisfactory to the thieves, but something more must be prepared for the
stockholders and the public. Bank safes are not so easily emptied; there
must be the appearance, at least, of great effort to effect the robbery,
and marks of the effort must be left behind.

It was, therefore, settled that powerful tools were to be provided,
tools able to tear open any strong-box in the world. Such articles are
expensive, and the burglars had no money to procure them. No man who
knows those people will be surprised at this, for, however much money
they may obtain, they never have anything. It melts out of their hands,
and they would be themselves embarrassed to say what becomes of it.

The president's first necessity, therefore, was to pay out about a
thousand dollars for the jimmies, wedges and all the paraphernalia of
the burglars' industry. This he did. Irving took charge of the money,
and he had far too great an interest in the scheme to suffer the cash to
be squandered. The agreement was that on the following day Conroy should
present himself at the bank to hire a vacant basement, the roof of which
formed the floor of the room where the safes were lodged. The president
undertook to smooth any difficulties in the way of requiring references,
and promised that he should be accepted as a tenant.

This agreement was punctually carried out. Conroy made his application,
the basement was granted to him, the rent paid in advance for the
edification of the clerks, and he at once entered in possession. Hurley
and Shinburne joined him, and the following Saturday they removed so
much of the ceiling that but a few minutes' work was required to
complete a hole which should serve as a doorway to the vaults above when
the bank closed in the evening.

[Illustration: MACHINE FOR WEIGHING GOLD.]




CHAPTER VI.

CHEATED VISIONS AND VANISHED HOPES.


Saturday night was the time chosen to get into the bank, and the
plunderers were to remain there until Sunday. The members of Irving's
ring were to keep watch to prevent any officious interference from
passers-by or from ward policemen. Carriages were to be in waiting at
some convenient place on Sunday morning, and when the men inside
received a signal from their police accomplices on the outside, they
were to leave the bank, abandoning their tools, and carrying away
nothing but the money and the securities they had stolen. So far, the
way was plain; the keys had long before been prepared, tested and found
to work properly; full instructions were given as to the way to use
them, but the way inside was not yet open.

A night watchman was employed on the premises, and he, of course, was to
be got rid of. Little ceremony was to be used in treating him. He was to
be seized, overcome by any means, bound, gagged and rendered helpless
until Monday, and the fact that he always passed Sunday in the bank,
prevented any remark at home upon his continued absence. The details of
the plot were thus satisfactorily settled, and at a late hour the
conspirators separated.

In the early morning of that day the three burglars were standing in the
cellar to which they had lowered their booty, waiting for the signal to
come out. At last it was given, when the precious trio slipped out,
carrying their precious bags. A covered carriage was posted in an
adjoining street, into which the whole party entered, flurried and
excited, and rapidly drove to Irving's residence. There the contents of
the bags were carefully examined. The actual cash was easily disposed
of, but what was to be done with the bonds?

The arrangement finally agreed upon, to be detailed presently, shows
that if there be circumstances in which a little learning is a dangerous
thing, one of them is not just after the perpetration of a gigantic
burglary.

The Monday following its execution confusion and amazement reigned in
the bank. The clerks on their arrival were astounded to find the safe
doors wide open, torn and smashed by the tools which lay scattered over
the floor, and the night watchman, gagged and bound, was discovered,
nearly dead, in a neighboring room. One of the clerks jumped into a cab
and rushed to Police Headquarters in Mulberry street to report the
robbery. Irving was sitting in his office, busy with the night reports,
when the messenger was introduced to tell of the bank's calamity.

The excellent chief listened with breathless attention, and was
naturally horror-struck at the perpetration of such a crime. Calling a
couple of his trusted sleuths, he hastily communicated the surprising
news, and the three hurried with the clerk back to Greenwich street.
Arrived there they minutely examined the premises, and gave it as their
opinion, judging from the style of the work and from the tools which lay
around, that the burglary had been committed by a well-known burglar
named Harry Penrose, and that the night watchman, whom they immediately
placed under arrest, must have been his accomplice.

The president had sent word to the bank that he was unwell, and would
not be able to attend to business that day, but the terrible news was
immediately telegraphed to him, and, in spite of his illness, he hurried
to town. It is impossible to describe his astonishment and distress at
the sight which met his eyes. In the presence of the clerks he held
anxious consultations with the detectives, who assured him that they had
already taken the first steps to unravel the mystery, and that every
possible effort would be made to discover the criminals. In the privacy
of his own office he explained to the reporters that he had left in the
bank four hundred thousand dollars in cash and bonds, every farthing of
which had disappeared.

As soon as the news was published the excitement among the depositors
and the stockholders of the bank was, of course, immense. A run set in,
which the directors by the help of friends and of their own private
resources were able to meet, but the Wall street appreciation of the
calamity was shown in the drop in value of the bank's stock from 130 to
40.

I repeat, a little learning is a dangerous thing. Much knowledge is not
to be looked for among men who engage in such crimes, but one would
fancy that the everyday experience of Irving and his people would have
given them some idea of financial business. The fact is, they were, if
possible, more ignorant than their felonious partners. The financial
ideas of the latter scarcely went further than "making cheap pennyworths
of their plunder, giving to courtesans and living like lords till all be
gone," so that negotiating the sale of bonds was a mystery far too high
for them--something which they could never hope to attain to. But the
company included one man who was a rare exception to the ordinary ride
of such society. This was Max Shinburne, a German, a man of considerable
education, who, in some inexplicable way, had fallen so far from honor
and respectability that when he saw a thief he "consented unto him."

How is it that such men are often found in the ranks of professional
criminals? They would probably have difficulty to explain it themselves.
A want of savoir faire, the fact that they have never been taught to
make a practical use of their acquirements, the pressure of temptation
at a critical moment, the absence, possibly, from harm, leading to the
hope of immunity--all, perhaps, enter into the explanation of the secret
promptings which have led to the first false step, to the first planting
of the feet in the path which leads to destruction. Once the step is
taken, to retrace it seems impossible. The line which society draws, and
which it proclaims no man shall overstep without punishment, may be
approached very closely, but once on the wrong side, once the fateful
step is taken, the act is irretrievable; to attempt to retrace it is to
attempt to undo the past; it is all but impossible.

Thus probably it is that the fall of an educated man is more hopeless
than that of one who knows no better. A carpenter or a blacksmith who
has got himself in a tangle has only to move to another town, and if he
shakes off perverted thoughts and perverted influences, he is not much
worse off than before. He has kept his trade, and his trade will keep
him.

Nobody is going to inquire about a workman who can do his work. The
employer requires nothing more than that the work be done, and if it be
done he neither thinks nor cares anything more about either it or the
worker.

With the educated man the case is different. The sentiments of the class
he belongs to are less yielding, the fineness of his own feelings has
been too deeply wounded, and when he has stabbed his reputation, he is
apt, foolishly, of course, to fling the rest of his respectability after
it.

With qualities and advantages which might have fitted him for a useful
and honorable position in life, Shinburne was at less than 30 years of
age the companion of outcasts. But whatever his moral failings, his
knowledge remained, and it was for him, at least, to be valuable.

To get rid of the bonds in America was impossible, except by sacrificing
them to a stolen goods receiver, who would have given but a small
percentage of their value.

A steamer was to sail for Europe that day, and it was agreed that
Shinburne should go by her, with one of the other robbers as company,
sell the bonds before the news of the robbery could get across the
ocean, then return and fairly divide the proceeds.

This was the arrangement, but Shinburne had already begun to have other
dreams and other ambitions. He saw a chance to restore himself, or, at
least, to snatch at a position which would give him weight to crush down
sinister reports or envious whisperings, and he determined forthwith to
seize it. What the bank president had done to save himself from infamy,
Shinburne would do to recover himself from infamy. It can be, therefore,
easily understood that he accepted without hesitation the other's
proposal.

The steamer did not sail until noon. There was, therefore, plenty of
time to make preparations, and, besides, he had a little private
business to attend to. Leaving the securities in Irving's charge, with a
promise to meet the party at 11, he took his share of the cash and
departed.

Some time before this, with a skill and forethought rarely to be found
in the class he then belonged to, he had bought some building lots near
the park. Fortunate, indeed, the speculation eventually proved to be. In
the mean time, placing his lots in the hands of a responsible agent, and
taking drafts on Europe for his money, he rapidly made the little
preparation he needed, and at 11 joined his party, there to receive
nearly $200,000 in bonds, and to set out with Mike Hurley for the
steamer.

After hurried parting injunctions from the Headquarters men, the two
travelers, accompanied by Conroy, to see them off, were rapidly driven
to the steamer. Punctually to the hour the hawsers were cast off, and
with barely time to say good-bye the cronies parted. A moment after the
screw began to turn, and the Cunarder's bow pointed toward England.

Arrived in Liverpool, the pair proceeded at once to London. Hurley, who
was as ignorant of foreign travel as of everything else, was easily
tricked by some tale of no evening trains for the Continent. Shinburne
plied him well with liquor, taking care to mix the bottles, and when he
had got him helplessly drunk he took the bonds and with his little
luggage slipped quietly off to the Continent, never to see his dupe or
his New York friends again.

He went to Germany, called himself "Count" Shinburne, bought an estate
and began to exercise large hospitality toward his neighbors.

No man on all the length of the Rhine was so popular as he. No man's
house and table, horses and gardens were so praised as his. In the eyes
of the beggar nobles of the Fatherland the man who could give such
dinners and in such succession, must belong to the choice members of the
human race. Day by day Max's position grew more solid. No breath was
ever whispered against him, and with a little prudence he might have
kept up his state and died in the odor of sanctity. But the taste of
grandeur was too sweet, the incense of his little world's flattery too
precious to run the smallest risk of losing it. His display exceeded his
means, but for nothing in the world would he have curtailed it.

Matters were in this way until he awoke one day to find his account
overdrawn on his bankers. Then it was that he began to remember his
operation in Greenwich street, and he seems to have thought that if he
succeeded in New York, surely nothing could stand in his way in some
sleepy town in Europe.

[Illustration: "WITH HORROR THE SISTERS SAW THE COUNTESS AIRING THE
HISTORIC BRACELET."--Page 68.]

He went to Brussels prospecting, and soon pitched upon an establishment
which he thought likely to reward his industry. But the result showed
that to walk into a bank when the way was left open, with the
authorities anxious to see him there, and to force his way in when the
entrance was jealously barred with the guardians determined he should
stay out, were two very different things. He made the attempt, was
arrested and sentenced to sixteen years' imprisonment. His German
friends heard of his mishap, and his glory faded like the early dew.

Naturally, every one thought that the count's career had closed, that
the star of his fate had declined, that the bars of his prison house
were about him forever. They were greatly mistaken. After some twelve or
thirteen years he succeeded in getting a pardon and managed to make his
way to America. His first visit was to the agents in whose hands he had
left the management of his park lots. He went into their office, not
knowing whether or not he was a pauper. He came out knowing himself to
be nearly a millionaire.

During the almost twenty years of his absence his lots had increased
enormously in value. Once more he was a rich man, once more he might
emerge from his eclipse and become a power of a certain kind in the
class of society he could get access to, but his experience had taught
him something. His advancing years had left him but little desire for
display. He came back to a world which knew him not: and few of those
who notice a benevolent-looking old gentleman, who often passes an
afternoon in upper Broadway, suspect that under an assumed name he hides
the identity of Max Shinburne, the bank burglar.

When Hurley awoke from his drunken fit in London and recognized that his
partner had both robbed and deserted him, he felt that his mission was
over, and that nothing remained but to return at once to America. Loud
and long and wrathful were the complaints over Shinburne's treachery.
Whatever he did to others, all felt that his dealings with them ought to
have been "on the square," but there was no help for it. He had
disappeared, and faint, indeed, was the chance that they would ever see
him again. The success of the crime, so far as they were concerned, had,
after all, been a failure. Vanished hopes and cheated visions were
their share, instead of the wealth they had anticipated, and in their
devouring rage they tried to console themselves with the thought of what
they would do to him if they ever met Shinburne.

The only man who had any real success from the scheme was the president.
Exposure had become impossible. He had taken good care not to leave too
much in the safes for his accomplices, and he was henceforth a wealthy
man. The bank, desperately shaken by the robbery, fell so greatly in the
esteem of the public that not long after it failed. The president gave
up banking, and began to speculate in real estate. He increased in
riches and prospered in the world. He called his lands after his own
name. He thought his house would continue forever, and men praised him,
because he did well to himself. He settled his children comfortably in
life, and when he died, not so very long ago, all felt that the world
was better because he had lived in it, and that, although their loss
when he was taken was heavy, it was, nevertheless, his great gain.




CHAPTER VII.

GILDED SIRS WHO ARE NOT WISE.


After a pleasant voyage the Russia arrived, and one May morning I walked
into the Northwestern Railway station in Liverpool to take the train for
London. The bonds were in a little handbag, and I was free to look
around. Everything was novel and strange, and all things told me I was
in a foreign land. I had, like most young people, a particularly good
opinion of myself and something of an idea as to my own importance.

We arrived in London amid a drizzling rain, and I was much impressed
with the mighty roar of the traffic in the streets. We drove to Langham
place, where I had a regular English tea, and liked it immensely, too.
The next night I left Victoria Station for Dover, and crossing the
Channel to Ostend, went through to Brussels and stopped there, having
wanted, ever since boyhood, to visit the field of Waterloo. I looked
through the city that day, visiting the famous City Hall and one of the
art galleries. Retiring early I arose early and drove out to the plain
immortalized by the giant struggle of those valiant hosts, but did not
purchase any of the relics which were freely offered. These have been
sold by shiploads to two generations of visitors. Returning to Brussels,
I paid my bill at the Hotel de Paris, and was amused over the
inventiveness of the proprietor in making charges--towels, candles,
soap, attendance, paper, envelopes, being among them.

Going to the station I bought my ticket for Frankfort--that old town I
was destined to see so much of during the next few years. On my journey
I would pass through Cologne, and from there the railway skirts the bank
of the Rhine. This being my first visit to Europe, I was intensely
curious to see everything, especially the Cathedral at Cologne, and was
eager to linger a few days along the banks of the Rhine. But I was more
eager to complete the bond negotiations, and wisely resolved to go
direct to Frankfort, sell the bonds, then, with the money in my pocket
and all anxiety over, I would be in a state of mind to enjoy a short
holiday.

I traveled through Belgium and some parts of Germany by daylight, and
was, as most Americans are who travel on the Continent, shocked to see
the employment of women. Soon after leaving Brussels I saw the, to me,
novel sight of a number of women shoveling coal, handling the shovel
like men. In other places I saw them laboring in the brick yards,
digging and wheeling clay, and everywhere they were to be seen working
at men's work in the fields.

A traveler in my compartment proved a most entertaining companion. He
described himself to me as one who "went about pottering over a lot of
antiquities and fooling around generally."

But my friend, the pottering old antiquary, gave me something of a
surprise. At Chalours all of our fellow travelers in the compartment
left us. Two of them were voluble French women, and they kept it up with
amazing energy for the six hours from Brussels to Chalours. At every
unusual swaying of the car there would be a volley of "Mon Dieus!" and
ear-piercing exclamations, and it was certainly a relief when they left.

Bringing out a box of cigars, and my companion producing a flask of
wine, we soon became confidential. Presently, to my great amusement, my
Old Antiquary, warmed by the wine, confided to me that he was a
detective police officer and chief of the secret service at Antwerp,
that he was then working on a famous case, and had been shadowing one of
the ladies who had journeyed with us from Brussels. Before leaving
Brussels, he had discovered his quarry was to quit the train, and as he
had to go on to Mayence, he had turned the business over to a
confederate.

I was young, and no doubt he thought me innocent; certainly he did not
withhold his confidence. This is the case he was investigating:

There was a wealthy gentleman by the name of Van Tromp living in
Antwerp, a widower, 70 years of age, the father of a grown-up family,
and many times a grandfather. It had been his custom to go to
Baden-Baden every Summer, spending money freely both in pleasure and in
the famous gambling resorts there. The last time he had met a woman, the
Countess Winzerode, one of the many adventuresses to be found there, and
speedily became infatuated. This Van Tromp was a descendant of old
Admiral Van Tromp, who, in the mighty life-and-death struggle between
Holland and Spain, and in the two wars with England, the first when
Cromwell ruled, the second when the Second Charles was on the throne,
held up the fame and glory of Holland. In one case he swept the proud
navies of Spain from the seas and carried the Dutch flag around the
world. In the other, he was only vanquished after stubborn sea-fights
lasting for days, and only ended then because the stout admiral lay on
his deck with an English bullet in his heart. This Van Tromp was the
heir of the fame and the wealth of all the Van Tromps, and both had gone
on accumulating for 300 years.

The self-styled Countess knew all this, and, as the sequel shows, knew
her man. She was 40, had been beautiful, was still comely, with good
figure, fair-haired, but with steel-blue eyes. She spoke many languages
and had dwelt in every land from Petersburg to Paris. It is needless to
tell how they first met or of the intimacy that sprang up between them,
but I will merely say in passing that within five days of their first
meeting he had given her a magnificent diamond bracelet, which had been
in his family more than a century. This alarmed his two daughters, who
were terrified at the mere suspicion that their father was in earnest,
and might possibly present them with a stepmother, above all, a
comparatively young stepmother, and, so far as physique went, a
magnificent animal, with promise of a long life--so long that her rights
of dower would make a cut in the Van Tromp estates and treasures, which
might well cause the old Admiral to rouse himself from his three-century
sleep in Dordrecht Church and once more walk these glimpses of the moon
in protest of the sacrilege. Then the scandal of a Countess-adventuress
becoming a Van Tromp--head of that family, too! They knew of his
penchant for the Countess, and cared nothing for it, until, with a
feeling akin to horror they observed at the dress ball one night the
Countess airing the historic bracelet. It would require a volume to
relate the scenes that followed in the Van Tromp domicile on this
paralyzing discovery; but prayers, tears and histrionic touches were all
met by the stolid reply of Van Tromp: "I please myself."

As a last resort the daughters appealed to the Countess, offering all
their ready cash and a pension if she would only disappear. But visions
of the Van Tromp diamonds and of the Van Tromp bank account were in her
head and she was deaf to every appeal. In fact, she despised these
heavy, matter-of-fact Dutch ladies, and rather gloried to think that she
would soon be the female head of the Van Tromp house and stepmother to
these two highly respectable dames, who would perforce have to live in
her shadow. But then, of course, the Countess was a woman, and it is to
be feared that even good women love to triumph over others. She, of
course, could have no love for this portly old gentleman of seventy.
But it is pitiful to think he was madly infatuated. The poor old man, in
spite of his unromantic appearance, had warm blood in his veins and
plenty of romance in his heart. At last, in spite of gossip and
opposition, they were married, and then, instead of settling down, as
the happy groom had hoped, to a life of wedded bliss in one of his
country houses at Dordrecht, Lady Van Tromp insisted on spending her
honeymoon in Paris. There they went, and the very day of their arrival
the bride resumed a liaison with a beggarly count, who, not being an
actual criminal, yet was written black enough in the books of the Paris
police, and for whom the Countess had as warm an admiration as one of
her cold, calculating nature was capable of feeling.

Van Tromp speedily found his dream of bliss blown to the winds, but he
was not so blind as not to see that his wife not only did not love him,
but was false to him as well. Poor old Van Tromp felt he had made his
last throw for happiness, and hoping against hope, dreamed she in time
would learn to appreciate his devotion and would love him, and so tried
to persuade himself of her truth. The first anniversary of the marriage
found them at Baden-Baden, and there the unhappy husband, thinking to
give his wife a pleasant surprise, entered her chamber at an unusual
hour bearing a diamond necklace for a present, and found her in a
position which could no longer leave any doubt as to her faithlessness.
Seizing a chair he felled her companion, who never stirred again; but
the shock was too great for the husband, who himself fell to the floor
and instantly expired--the doctors said of heart disease, and I think
they were right. This event was only a few weeks old. The will had been
read, and it was found that he had literally left everything "to my
wife, Elizabeth."

Here my friend, the chief of police and a distant relative of Van Tromp,
came to the front, determined quietly on his own account to investigate
Lady Van Tromp. He found this last was at least her third venture on
the stormy sea of matrimony. He had a fancy that some one of her
husbands might still be living and undiscovered. If this could be
proved, then her marriage to Van Tromp was no marriage, and the ducats,
dollars and diamonds bequeathed by Van Tromp to "my wife, Elizabeth,"
would instantly melt into air--into very thin air, so far as the
Countess was concerned; provided, of course, they had not actually
passed into her clutches. In fact, they were legally hers, for the will
had been admitted to probate. Those of the family objecting could offer
no valid opposition, and she had been put in possession, but, by a
strange neglect on her part, left everything intact, save a deposit of
300,000 gulden in the Bank of Amsterdam, which she secured and set out
for Naples with a new lover.

The detective--whom I will call Amstel--discovered that she had first
been married when only 15 years old to a young Swiss in Geneva, who soon
left her and fled to America. He had subsequently returned to Europe,
but Amstel was unable to discover his whereabouts or if he was living.
He suspected that the Swiss was not only alive but in communication with
the Countess, and that she, in fact, might be his legal wife. He had
followed the Countess from Naples to Paris. There she left her lover and
was now on her way to Nuremberg, as Amstel believed, to meet her first
husband, but she had arranged to remain a few days with some old friends
of hers. Every movement she made there would be watched, while Amstel,
going on to Cologne to look up some clues, intended to wait there until
informed that she had departed, and when the train arrived at Cologne he
proposed to enter it and follow my lady on, hoping to witness a meeting
between her and the much hoped-for husband. Happily we had arrived at
Cologne at this point in the story, and as Amstel was to remain here we
had to say good-bye; but for the whole twenty minutes of my stay we
walked up and down the platform talking eagerly of the case. I had
become much interested, so deeply, indeed, that had I had leisure I
certainly should have turned amateur detective and joined Amstel.

[Illustration: LONDON POLICEMAN.--ST. PAUL'S IN DISTANCE.]

The train started, and, promising to write me in New York the outcome of
the case, we shook hands warmly and parted. He wrote me twice, and the
following year I returned to Europe and met Amstel at Brussels. We had a
very delightful time together, during which he told me the sequel of the
Van Tromp episode. Instead of one, the Countess had two husbands living;
but the Van Tromps preferred to buy off the woman at a good round sum
rather than have a public scandal.

Amstel interviewed the Countess, and gave her the choice between arrest
and a full release of all claims on the Van Tromp property for the sum
of 100,000 gulden. She made a hard fight, but at last gave in
gracefully. But my chapter has grown too long already, and I will close
it with the remark that I myself met the lady at Wiesbaden in 1871, and
became acquainted with the brilliant adventuress. She will appear again
in the sequel.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE MERRY SUMMER OVER AND NO HARVEST STORED.


From Cologne to Frankfort is about 140 miles, and swiftly our train sped
along up the Rhine--the lovely stream about which poets have raved for
twenty generations. What classic ground! What scenes have its waters
reflected, its mountains looked upon! In the old days its rolling floods
made a deep impression on the stout Roman heart. More than one army,
carrying with it the hearts of the Roman world, had crossed that river
and plunged into the unknown forests beyond, only to go down in the
shock of conflict with the brave but barbarian foe, leaving not one
solitary survivor to carry back tidings to Rome of the fate of her army.
And down through all the linked centuries the history of the Rhine has
been the history of giant armies marching against each other, and of
brothers slaughtering brothers. To-day the plains of Germany and France
bear a million of armed men, ranged face to face, with only the Rhine
between, eagerly awaiting the signal to pour a deadly rain on each
other. And for what?

The last face that I saw at the Cologne station was that of Amstel, lit
up with smiles as he waved his hand in adieu. Sitting cozily in the
corner of the carriage, eager to see all that was to be seen, I found,
as all tourists do, much to charm and delight. But my thoughts were on
the bonds I had to sell, and I was glad enough when at 5 o'clock our
train drew into the depot at Frankfort.

Alighting I took a cab and drove to the Hotel Landsberg, and, although
tired, the scenes and surroundings were too novel for me to think of
sleep. So I dined and went out to view the city, but as I will have
occasion to refer to the place again, I will leave any description of it
until another chapter.

In London there was an American banking house that has since failed, but
which at this time was doing a large business in the way of issuing
letters of credit. The firm was patronized chiefly by Americans. It
issued credits, or letters of credit, without inquiry, to any one
applying for them. While in London I called at their office, 449 Strand,
and paying $750 was given a credit for L150, which I took under an
assumed name. I wanted this letter to serve as an introduction to some
of the bankers at Frankfort, and to open the way for the negotiation of
the bonds. The Frankfort correspondents of the London firm were Kraut,
Lautner & Co., on the Gallowsgasse. The next morning I repaired to the
office of this firm, and producing my letter was very cordially
received, and invited to make my headquarters in their office during my
stay at Frankfort, which for the next day or two I did. However, I
called on several other bankers, also feeling the way, and finally
selected the firm of Murpurgo & Wiesweller, bankers widely known and of
enormous wealth. I had several talks with Murpurgo, and told him I was
arranging to purchase a number of copper mines in Austria, and if the
deal was closed I should sell a large block of American bonds and use
the cash I realized to pay for the purchase of the mines. I suppose he
thought to make a good thing out of it, and was eager to purchase.

My reader will recall that payment upon all United States bonds payable
to bearer, as mine were, could not be stopped, and so far as the
innocent holder was concerned he was perfectly secure. But the custom
among bankers was, whenever any bonds were lost by theft or fraud, to
send out circulars containing the numbers, asking that the parties
offering them might be questioned and held. But as American bonds were
sold in millions all over the Continent, and were passing freely from
hand to hand, as a matter of fact, little or no attention was paid to
such circulars, but, of course, had strangers of disreputable appearance
offered bonds in large sums, the lists might have been scrutinized and
awkward questions asked. Therefore I felt a trifle nervous, and
determined to run no chance of losing my bonds--at least not all of
them. So I resolved to go to Wiesbaden, some fifteen miles away, stop at
some hotel under a different name, leave the bonds there, and take the
morning train for Frankfort, conduct my negotiations, and return to
Wiesbaden every evening. It was at this time easy to lose one's identity
in Wiesbaden, for the town then was, along with Baden-Baden, the Monte
Carlo of the Continent, and adventurers, men and women, from all over
Europe flocked there in thousands to chance their fortune in the
gambling halls. Although a little in advance of this portion of my
history, I will here relate an adventure of mine there, some years after
the period of which I am speaking.

I will, however, preface my narrative with a brief account of the
history of the place. The city of Wiesbaden, previous to the
Franco-German war of 1870, was the chief town of one of those petty
principalities which were plentifully sprinkled over the face of Europe.
Since the old Roman days the town had been famous for its hot springs,
and consequently for its hot baths, and a good many people--during the
Winter particularly--resorted there to bathe and to drink the waters. As
a matter of course, the townspeople, as the custom of such places is,
have recorded many a marvelous cure, ranging all the way from headache
to hydrophobia. But still the town was of little importance save
locally. The petty ruler, with a title longer than his income, lived in
the pretentious castle, beguiling the time by smoking cheap cigars or
ordering on banquets whose piece de resistance consisted of Gebratene
Gans und Kartoffeln, the unlucky bird being tribute in kind from the
farmyard of some peasant subject living in a miserable hut on black
bread.

But a change was impending. A mighty wizard had visited the place, with
an eye quick to see the possibilities of the situation, with a brain to
plan and a hand to execute. His name was Francois Blanc, the head of the
great gambling establishment at Homburg. Vast as were his ambition and
achievements, he was a man of the simplest tastes.

To see him--as I often have--in his seedy coat, his old-fashioned
spectacles on the tip of his nose, one would have taken him for a
country advocate whose wildest dreams were of a practice of two thousand
thalers a year, with an old gig and wheezy mare to haul him around the
country side from client to client. Before his Wiesbaden days he had
been the guiding spirit in the direction of the splendid gambling halls,
the Casino at Homburg. Blanc was impervious to flattery; a hard-headed,
silent man, a man without enthusiasm and without weaknesses, who kept a
lavish table and ate sparingly himself, who had a wine cellar rivaling
that of the Autocrat of All the Russias and yet contented himself with
sipping a harmless mineral water; who kept and directed a huge gambling
machine--a mighty conglomeration of gorgeously decorated halls, wine
parlors and music rooms, crammed day and night by giddy and excited
throngs, but himself never indulging in anything more exciting than an
after-dinner game of dominoes or a quiet drive with his wife through the
country lanes.

Thus this Francois Blanc, with perfect equanimity, watched the thousand
thousands of butterflies and moths of society scorch their wings in the
terrific flame that glowed in his Casino, while he looked on, a cynical
observer, despising the fools enraptured with roulette and fascinated
with rouge-et-noir.

But one thing he was not afraid of, and that was spending money. To
compass his business ends he laid it out lavishly, and in the end he
drew all Europe to Wiesbaden. Still broader and still deeper he laid the
foundations of the fortune that ultimately grew to colossal proportions.
But he did not make Wiesbaden famous without keen opposition. He made
the fortune of the beggarly Prince Karl and the whole hungry crowd of
royal highnesses in spite of themselves. At every fresh opposition he
simply opened his purse and a golden shower fell on them.

It required a hard head to withstand the attacks made on him when it
became known that he had bought up both prince and municipality, and
proposed to make Wiesbaden par excellence the gambling city of the
Continent. But, despite of all, he pushed on his plans to wonderful
success. A great park was laid out and stately buildings arose, all
dedicated to the goddess of chance. Slim was the chance the votaries of
the game had in his gorgeous halls. He threw out his money in millions,
but he knew the weak, foolish heart of man, the egotism of each and
every one of us, that leads us to ignore for ourselves the immutable law
of numbers. So he counted upon his returns, and never counted in vain.

As I say, he had a hard head to withstand the attacks made upon him.
Every day the post brought hundreds of letters containing propositions
of threats from people who had lost their money and demanded its return
with fierce threats, pitiful supplications and warnings of intended
suicide, place, date and hour carefully specified, so there could be no
mistake, and more than one attempt was made upon his life. But the
equanimity of Francois Blanc was equal to all adventures. Threats,
prayers, temptations, left him untouched. This man of ice,
self-possessed, cold, indifferent to the ruin of the thousands of
victims of his will, had a fad or fancy. It was for raising red and
white roses, and while the mad throngs were fluttering in frenzy around
the tables in his halls at Homburg, Wiesbaden and Monte Carlo, he, hoe
or trowel in hand, would be training and transplanting his roses,
solicitous over an opening bud or deploring the ravages of an insect;
or, again, refusing all invitations, would sit down with his wife to a
dinner of boiled turnips and bacon, washed down with a glass of Vichy
water and milk. This was the town and these the scenes constantly
occurring there.

Now for my adventure. In 1870, just before the war cloud burst, covering
all that part of the world, I was stopping for some weeks at the Hotel
Nassau. It stands in the main street, opposite the park gate leading to
the Casino. All the world went to Wiesbaden to be amused. However
fashionable frivolity and vice may be elsewhere, here it was strictly de
rigueur, and to pretend to decency and sobriety would be to stamp one's
self a heathen and barbarian, all unversed in the glorious
flower-wreathed Primrose Way of our orb.

The daily routine for the throng began with coffee in bed at 8 a.m.,
then dressing gowns were donned, and the bath in underground floors of
the hotel were sought and a bath had in the hot mineral waters, which
were conducted to all the hotels direct from the hot springs of the
town. Half an hour in the bath, then a light breakfast, preparatory to
sallying out for an hour on the Spaziergang around the Quellen to drink
the water, listen to the band, see and be seen, but, above all, to
gossip and tell lies. At 11 a.m. the gambling began in the Casino, and
with a rush the seats around the tables would be filled. Then speedily
there would be rows behind rows of eager players or spectators, and what
a sight it all was to the cool-headed observer.

With what keen interest all watched the result of the first turn of the
card at the card tables and the color of the first hit at roulette. For
all gamblers are superstitious, and are devout believers in omens. Those
whose luck or pocketbooks held out gambled steadily on, or, if luck
turned against them, would leave the table, go to do some fantastic
thing to change their luck and then return. At 2 p.m. the band (a very
fine one) played in the Musik Saal, and most of the idlers and morning
players gathered there to listen to the music and to drink and dine.
Here in this hall the intrigues begun on the promenade or in the
gambling-rooms were helped along by the ample opportunities of meeting,
with the passions stimulated by the music and the wine. At 4 o'clock
many took an afternoon nap. Then came the chief event of the day, the
ponderous table d'hote. At 9 p.m. every one flocked to the Casino, and
the game went merrily on until midnight. Then to bed, each and all with
more or less Rudesheimer or Hochheimer stowed away.

At the time of which I speak many were my idle days, in which I was free
to seek pleasure. I used to find much enjoyment in frequenting the
Casino to watch the people and to play the role of "looker-on in
Vienna," which, by the way, is a star role and therefore rather
agreeable. One evening while watching the rouge-et-noir I noticed a lady
just in front of me, magnificently dressed in all, save that there was
an entire absence of jewelry. She was literally dressed to kill, and,
although near 50, yet to the casual observer she seemed no more than 40,
or even less. She was a well-preserved woman of the world, and was known
as the Countess de Winzerole. This was the adventuress who had married
Van Tromp some two years before. What a career had been that of this
woman!

She had been mistress from first to last of a dozen men, noblemen,
diplomats, soldiers, but being an inveterate gambler, one after another
saw, with dismay, the cash, estates, diamonds, carriages, costly furs
and laces he showered upon her all go whirling into the ever-open maw of
the Casino, or in the drawing-room games of the bon-ton in Paris or
Petersburg. One brave youth, an officer in the Prussian Guards, had, in
his infatuation for the Countess, and impregnable, as he thought,
against bankruptcy by reason of his great fortune, tried to satisfy her
cravings for splendor of entourage and her infatuation for gambling. The
result was that one day the crack of a pistol-shot was heard in the
Countess' chamber, and the servants rushing in found the young bankrupt
dead, lying across the bed, with a bullet through the heart. The next
day a horde of clamorous creditors besieged the house, where the
Countess calmly told them she had sent for her bankers and on the morrow
they would be paid. That night his comrades buried their dead friend
with military honors. At midnight the cortege passed the hotel, and all
eyes watched the lovely Countess robed in white as she appeared, her
bosom heaving with emotion, while she waved a farewell to her dead
lover. Ten minutes later she fled through the back door and over the
garden wall, falling into the arms of another lover waiting there. He
himself did not go the way of the last, but half of his fortune did; so
one morning, leaving a polite note of farewell, he, taking for companion
the dressing maid of his mistress, embarked for America.

At the time I met her the Countess' reputation was too well known and
her beauty too much fallen off for her to make any more grand catches. A
local banker at Wiesbaden became very friendly. However, the friendship
lost all its warmth when the banker's stout wife one day caught them
together, and having already provided herself with a whip in
anticipation, visited them both with a jealous woman's rage and a sound
thrashing.

Now, the Countess spent her time around the tables, following the
winners and getting douceurs from them. These were by no means
small--most of them being gifts pure and simple, given from mere
goodness of heart or sheer prodigality for there were too many gay and
beautiful women flocking around ready to smile on winners in the game
for the Countess now to make even a temporary conquest. However, at
this period she lived well--even extravagantly--but, of course, saved
nothing. As related, I first met the Countess here at the table where
the game was going on. She had just staked and lost her last gulden. She
was betting on the black, and four times in succession the red had won.
She turned, and looking in my face, implored me to bet a double
Frederick on the red. I instantly placed the money on the red and won.
She begged me to transfer the stake to the black. I did so, and black
won. Placing her hand on the stake, she said: "Sir, leave it; black will
win again." Sure enough, it did. She seized the cash, $80, and handing
me a double Frederick, said in her most bewitching manner: "Oh, sir; be
generous and let me keep this!" I said: "Certainly, madame." She
promptly staked it, and in two turns of the cards it was gone.

We met several times the next few days, but merely bowed without
speaking.

One afternoon, entering the Musik Saal, I took a small table, and,
ordering a bottle of wine, sat down to listen to the music and watch the
throng. The Countess came in, and seeing me alone, came straight to me,
shook hands warmly and sat down. I, of course, invited her to have a
glass of wine. We soon finished that bottle and ordered another. We had
what was to me a most amusing talk. She was a character--had been
everywhere and spoke all the modern languages. She assured me that I was
a very charming gentleman. In paying my bill I incautiously displayed a
gold piece or two, and, seeing she was going to ask me to give her one,
I saved her the trouble by placing one in her hand. In time we became
quite good friends. Twice I paid her board bill in order to rescue her
wardrobe from the clutches of her landlord, and once I saved her from
the hands of an irate washerwoman. When, after a time, I left Wiesbaden,
I left her as gay, as prosperous and as extravagant as ever.

I did not see Wiesbaden again for over two years, but the second week
of January, 1873, found me there. The Prussian Government now ruled in
the town, and refused to renew the license of M. Blanc. It had expired
fourteen days before my arrival. What a change had fallen on the town!
The Casino was gloomy and cold, the gay crowds had fled. All the life
and movement of the street and promenade was forever a thing of the
past. I had located there simply as a precaution, disposing of large
amounts of bonds in Frankfort, fifteen miles away, and returning to
Wiesbaden each night. At this time I put up at the Hotel Victoria, near
the railroad station. One Saturday, going up to Frankfort rather late,
my business detained me until after dark. On reaching the station I
happened to look into the third-class waiting-room, and there I spied a
figure alone that looked familiar. I soon recognized the Countess. From
her appearance and surroundings it was plain that there was now no
wealthy lover at her beck and call. Because she looked so unhappy I gave
her a cordial greeting, which she returned rather wearily. It was very
cold, and I was clad in furs from head to foot; besides, I was,
apparently, on the full floodtide of fortune, having with me then a very
large sum of money, some of which she could have had for the asking.

I said: "Come, Countess; let us go together first class to Wiesbaden."
She replied that she lived at Bieberich, a small town on the Rhine, four
miles below Mayence, and four miles from Wiesbaden. As the train was
starting I bade her good-bye, but asked permission to call on her the
next day. She consented, giving her address as Hotel Bellevue.

The next morning was very cold, but I enjoyed that, so, after a light
breakfast, I started over the hills for a walk to the town, arriving
there soon after noon. I found the hotel, a fifth-rate one, and
entering, was shown to the room of the Countess. What a change for her
from the past! Her room was a small one, plastered, but unpapered, and
with a few articles of furniture of the cheapest. The poor woman was
too evidently in a state of frightful depression, and well she might be.
Hers had been a butterfly existence, life all one Summer holiday, no
hostages given to fortune, no bond taken against future wreck or change.
Like the butterfly, she had roamed from flower to flower, sipping the
sweet only, or, like the cricket, had merrily piped all the Summer
through, thinking sunshine and bloom eternal. Even when youth and beauty
had fled, and lovers no longer stood ready to attend and serve, she
still found a good aftermath in her happy harvest field on the floors of
the Casino, but when the Casino lights at Wiesbaden went out, then, for
the Countess, had the Winter indeed come.

My walk had given me something of an appetite, and it now being 2
o'clock I at once proposed to have dinner. To my surprise she said she
had already dined, and upon my remarking that it was early for dinner,
she replied that it was, but as she was owing quite a hotel bill she
feared to give any trouble lest the landlord might present his bill, and
in default of payment she was liable to arrest and a very considerable
imprisonment. I need hardly tell my readers that they do these things
differently in Germany than with us. I could easily afford to be
generous with other people's money, and did not mean to see the Countess
suffer for a hotel bill. Ringing the bell, I told the waiter to bring me
some dinner and a bottle of wine. The Countess looked very uneasy over
my order. Of late years she had seen life from the seamy side and had
observed so much of the falseness and cruelty of men that she had
apparently lost all faith in them, and no doubt thought me an
adventurer, one who might possibly dine and order expensive wines,
leaving her to face an angry landlord. While dinner was being prepared
she told me she was in the greatest distress; had not even a single
kreutzer to pay postage, and, worst of all, was owing for two weeks'
board. She had no means to fly, no place to fly to, and if she remained
incarceration awaited her. She had for weeks been writing everywhere to
every one she had known, former lovers, distant, but long-neglected
relatives. The result--dead silence; no response from anywhere. She at
last was alone, caught in the world's great snare, with no friendly hand
to shelter or save. It was a sight to read this woman's face. There
swept over it all the conflicting waves of regrets over might-have-beens
and the gloomy shades of despair. Both proprietor and waiter appeared to
set the table; it was for one, but wineglasses for two were brought
unsolicited. They were officiously anxious to please "Your Highness," as
they christened me. The Countess sat looking gloomily out of the window
across the Rhine, while I watched her face until an infinite pity for
the shipwrecked soul filled my mind. Dismissing the waiter I went to the
window, and standing by her chair I said: "Don't worry any more,
Countess; I will pay your bill." At the same time drawing from an inner
pocket a book crammed with notes, I placed seven 100-thaler notes in her
lap, saying: "This one is for your board bill, and the other six are for
your pocket money." I need not attempt to picture her amazement and
delight. Certainly she appeared very grateful. We had a long
conversation and I was talking to her like a brother. Perhaps had she
still been beautiful and young my manner and language might have been
less brotherly. I told her she had danced and sung, but at last the time
had come for toil, and suggested she should go to Brussels, which is
ever thronged with tourists, where her knowledge of languages and her
savoir faire could be made available in one of the many shops where
gimcracks are sold to travelers. I advised her to offer a small premium
for a position. This she said she would do.

In saying good-bye I promised to see her again the next night, but I
found a telegram awaiting me on my arrival at my hotel which called me
to meet two of my companions at Calais, and I was forced to leave by an
early train. The next time I saw the Countess was at Newgate. She
visited me there, and was in perfect despair over my position and her
inability to serve me. For those who may care to know more of her, I
will say that, following my advice, she went to Brussels and obtained a
position in a Tourist Exchange and within a year married the proprietor,
who was a Councilman and a man of considerable local importance. She
made him a good wife and became a true mother to his five daughters.
When he died he made her guardian to both of them and his wealth. She
became very religious, and to the last was a devout member of the Roman
Church. She died in 1886, thirteen years after the episode at Rieberich.
Her ashes rest in the little graveyard of the Convent des Soeurs de Ste.
Agnes, on the Charleroi road, two miles from the city, and on her
monument is engraved:

     TO ELIZABETH, The Beloved Wife, Pious and True. She Served God and
     Has Gone to Live with the Angels

[Illustration: "THE LOVELY COUNTESS WAVED A FAREWELL TO HER DEAD
LOVER."--Page 81.]




CHAPTER IX.

"WE HAVE ANOTHER JOB FOR YOU."


About every second day I called on Murpurgo & Weissweller in Frankfort,
and talked over matters, and easily saw that everything would go right.
All that was necessary was to produce the bonds, and they would hand
over the cash. Here in America, though we scrutinized a man's garments,
the quality and fit of the same having a certain value, we never take
much stock in a stranger because an artist tailor has decorated him, or
because he has plenty of money. But in the seventies, all over Europe,
from the mere fact that a man was an American and had the appearance,
dress and manner of a gentleman, they always took it for granted that he
must be a gentleman.

Therefore, seeing that I was taken for a capitalist, and that no
question would be asked, I told the firm my deal in Austrian copper
mines appeared so certain to be completed that I had ordered the
securities I intended to dispose of to be forwarded from London. Giving
them a list, they gave me a memorandum offer for the lot. I accepted
their offer. The next hour was a very bad sixty minutes for me. There
was considerable delay, and my suspicions were fully aroused, and at one
time I thought they had made some discovery; but, as a fact, my
suspicions were wholly unfounded.

The banker and clerks were simply hurrying around, anxious to oblige me
and have the money out of the bank before it closed. At last the amounts
were figured up and verified by myself. One of the partners hastened
off to the bank and in five minutes returned with a very pretty parcel
of 200,000 gulden; but, in spite of the evident safety of the business,
I was nervous, and resolved to put a good distance between me and the
town as speedily as possible. Before 5 o'clock I was in Weisbaden, and,
going directly to the Casino, where they kept at all times a million
francs, in addition to German money, and where the possession of large
sums attract no attention, I readily exchanged my money for 350
one-thousand-franc notes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Going to Rothschild's, I bought exchange on New York for $80,000, and
left the same night for London. Very many times I journeyed over that
route in after years, but never with so light a heart. I was young and
enthusiastic; all the glamour and poetry of life hung around me, while I
was too inexperienced to notice whither I was drifting, or to understand
the powerful current upon which I had embarked. In fact, I had sold
myself to do the devil's work, and day by day the chain would tighten,
while all the time I thought I could when I pleased stop short on the
downward grade and take the back track. More experience would have
taught me that every one who forsook the path of honor not only thought
the same, but had a purpose to even everything up some day and make
restitution. And to-day there is not a criminal but who, at the start,
looks forward to the time when he will no longer war against society,
but will go out and come in at peace with all men. But when one comes to
think of it, what a fool's game is that of a man who fights against
society!

[Illustration: "THEY FOUND A BODY, RAGGED, EMACIATED, FORLORN. IT WAS
BREA."--Page 120.]

The criminal has but two arms, very short and weak they are, and of
flesh, too. He has but two eyes that cannot possibly see around the
nearest corner, while society has a million arms of steel that can reach
around the world, and a million eyes which are never closed, that can
pierce the thickest gloom with sleepless vigilance. The poor, unhappy
criminal, by fortunate dexterity, may escape for a little, but at last
society lays her iron grasp on him, and with giant force hurls him into
a dungeon. As for the short-lived, tempestuous success that some few
criminals have, is there any sweetness in it? I say no; success won in
honest fight is sweet, but I know from my own experience that the
success of crime brings no sweetness, no blessing with it, but leaves
the mind a prey to a thousand haunting fears that make shipwreck of
peace.

There were no sleeping cars in all Europe then, so I sat up in a
compartment and really enjoyed the ride, viewing the country by
moonlight. At midnight we arrived at Calais, and took the boat for
Dover. Then the express for London. Arriving at Victoria Station I took
a cab to Mrs. Green's, where I had breakfast a l'anglaise.

I had a little adventure that night going down the Strand. At Bow
street, on the corner, is the "Gaiety," a famous drinking saloon,
flooded with light inside and out, with more than a half-dozen handsome
barmaids. Barmaids are a great institution in England--that is, they
have never more than one man behind a bar, none at all in the railway
bars. And a fearful source of ruin to the girls, as they are to
thousands of young men--I might say tens of thousands every year. These
girls are chosen for their beauty and attractiveness. Yearly, in London
and in other large cities of England, a "Beautiful Barmaid Show" is one
of the stated features, and is held in some public garden or monster
hall. These exhibitions are wonderfully popular, and thousands flock to
them. Various beauty contests are got up, and all the popular features
of voting, etc., are in vogue. Those of the young women who win the
prizes make their fortunes, for they are at once engaged at high
salaries for the more aristocratic barrooms. Fancy what an attraction
and even fascination the gin palace with lovely girls behind the bar
must have to the youth of a great city. Many of them strangers, busy
during the day, but with nothing to do at night, with the choice of the
street or a sombre room, but sure of a sweet smile of welcome from a
fascinating woman in the barrooms. How easily and how naturally, too,
does a young man become ensnared. But how if he has no money? No smiles
and no welcome for him! And then what a temptation to help himself to
his master's cash!

Happy for our country that our laws forbid women entering that
occupation!

While standing in the brilliant light of the Gaiety, watching the
thronging crowd of passers-by, with its sprinkling of unfortunates, I
saw one poor, bedraggled creature, wan-faced and hollowed-eyed, with
hunger and despair imprinted on every feature. Looking sharply at her
she caught my eye, and, crossing the street, she spoke to me. The poor
thing looked as if she had been dragged through all the gutters of
London. She said that herself and her baby were actually starving--that
her husband had been out of work thirteen weeks and had then deserted
her, owing twelve weeks' rent, and the landlady had just told her that
unless she paid her some rent before 9 o'clock that night she would be
turned out with her baby into the streets.

Those of my readers who have been in London know something of what it
would mean for this woman to be turned out into the streets of that
fearful Babylon. No wonder, then, the poor soul was frantic with
despair. In her poverty a shilling looked as big as a cartwheel, and
when I said to her: "Will you promise to go direct home if I give you a
sovereign?" she cried out: "Oh, sir, God forever bless you if you will!"
I gave her the $5, and as she started to run I caught her by the sleeve
and said: "I will go home with you to see if you have told me the
truth." She lived close by, in one of those teeming courts that run off
from the Strand. We found her baby naked on a heap of rags, in a small,
dirty room, containing two broken chairs for furniture. I felt that
there were in the large city thousands of similar cases, but this one
was brought home to me. I was young and impressionable--more than that,
I had other people's money to be liberal with; so I called up the
landlady, who, almost dumb with surprise, received the arrears of rent,
along with a month in advance. Eliza, for that was her name, told me she
could get work if she had clean clothes for herself and baby, which she
could buy for L2. I gave her five, and giving her my address in New
York, told her to find work and let me know how she got on. She did find
work in an eel-pie shop in Red Lion Square, High Holborn. I saw her two
years later in London, and possibly may refer to her again in this
story.

       *       *       *       *       *

I went down to Liverpool and embarked on the good ship Java. Ten days
later we sailed through the Narrows.

During my last day in London I went to Westminster Abbey, and spent
three hours in that Valhalla of the Anglo-Saxon race. It made a
tremendous impression upon my mind. In no other work of human hands do
the spirits of so many departed heroes linger, certainly in no other
does the dust of so many of the great dead rest, and as I read memorial
upon memorial to departed greatness I realized that the path of honor
and of truth was the only one for men to tread. All through the voyage
the influences of the Abbey were upon me; I felt I was treading on
dangerous ground, and resolved I would have no more of it. Would I had
then resolved, when I met Irving & Co., to throw all the plunder in
their faces and say: "I'll have none of it, and here we part!" I felt
that I ought to do that, but weakly said: "I need the $10,000, and I'll
give the rogues their share and then see them no more." I had fully made
up my mind to that, knowing Irving would be on the wharf, eager to meet
me.

In sailing through the Narrows and past Staten Island I was making up my
mind as to the little speech I would make. We rapidly neared the wharf
in Jersey City, and I quickly recognized Irving standing on the edge of
the closely packed crowd, watching the steamer with a nervous look on
his face. A rogue suspects every one, and although by this time he had
become pretty well satisfied as to my good faith, no doubt he would be
happier when he had his share of the plunder safe in his pocket. I was
standing close to the rail between two ladies, and saw Irving before he
saw me. Waving my handkerchief, his eye suddenly fell on me. With a
smile and pointing significantly to my pocket, I gave him a salute. An
eager look came into his face, and waving his hand he cried out: "I am
glad to see you!" and no doubt he spoke the truth. When the gangplank
was thrown ashore, and I saw him making his way toward it, evidently
intending to board the steamer, I thought how surprised he would be when
I told him I would have no more of his game. He sprang on board, rushed
to me with a beaming face, grasped my hand, and putting the other on my
shoulder, led me toward the gangway. He had not spoken yet, but as we
were going down the gangplank he said: "My boy, you have done
splendidly," and then, putting his mouth close to my ear, whispered: "We
have got another job for you, and it's a beauty!"

I don't mean to pester my reader with a moral, or by too much
moralizing, although I am tempted to do so. There is ample material for
a course of sermons in that "we have another job for you" coming to me
just then. But, leaving my reader to draw his own moral, I must go on
with my narrative.

Going up the wharf with Irving, I was on the point of telling him I
wanted no more jobs, but weakly put it off, and by so doing, of course,
made it more difficult. He told me Stanley and White were waiting at
Taylor's Hotel on Montgomery street, a few doors up from the wharf. We
soon were there, and they gave me a warm and even enthusiastic
reception. Then I began to tell some of my adventures on the journey, to
which they listened with unfeigned admiration, and, opening my bag, I
produced the sixteen bills of exchange for $5,000 each, informing them
they should have their cash in ninety minutes. It was curious to see
these men handle the bills of exchange, passing them from one to
another, examining them with anxious care. But where were my good
resolutions, and what had become of them? Why, they, under the effect of
the wine and the magnetic influence of these three minds, had gone
flying down the bay, and under a favorable gale were fast speeding
seaward beyond the ken of mortal eye, not to be found by me again until
years after, when, with the toils about me, I found myself in Newgate.
Then the fugitives all came back, this time to stay.

My three graces who adorned the Police Department of New York were full
of matter of a new enterprise, which by my co-operation was to make the
fortunes of us all. But they were too evidently anxious, too eagerly
desirous to handle the greenbacks my bills of exchange represented, to
fix their minds upon anything else.

Stanley and White went away together, but first each once more told me
privately that he depended upon me to put in his own hands his share,
showing how these rogues suspected each other, and, indeed, were full of
suspicions of every one and every thing. Irving crossed the ferry with
me, but on the New York side dropped behind, and, although I paid no
more attention to him, no doubt he followed me. The excitement of
success and of being at home again banished any possible regrets or
fears over the course I had entered, and with a light heart and buoyant
step I quickly made my way to a friend of mine, a well-known broker in
New street, shook hands with him, and, telling him, very much to his
surprise, that I had just returned from Europe, asked him to step around
the corner to the office of the bankers and identify me. In a minute we
were there. Indorsing the drafts, I told them to make it in
five-hundreds; they sent out to the bank for them, and I was speedily on
my way to our rendezvous with 160 $500 greenbacks in a roll, and meeting
the three at the wineroom I made their eyes grow big when I flashed the
roll on their delighted orbs. The division was speedily made, I
retaining $10,000 for my share, and each promptly threw out a thousand,
and we shook hands all around and parted.

Here were four conspirators of us, and it was comical to see how anxious
we all were to get away so that each could stow his plunder in a safe
place. For my part I went home, but I shall say nothing of the meeting
with the members of my family. I told them I had made a lot of money in
a speculation, and not knowing the inside history, or suspecting
anything, they rejoiced with me and were proud and happy for their boy.
I spent about a thousand dollars making things comfortable for them, but
to their grief I told them that circumstances required me to take up my
former quarters at the St. Nicholas.

It would be interesting to tell of my reception among my acquaintances
on Wall street and other parts of the city. Rumor magnified my
resources, and it was reported I had cleared a hundred thousand dollars
in some fortunate deal. It was strange to see the new-found deference
all around, from my former employers down to my old waiter at downtown
Delmonico's, where I dined; but I will pass over all these matters and
proceed with my history of the Primrose Way.

The next few days I went about engaged in the to me very agreeable task
of paying all my debts. The largest debt I was owing was one of $1,300,
partly borrowed money and partly a long-standing balance due on a
speculation negotiated on my account, and which did not pan out, but
entailed a loss. Then I indulged pretty freely in many little
extravagances in the way of tailor bills, etc. Two friends struck me for
a loan, and, strange to say, both remain unpaid to this hour, along with
some twenty-five years' interest. So, within a fortnight of my landing I
found my $13,000 reduced quite one-half, and as I was cherishing visions
of unbounded wealth, I began to feel quite poor, and anxious to see some
outcome to this "other job" my friends said they had ready for me. It
was at the very door.

[Illustration: MANSION HOUSE, ILLUMINATED.]




CHAPTER X.

A NINETEENTH CENTURY PRODIGAL.


Let no man who may be tempted to commit a crime ever fancy that if he
takes the first step down hill he will stop until he reaches the bottom.
If one of my readers flatters himself he can go one step, with no more
to follow, on the downward road, let such an one read this story to the
end and then forever abandon such an idea as a fancy born of
inexperience. For this history is as a handwriting on the wall, full of
warning to all and every one who may be tempted to take one step in any
other path than the path of honor.

In 1865 there lived in London a famous Queen's Counsel, Edwin James.
Fame and fortune were his. A born orator, a talented scholar, he rapidly
pushed his way from the very bottom of the legal profession to all but
its topmost height. At 40 he found himself facile princeps of the
English Bar, and public opinion, that potent factor in popular
government, had already singled him out for the high position of
Attorney-General. That secured, only one step remained to place him in
the seat of the Lord Chancellor. Truly, an imperial position--one that
satisfied the proud ambition of a Wolsey and fitted the genius of a
Thomas a Becket. It carries with it the position of keeper of the
conscience of Her Majesty, giving the possessor precedence in all
official functions over the English aristocracy, next to royalty itself.

But about this time dark whispers began to fly about through the clubs
of London. Soon it became known that Edwin James, the Lord Chancellor
to be, was in the toils, and it shortly transpired that, in spite of the
fact that his income from his profession was nearer twenty than ten
thousand pounds per annum, it had proved insufficient and he was heavily
in debt, and worse.

It would seem he was keeping up what in the polite language of society
are known as dual houses. A woman of brilliant beauty presided over one,
and the marvelous beauty of its mistress was only equaled by her
extravagance. He also had a fondness for associating with younger men
than himself, and had got into a particularly fast set of young lords
and army men. At his club he had lost large sums at baccarat and loo,
and, in an unhappy hour for himself and his, he stooped from his high
position and--miserable to think of--committed a crime. This, in the
expectation that he would relieve himself from some of the more crushing
obligations he had heaped upon himself, either through the extravagant
vagaries of his imperious mistress, or by his own rashness in trying his
luck among a lot of titled sharpers. He had among his clients one fast,
even madly extravagant youth, heir of an historic name and of a lordly
estate. To supply his extravagance "my lord" had applied to the money
lenders--those sharks that in London, as elsewhere, fatten on such game.
These gentry were eager to lend the young blood money upon what are
known in English law as post-obits, which loans in this particular case
carried the trifling interest of about 100 per cent. per annum. James
was cognizant of his friend's excursions among the money lenders, and no
doubt he thought the young spendthrift, when he came into his fortune,
would never know within a good many thousands how much he had borrowed,
nor even the number of post-obits he had given.

I will just explain that a post-obit is a form of note or due bill given
by the heir of an estate (usually of an entailed estate), which matures
the moment the drawer of the document enters into that estate. That is
to say, the tender-hearted son discounts his father's death to provide
fuel to feed his flame. So Edwin James, driven to his own destruction,
stooped from his imperial position into what one might call ankle-depth
of crime.

How little he dreamed there was a beyond--a huge, seething sea of crime;
an ocean whose billows are of ink, and which would soon sweep him from
his high place into the black waters, there to be buffeted until, honor
and hope all gone, he would, throwing his hands to heaven, with one
despairing cry, sink into its inky depths, adding one more ruined life
to the millions already engulfed. In that long, sad catalogue of the
dead there is probably not one, who, when taking the first step into
crime, ever thought a second would follow the first.

But to come back to our gilded sir. He made out two post-obits for
L5,000, wrote his client's name at the bottom of each, gave them to the
money lenders, who, never doubting that the prodigal son had signed and
given them to his counsel, made no question, but gave James the money
for them at once. But James had reckoned without his host, for this
nineteenth century prodigal was made of keener metal than he of the
first. Strange to say, and utterly unexpected as it was to all who knew
him and had looked upon his riotous living, he kept his books straight,
and knew to a single guinea how much and to whom he was owing.

His discovery of the forgery was accelerated by the sudden and most
unexpected death of his father, his return home and stepping into his
estate.

The various post-obits were presented and placed before him. He
instantly pronounced the two for five thousand pounds each to be
forgeries, and the crime was easily laid at the door of the Queen's
Counsel. The heir indignantly refused to condone the offense, and,
revealing the fatal secret to a few, within a month it was known in
every clubroom in London. From there it got into the newspapers, and
they, under a thinly disguised alias of a "distinguished member of the
Bar," gave more or less accurate details of the damning truth. His
former client eventually said he would not prosecute the forgery if the
criminal left England; if not, he would immediately go before the Grand
Jury, procure an indictment, and have this man, who had moved a prince
among men, arraigned in the dock at the Old Bailey, there to plead and
stand trial like any common criminal.

And he fled. Of course, like all fugitives from justice throughout the
Old World, he looked to America for a city of refuge, and here he came.
Not to keep my readers too long from the main narrative, it will suffice
to say that soon after his arrival he applied for admission to the Bar
of New York, but first he won to his cause the high-souled Richard
O'Gorman, then a leader of his profession.

It was for Edwin James a lucky stroke, for at this time O'Gorman was in
full possession of his magnificent powers. Few could resist his magic.
His great heart was stirred, and he took up the cause of his friend as
if he had been his brother. The English lawyer's reputation was known to
every member of the Bar of New York, and there had been and still was a
bitter opposition to his admission; but when it became known that their
eloquent leader was his champion, many began to feel that after all "the
poor fellow ought to be given another chance," and when at the next
meeting of the Bar Association O'Gorman in a set oration brought all his
splendid eloquence into play the cause was won.

Great-hearted O'Gorman had helped this lame dog over the stile, but the
dog's heart was not in the right place, and, as my reader will see in
the sequel, he soon went lame again. * * *

       *       *       *       *       *

In the rear room of a somewhat luxurious range of offices in a building
on Broadway, facing the City Hall, four men were engaged in discussing
what was evidently an exciting topic. The door of the main office bore
the sign "Edwin James, Counselor-at-Law and Register in Bankruptcy." He
was one of the four. He had failed lamentably in his efforts to secure a
practice. The effects of O'Gorman's eloquence had in the gray light of
commonplace day faded away, the more so when the ideal his magic had
created in the minds of men was in hourly contrast with the man himself
and his history. His professional brethren looked upon him with
suspicion, and there was a general impression abroad that his escapades
were not over yet.

He had launched out in his office and home somewhat extravagantly, and
now, once again pressed by clamorous creditors, he had once more drifted
upon the borderlands of crime, and was here with his companions planning
a criminal transaction in order to pay his more pressing debts.

One of these four was Brea, who, with a keen eye to business, had
married the discarded daughter of a wealthy but not over-respectable New
York family, and he had, unsuspected, pulled the wires so that James had
been employed as the family lawyer, and in that capacity had drawn the
will of the mother. She was an imperious, hot-tempered body, one who,
when aroused, was accustomed to use language more vigorous than polite,
and who not infrequently went to fisticuffs with her daughters. The
husband and father, the creator of the fortune, was dead and the vast
family property, in securities, stocks and lands, was vested absolutely
in the mother. In the old lady's will Brea's wife, the second daughter
of the house (there were no sons), was down in the very first paragraph
for the magnificent sum of "one dollar lawful currency," and her name
nowhere else appeared in the lengthy document. The old lady was such a
termagant and so implacable in her hatreds that it was a moral certainty
she would never relent and change her purpose toward her daughter. But
James had also drawn up a second will of his own and Brea's
concoction, and a precious piece of villainy it was, in which the wife
was down for legacies amounting; to $750,000. The genuine will James
kept in his own possession, ready to destroy the very moment word came
that the old lady was an immortal, while the spurious will was kept in
the vaults of the Safety Deposit Company, there to remain until the
death of the testatrix, when, of course, it would in due time be
produced.

[Illustration: BANK OF ENGLAND PARLOR.]

Brea had been introduced to the other three men, and cultivated their
acquaintance in the belief that they would some day be useful to him. He
had a few days before introduced them to James. As a matter of
precaution he had concealed from them all knowledge of the will. At the
same time he gave them a hint that there was something in the wind, but
that some way must be found to secure at once a few thousands, enough
for a year or two, until the good time came when fortune was to lavish
her favors on them all with a liberal hand. But money must be had at
once, for Brea and James were in sore straits, particularly James, who
had been threatened with arrest, and was so far involved that he always
entered and left his house at night in order to escape importunate
creditors. This was James' second interview with the men, and the first
time he had been alone with them. He saw at once that he had to do with
able, clear-headed men, took them into his confidence, and, in order to
excite their hopes and to bind them to him as well, he confided to them
the plot of the forged will, producing the genuine for their inspection.
He assured them that it was a sure and speedy fortune, as the lady was
old and frail in health, and he also promised they should share between
them $100,000, provided they would stand by to give a hand in the
somewhat improbable event of the other heirs disputing the will, but
above all, if they would devise some means to furnish him at once
$10,000, or at least $5,000. Money he must have, and he could no longer
do without it.

The result of our conference in James' office was that the very next day
an office downtown was engaged under a fictitious name, and a simple,
unsuspicious fellow hired as porter and messenger. After some little
negotiation, we obtained particulars of parties banking with the then
great firm of Jay Cooke & Company, corner of Wall and Nassau streets.
Briefly told, the result was that four days later a messenger walked
into their banking house with a check for $20,000, purporting to be
signed by another firm, who banked with them. Along with the check went
a letter bearing a signature well known to the cashier, asking him to
pay the check to bearer. The result of all being that five minutes
thereafter we were walking unconcernedly up Broadway, and sending a
message to James to meet us at Delmonico's, corner of Broadway and
Chambers street, we sat down awaiting his arrival. He had anxiously been
looking for news, and almost before we had seated ourselves he entered,
eager and anxious-looking; but, when he glanced at our faces, a happy
expression came over his own, and without a word he put out his hand.
After a warm greeting, I produced the roll, and, to his delight, I
handed over to James ten five hundreds. On the morrow I went to the
office, and, paying my messenger a week's wages, besides making a small
gift, told him he need not come any more.

With this twenty thousand coup we fondly thought all our troubles and
all our unlawful acts were ended. We now had a few thousands, sufficient
to last until the $5,000 we had invested in the will case should bring
in a dividend that would mean a fortune for us all. So we took things
easy about town, and altogether thought ourselves pretty good fellows,
and this world a very good sort of place to be in.

Thus the Winter passed by and the Summer was at hand. Our thousands of
the year before had dwindled to hundreds, and the old lady whose heirs
we had constituted ourselves seemed to have renewed her youth, and
threatened to outlive us all.

Besides this there had grown up a repugnance in our minds to the
business, and when one day my friend Mac remarked it was a scoundrelly
business to rob the heirs of an estate, and they women, George and I
heartily acquiesced; and we vowed we would take no part in the matter,
and then and there resolved we would throw both James and Brea over, but
first to use Brea and James for our own purposes. Once more we found
ourselves planning a coup in Wall street. Talking the matter over, we
three soon had a plan, and, being dowered with intense energy, it
promised a successful termination. Audaciously enough we determined the
lightning should strike once more in the same place--that is, to make
Jay Cooke & Company again the victims. Irving and his honest fellows
were to co-operate by watching everything, and, if any arrest
threatened, to be on hand to make it themselves; and then let the
prisoner escape. Most important of all, when the bankers drove up in hot
haste to Police Headquarters to give information, James, Honest James,
would be on hand to receive them, would call in his two trustys to get
with him full particulars of the robbery and a description of the men.
Then the bankers would be sent away with assurances that "we know the
men and will have them," but at the same time warning them to keep the
matter a secret in order better to enable them to catch the villains.

If successful, the detectives were to receive 25 per cent. between them.
Our plan required James to play an important part, and, although no
confederacy could be fixed on him, yet he would hardly escape
questioning and a very considerable degree of suspicion, so much so that
it probably would put an end to any lingering remnants of character he
had on hand or in stock. But he was tired of America, and determined to
go to Paris with his share of the plunder. Our visits to James had
always been in his private office, and his clerks had never seen either
of us or Brea.

Our plan was to make use of James' office in a way that will appear
later. As related, he was suspected by his profession, but the general
public thought him a very great man. He had appeared as (volunteer)
counsel in two or three murder cases and had delivered powerful
addresses which had attracted considerable notice in the papers.

One day, soon after our plan was matured, Brea went to Philadelphia,
and, by a mixture of audacity and finesse, procured from Jay Cooke
himself (the parent house of the New York firm of Jay Cooke & Co. was in
Philadelphia) a letter of introduction to the manager of the New York
firm. He wanted the letter ostensibly in order to consult the manager
about certain investments which he, as executor of an estate, desired to
make for his wards.

The transaction was made to appear as one of considerable magnitude, in
which there would be large commissions paid. With the grand send-off of
a letter from Jay Cooke to his subordinate in New York, the speculation
opened well--so well that we at once decided what we would do with the
money when we got it--a case in point for the old proverb. We had
ascertained the name of a Newark manufacturer who had recently failed in
business. I will call him Newman. On the morning after his return from
Philadelphia, Brea presented himself at James' office--it being arranged
that James himself be out, so Brea told the clerk that his name was
Newman, that he had lately failed in business, and intended to employ
Mr. James to put him through the bankruptcy court. The clerk told him to
come again at 12, and he would find Mr. James in. At 12 he came; the
clerk introduced him. James kept the clerk conveniently near, that he
could hear the conversation. Brea, as Newman, told James he had used in
his business $240,000 belonging to his wife and her mother, and that in
scheduling his assets he proposed to use enough to make those amounts
good, intending to conceal the fact from his creditors. He determined to
invest the amount in bonds--so ran his story--and was going to deposit
the money in the bank that very afternoon, at the same time producing
his letter of introduction from Jay Cooke. All of this, of course, being
for the eye and ear of the clerk, who might be required as a witness of
his employer's good faith.

[Illustration: "MAC AND GEORGE WERE WITHOUT, AND WERE STRICKEN WITH
CONSTERNATION, FOR A MINUTE'S OBSERVATION OF THE GATHERING CROWD AND THE
RUSHING INTO THE BANK OF EXCITED PEOPLE CONVINCED THEM SOMETHING UNUSUAL
WAS IN THE WIND, AND THEY KNEW NOYES MUST BE IN DEADLY PERIL. MAC RUSHED
INTO THE BANK IN HOPE "TO WARN OR TO BE OF HELP."--Page 236.]

Brea-Newman also paid James, in presence of the clerk, a retaining fee
of $250, which was privately returned. James banked in Jersey City, and
when Newman said, "Introduce me at your bank, as I want a small credit
handy," James said, "My bank is in Jersey City." The clerk's brother was
paying teller at the Chemical Bank, and, as was expected, he at once
spoke up, saying: "Let me introduce Mr. Newman in the Chemical Bank," so
down went Newman and the clerk, and in ten minutes our man had the
Chemical Bank checkbook in his pocket and $5,000 to his credit in the
bank. The same afternoon he presented his letter of introduction at Jay
Cooke & Co.'s, and was cordially received. He, of course, told a totally
different story there. In this case a relative, lately deceased, had
left him an estate of great value. He was, he said, realizing on his
real estate, and buying bonds as fast as his money came in, and he
wanted to invest a million in various railway bonds. At present he had
$240,000 on hand, which he wanted to invest in Government bonds. He then
left for the time being, leaving a good impression, which his refined
manner and appearance confirmed.

So far all was well; that is, all was well from our point of view. The
next two or three days Brea paid several visits to the Chemical Bank,
getting small checks for $500 and $1,000 certified, and now had his
account drawn down to $1,000. The day before he had called on Jay Cooke
& Co. and told them he would take $240,000 in seven thirties, "Bearer"
bonds, and that he would call the next day and pay for them. At the
same time he got them to give him a proforma bill for them.

The eventful day had come, and James, to get his head clerk out of the
way, sent him to the Admiralty Court to take notes of the evidence in a
case going on there.

At 10 o'clock Brea sent a messenger with a note to the bankers,
requesting them to send the bonds to Edwin James' office, and he would
pay for them on delivery. He could not come himself, as he was in
consultation with the executors of the estate.

In the mean time a check for the full value of the bonds, $240,000, had
been made out. It was drawn on the Chemical Bank, and was, in fact,
similar to those always given between bankers on bond transactions.

Brea had drawn his own check for $240, and had it in his hatband with
the $240,000 dummy check. The plan is palpable enough. When the
messenger brought the bonds Brea, or Newman, was going to say: "All
right, I have the check here; bring the bonds and we will go to the
Chemical Bank and get them to certify my check." Then when at the bank
he would take out both checks, letting the messenger only get a glimpse
of one, and that would be the small $240 one, which Brea would pass in
through the window with a request to have it certified. This would be
done, and when handed out, of course, Brea was to change it and hand the
messenger the big one of home manufacture.

It seemed impossible for the scheme to fail, and success in it meant on
the surface comparative wealth for us all, with, perhaps, in the not
distant future an entrance through the McAllister-guarded portals of the
Four Hundred.

But here we have a vivid instance of how easily an elaborate scheme can
by the merest accident fall to pieces.

The night before the expected coup we met James for a final full-dress
rehearsal for the morrow, and after everything was settled adjourned to
the uptown Delmonico's for supper. It so happened that Detective George
Elder was there. This Elder was a bright fellow, was in a ring--but not
in our ring--and, of course, had his bank account, diamond pin and
turnout for the road. He had had some acquaintance with me, but the rest
of the party were strangers. I did not see him at the time, but it would
seem he was curious, even suspicious, from some scraps of conversation
he overheard. However, neither his curiosity nor suspicion would have
been of any consequence or concern to us had it not been that, in going
out, Brea left on the table with some papers the memorandum or pro forma
bill of the bonds given him the day before by the bankers. Strangely
enough, the body of the bill alone was intact. The heading bearing the
name of the firm and purchaser had been torn off and destroyed.

Elder picked it up and, having some vague suspicions of a plot
somewhere, he determined to go around among the hundred or more bankers
and brokers in and around Wall street and investigate quietly, without
making any report to his superiors, his immediate superior being, of
course, our honest friend, the worthy chief of the detective force, who
was anxiously looking for his percentage of the deal. The whole force
was split up into cliques, each intensely jealous of every other, each
with its own stamping grounds, and each strictly protected his own
preserves.

At 9:30 the next morning Elder started around carrying the fragment of
the memorandum he had picked up from bank to bank and from one broker to
the other. He had spent over an hour making inquiries, and walked into
Jay Cooke & Co.'s office just as the messenger was leaving with the
bonds for James' office. Fifteen minutes more and the game was ours!
Elder produced the memorandum, and they at once recognized it as their
own. Elder asked them if they knew their man and were sure it was all
right. They said it was perfectly right, that Mr. "Newman" had been
introduced by the head of the firm in Philadelphia, and was also a
client of Edwin James; but then it was strange the bill should be
mutilated. Elder averred his belief that a fraud was intended, and
suggested that he and the manager should accompany the messenger with
the bonds. This alarmed the manager, and he directed Elder and the
messenger to await his return. Seizing his hat, he started for James'
office to investigate. James was there, and Brea (the pseudo Newman) was
in the private office with the two checks ready, anxiously awaiting the
arrival of the messenger with the bonds.

Myself and all the other members of our party were nearby, watching and
awaiting developments. The manager, considerably perturbed, entered the
office, and James saw at once the business was a failure, for he knew,
of course, that any suspicion as to good faith would be fatal to the
success of the plot. Brea, hearing the voices and supposing it was the
messenger with the bonds, opened the door of the private office and was
vexed to see the manager, who, shaking him by the hand, told him the
bonds would arrive soon, at the same time saying: "I suppose you will
pay currency for the bonds?" To which Brea replied: "I will go to my
bank with you now and get my check certified for the amount and give it
to you, or leave it until the messenger comes with the bonds."

This offer, along with Brea's coolness, apparently disarmed all
suspicions, and he said: "Oh, all right, the messenger will go to the
bank with you." He left the office, but stopped in the hall for a
moment, then turned and hastily re-entering, said: "By the way, Mr.
Newman, please draw the currency from the bank, and pay the notes to the
messenger upon delivery of the bonds."

So the grand coup had failed, ignominiously failed, and through what
appeared a trivial accident. More such "accidents" at critical periods
will appear before this history is ended.

The dummy check was still in our hands, and was at once destroyed, so,
with nothing to fear, we coolly walked up Broadway to dinner, and talked
of the future over a bottle of wine. At last we fixed upon a definite
plan. Clinking our glasses, we drank to "Eastward, Ho!"

[Illustration: MERCHANTS EXCHANGE, ILLUMINATED.]




CHAPTER XI.

"CRACK THE LAWYER'S VOICE THAT HE MAY NEVER MORE FALSE TITLES PLEAD, NOR
SOUND HIS QUILLETS SHRILLY."


The Eastward Ho was a hint of a project we had frequently talked over as
a possible speculation. Here we see how men are led on step by step from
bad to worse when once they set out on the Primrose Way.

In returning from Europe with the $10,000 commission in my pocket, I
vowed never again to engage in any unlawful speculation. I was through!
No criminal life for me! Then came the day when we struck for the
$20,000 and won, and we were all happy in the thought that our last
unlawful deed was over.

Then we took the third step we had vowed never to take, and had
discussed the $240,000 project. We had spent money on it, had laid our
plans cunningly and deep, and were confident of success. We had even
planned how to invest our thousands in an honest business, and so win
the esteem of all good men, and, of course, in some happy future would
make restitution. But that is a future which never comes in the history
of crime. These three wrong steps had been taken only after convincing
ourselves that the circumstances justified each separate act.

Such is the contradiction of human nature that even when planning crime
we not only intended to make restitution, but despised all other
wrongdoers and reprobated their crimes. Each wrongful act of ours was
to be the last, and it was with something like despair that we began to
realize that there was no stopping place on the dangerous road we were
treading.

My $13,000 commission from the European trip had melted away. Our share
of the $20,000 got from Jay Cooke & Co. was fast going. Our deep-laid
plot to win $240,000 had miscarried, and now the necessity was upon us
of engaging in another illegitimate operation if we would continue in
our life of ease and luxury.

For the next few days we did little but dine and plan. Discussion
followed discussion, and through them all we clung to the general
proposition that we would not do any more in our particular line in
America. At last we resolved to go to Europe and realize the fortune
that seemed to elude our grasp at home.

We resolved to tell Irving in a general way that we were going to Europe
to make some money, and would pay him and his two fellows their
percentage. Then we could (apparently) work with impunity; for, of
course, if we committed a forgery in Europe and were recognised as
Americans--as probably we would be--the foreign police would report the
case to the New York police--that is, to Irving--and we should be safe
in New York.

Edwin James and Brea had dropped out of our lives for good, but as my
readers will be curious to know of their fate in after times, I will
relate it in this chapter.

The morning our scheme on Jay Cooke & Co. fell to pieces, as soon as the
manager left the office, telling Brea he was to pay cash for the bonds
in place of the check, it was recognized at once that the game was up,
and the only thing remaining was to shield James as much as possible. So
Brea left the office, but first instructed the clerk to tell the
messenger when he came that he had gone for the money, and would call
for the bonds. This was done, the messenger arrived, being accompanied
by Detective Elder all the time, and took the bonds back again.

At 2 o'clock James went down to the bankers, where he was well known,
and inquired for Mr. Newman. Being told he was not in, he said he had
made an appointment to meet him there. Invited into the inner office,
the manager asked him if he had any personal knowledge of this Mr.
Newman, and James said no further than that he had called and given him
a retaining fee of $250, and had engaged him as legal adviser, etc. Then
the manager produced a telegram he had received in answer to one he had
sent to the Philadelphia house, inquiring about Newman, and asking if
his letter of introduction was genuine or not. James read the reply; it
said the letter was genuine, but that they knew absolutely nothing about
the man, and warned him to be cautious. James pretended astonishment,
and feigned to be very indignant, declaring that if Mr. Newman did not
put in an appearance within half an hour he should begin to fear a fraud
had been attempted. When the closing hour came at 3 o'clock, the manager
announced to James that he should give the whole matter to the press,
but would keep his name out of it.

So they parted with warm congratulations over their escape, the manager
pretending to believe James was an innocent tool, but no doubt with a
shrewd suspicion that he intended to have a finger in this pie, had the
pie ever been baked and divided. Had the bankers been victimized they
would have striven with all their power to keep the fact a secret and
forbidden their employees to breathe a word about it to any one. But now
the case was different. All the morning papers had long accounts of the
transaction. They were absurdly inaccurate, but all agreed as to the
extreme cleverness of the manager, and noticed how he had suspected,
etc., while poor Elder, who both expected and really deserved all the
glory, was not even mentioned in the newspaper accounts. However, his
feelings were soon after solaced, as Irving informed us that Elder had
stood in on a deal that paid him well.

The $5,000 we gave James eased up matters for a time. Practice he had
none, but managed to hold on in the hope of realizing on the Brea will
matter, but getting deeper and deeper in debt. One night, four years
later, the old lady, Brea's mother-in-law, had a more than usually
furious outbreak of temper, and fell to beating the three daughters
still living with her. Before it was over she had attacked and seriously
injured the eldest, and then flew to her room in a passion. Not
appearing at breakfast the next morning her daughter went to her room,
but she was not there, and the bed was undisturbed. Going to the room
that served for office and library, they found the door, as usual,
locked. Bursting it open the poor old maids found their mother huddled
in a corner of the room dead.

Truly a happy relief for the daughters. Poor girls, theirs had been a
hard life. Every suitor who tried to cultivate their acquaintance had
been driven from the door by the mother, who never spent a dollar on
their education, and her death found them all unused to the ways of the
world. The result was that all became victims of fortune-hunters, and
the unhappy ladies only changed the tyranny of an unnatural mother for
the tyranny of a husband, who in each case wedded for wealth alone, and
all three husbands were uncultured men. What an experience! Two of the
three still live. How sweet the rest of the grave will be to them!

The genuine will was destroyed and the "family lawyer," James,
immediately after the funeral, produced and read "the last will and
testament" of the dead woman. The four sisters and a host of poor
relations were present at the reading. When Sarah, Brea's wife, heard
her name read as chief heir of the vast estate, she was stunned, but if
she was stunned, the rest of the family were paralyzed. Legacies were
left to many, small in amount, save in the case of the other three
sisters, who were to have a certain tenement and land in Harlem and
three thousand a year for life out of the estate. None of those present
thought for a moment of questioning either the genuineness of the will
or the validity of the testaments, save only a poor relation, a nephew,
whose name was down for $500. He was indignant with the old lady and
loudly declared that he would not put up with it. The next day he
employed a briefless lawyer, one that had wit and brass enough and who
had his way to make in the world, and was determined to make it.

Without waiting for the will to be probated or having legal authority to
do so, Brea and his wife, the very day of the funeral, moved into the
house and took possession. But before the week was out he had persuaded
the three old maids that they would be happier if away from the scene of
their parent's death, so he had them installed in their own house at
Harlem, he remaining in undisturbed possession, waiting only for the
will to be probated in order to take possession of upward of $200,000 in
cash and bonds still in the custody of the old lady's bank. He had full
possession of the house, and with entire confidence waited to be put in
legal possession of all. But little did he dream that at that moment
there was one poor torn sheet of foolscap in the library, casually
thrust in a book, lying completely at his mercy to destroy, if he could
only have known it, which was going to tear all his wealth from his
grasp and drive him forth a foiled plotter, to become an adventurer and
ultimately to perish a miserable outcast.

The executors of the will (the same in the forged will as in the
genuine) were two simple shopkeepers living near. Eagan was the name of
the nephew, and to the surprise of the executors his attorney notified
them he should contest the will on behalf of his client, and warned them
to dispossess Brea of the house until such time as the law decreed it
to be his wife's property. The attorney knew the standing of James in
his profession, and, being capable of pretty sharp practice himself, he,
by some extraordinary intuition, boldly asserted his belief that the
will was a forgery. The three sisters declared they would not contest
the will, and had Brea acted wisely by fixing it up to give the attorney
a liberal fee, and Eagan a paltry thousand dollars, it would have ended
there. But, feeling perfectly secure, no doubt he thought an appearance
of firmness would strengthen his position still more, and he was so rash
as to denounce the attorney as a shyster and blackmailer.

The attorney's blood was up; he frightened the sisters into supporting
him in disputing the will, and had Brea and his wife ousted from the
house and the sisters reinstalled. Brea then attempted negotiations with
the attorney. Cautious as he was, he said enough to convince the lawyer
that for some reason he did not want the case to come before the courts;
still the attorney was half inclined to join hands with Brea. In the
mean time Ezra (this was the name of the man of law) had acquired great
power over the sisters, and they all looked to him both as champion and
protector. He resolved to be protector to one, at least, paying
assiduous court to Jane, the youngest. Although past 30 and without
education or accomplishments, she was warm-hearted and extremely
sentimental, and a thrill went through her tender heart when it became
evident that Ezra's attention pointed at her. She quickly made him a
hero, and invested the thin-shanked, narrow-chested, waspish attorney
with a thousand tender attributes, and when, after one month's
acquaintance, she found herself alone with him in the poky little parlor
and he asking her to be his wife, her woman's heart overflowed, and
telling him she had loved him from the first hour they met she threw
herself into his arms, crying she was the happiest and most favored
woman in the world. In the midst of the happy lovers' talk she ran to
the shelf, took down a book, and, opening it, revealed a soiled sheet
of paper and asked her lover what it was. His love had given him a gift,
indeed. His trained eye recognized it at once as a draft of a new will,
in the handwriting of the deceased mother, and dated the very night of
her death. It was a rough draft, but across the bottom was drawn the
bold, masculine signature of the old lady. There were no signatures of
witnesses, but Ezra was lawyer enough to know it would stand and that it
revoked all previous wills. Calling in the two elder sisters he read the
will to their amazed ears, and then and there wrote out a full statement
as to the circumstance under which it was found. All four attached their
signatures to the document, and when Ezra kissed his love a tender good
night and went home, he hardly felt the paving stones under his feet,
for he had carefully tucked away in the inside pocket of his vest, just
over his heart, the little soiled piece of paper which told him in
unmistakable terms that his fortune was made, and the wedding ceremony
once over, that it was beyond all chance of change.

It would seem that the old lady, after her quarrel with her daughters,
went to the library in a rage and made the draft of a new will. The
chief change in it, as compared with the old genuine will which the
conspirators had destroyed, was that it was more favorable to Jane,
Ezra's wife to be. But what gave Ezra the greatest satisfaction was the
fact that Brea's wife was down by name in the new will for one dollar
lawful currency. The will was promptly filed and probated. Ezra gave
bonds and was appointed one of the executors, and he had what to him was
the immense satisfaction of denouncing Brea to his face as a forger and
villain.

Before the discovery of the new will, while it was believed that Mrs.
Brea was an heiress and her credit good, she and her husband had made
use of the fact, and had incurred debts to a large amount. Brea got his
wife to indorse his note for $10,000, and he borrowed that sum from the
bankers, but as soon as the true state of the case was known, his
creditors became clamorous and had him arrested on civil suits. Unable
to give bonds, he was locked up in Ludlow Street Jail, and there he
remained six months, until, acting upon Ezra's advice, the sisters
agreed to pay all his debts and give him and his wife $1,000 each if
they would live west of Chicago. This they were forced to accept, and
went to Montana. Brea opened a saloon at Butte City, but he never
recovered his spirits again. He became his own best customer, and that,
of course, meant ruin, but what, after all, killed him was the knowledge
that he had been for more than a score of days in full possession of
that old house and had spent scores of hours alone in the old library,
and yet had not discovered and destroyed the new will lying there at his
mercy.

The Sheriff soon sold out his saloon, while his wife eloped with his
best friend. Ruined in pocket, health and character, poor old Brea was
left bare to every storm that blew. One morning, as the sun was rising
over the town, surprising half a dozen belated gamblers in Ned Wright's
saloon as they were getting up to leave, they found lying across the
threshold the body of a man, ragged, emaciated, forlorn. It was Brea.

As soon as James had read the will he insisted upon having $5,000 from
Brea at once, and he got the money. But when that thunderbolt of the new
will fell on the two men, James sadly recognized that fortune and he
would shake hands no more, so far as this world is concerned, and he
resolved to chance returning to London before the whole of the $5,000 he
had from Brea was gone. To London he went; he lived a few years in
extreme poverty, driven to all manner of miserable shifts, and at last
died. This man died who ought to have been buried in Westminster Abbey,
so adding one more brilliant name to the long line of illustrious Lord
Chancellors from Thomas a Becket and Cardinal Wolsey down; but he,
hating his own soul, took the first step in wrongdoing, and, instead of
resting in the mighty Abbey and bequeathing his dust as a precious
legacy to succeeding generations, perished forlorn and alone, and was
buried in a pauper's grave.

[Illustration: GARRAWAY'S.]




CHAPTER XII.

RESTEZ ICI, MES ENFANTS.


We all landed in Liverpool in the highest spirits, and at once took the
train for London, enjoying the novelty of everything.

It was settled that George should pursue the venture alone in France,
while I should go with Mac to Germany to act as his second there. To
keep entirely clear myself, but at the same time to watch everything, to
exchange the German notes he obtained and to be ready to help if any one
should attempt to detain him.

Therefore, after completing certain preparations which required skill
and considerable business knowledge, we departed to execute this new
and, of course, last shuffle for fortune.

We had selected Berlin, Munich, Leipsic and Frankfort as the scenes of
our operations in Germany. In France we sought to operate in Bordeaux,
Marseilles and Lyons. At 8 p.m. Saturday we all crossed to Calais
together, where George said good-bye, and, leaving us to take the train
eastward to Berlin, he started west to Bordeaux. We were not to meet
again until after our hurried rush through the Continent and our return
to London with the proceeds. Before I give an account of Mac's adventure
and my own for the next three days I will here give George's narrative
in his own language, as related to us when we all met again in London:

After saying good-bye to you I arrived in Paris in due time, and
sauntered about for two hours until the train left for Bordeaux, where I
arrived at 8 o'clock Monday morning, and went at once to the Hotel
d'Orient, and after a bath and breakfast repaired to the bankers. As
soon as I presented my letters of introduction they received me with the
greatest consideration, lavishing every attention upon me, inviting me
to dinner and to a drive through the city afterward. I thanked them, and
explained that I was obliged to decline, as my agent was waiting for me
at Bayonne, where I had purchased some real estate, and, having been
recommended to their firm, I should feel obliged if they would cash my
draft for L2,000 and indorse it on my letter of credit. The manager
replied that it was the custom of the French bankers to require
twenty-four hours' notice before drawing a check, and asked me if the
next day would not answer. "We shall be happy to assist you," said he,
"in passing the time pleasantly." This was a new custom to me, but I
answered instantly, expressing regret that the nature of my business
precluded delay, it being necessary that I should reach Bayonne that
night. "I suppose," continued I, "that your bankers will not mind your
checking out a small sum without the usual notice. However, if it
occasions any embarrassment or inconvenience, I can easily procure the
money elsewhere." One of the partners replied that their bank would
without doubt honor their check, and the matter should be attended to at
once. I sat down for a half hour, conversing on a variety of topics. Of
course, this was a most trying period to me; the least show of haste or
anxiety might have betrayed me to those lynx-eyed, experienced men of
business. In the midst of our conversation an undercurrent of thought
kept running through my mind thus: "Who knows but they have sent a
dispatch to the Union Bank of London, merely as a matter of business
precaution, and that they are delaying me to get a reply? In that case I
shall have a good opportunity to learn the pure French accent while
passing my days in the Bagnio at Toulon." At last, however, the amount
was paid over to me in French bank notes. I deliberately counted them
and took leave, lighter in mind and heavier in purse by 50,000 francs.

[Illustration: THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR SIDNEY WATERLOW, Lord Mayor of
London in 1873, in official costume.]

I had arranged that I would send all the money I obtained to the Queen's
Hotel, London, by post at the earliest possible moment after receiving
it, that in the event of any accident to myself the money should be
safe.

After receiving the money I inclosed it in a large envelope, addressing
it to the hotel in London. I also wrote on the envelope: "Echantillons
de papier" (i. e., samples of paper), after which I threw it into the
postoffice.

As I wished to reduce the risk as much as possible (the train for
Marseilles not leaving for three hours), I took a carriage and told the
driver to take me toward the next station on the way to that city. After
we were fairly out in the country I got outside and sat with the driver,
chatting with him about the country we were driving through, arriving in
the village about half an hour before the train from Bordeaux was due. I
dismissed my driver at a small village cabaret (tavern), walked to the
station, got aboard the train, and early the next morning was in
Marseilles. I breakfasted at the Hotel d'Europe, and looked over the
papers to see if the Bordeaux fraud had been discovered. As I could see
no indication of it, about 10 a.m. I took a carriage and went to call on
Messrs. Brune & Co.

On making myself known I was, as usual, received with the utmost
courtesy, began to talk business, and one of the firm got into my
carriage and rode with me to his bank to effect the sale of my draft on
London for the sum of L2,500. Arriving at the bank I took a seat in the
front office, while Mr. Brune went into the manager's room to introduce
the transaction; the clerks eyed me, as I thought, suspiciously, but
doubtless only curiously, because they perceived I was a foreigner.
Another thing which I noticed sent a shiver through me. After Mr. Brune
had been a few minutes in the manager's room, the bank porter stepped to
the outer door, closed and locked it. It being but 12 o'clock, I
imagined the precautionary measure must be due to my presence. "The
Bordeaux affair is discovered and has been telegraphed all over France,"
was my first thought; "all is over with me. I am a candidate for a
French prison, sure."

These and a thousand other thoughts flashed through my mind during the
quarter of an hour preceding Mr. Brune's reappearance with his hands
full of bank notes. I could hardly believe my eyes. I had suppressed all
signs of the internal hurricane which raged during those prolonged
moments of suspense.

Now the revulsion of feeling was so great that I nearly fainted.
However, by a mental effort, I recovered my self-possession and
effectually masked all inward convulsions.

Mr. Brune placed in my hands 62,000 francs, in notes of the Bank of
France, and we then descended to the carriage and drove to my hotel,
where we parted. I paid my bill, and at once made preparations to start
for Lyons, which was to be the next and last scene of my operations in
France.

As my train did not leave for three hours, I got into a carriage at some
distance from the hotel and was driven toward the next station, located
on the beautiful bay a few miles from Marseilles.

After driving along the shore of the bay for some miles I remember we
met two women, dressed in the quaint costume common to that part of the
country, each carrying a basket of eggs. I stopped the carriage and
endeavored to enter into conversation with the pair, but could not
understand a word of their patois. I then took a couple of eggs, handed
out a silver franc piece, and drove on, leaving two astonished women
standing in the road, gazing alternately at the piece of money and at
the back of my carriage. Arriving at the station I found it would be an
hour and a half to train time, and driving to a hotel on the shore I
ordered dinner to be served in the upper room of a two-story tower
overlooking the bay, with Marseilles in the distance. After dining I
strolled along the beach, looking at some queer fish not found north of
the Mediterranean, their colors vying in brilliancy with the plumage of
tropical birds. Returning to the station I took a ticket for Lyons,
stopping off at Arles about sunset, as I wished to see the amphitheatre
and other relics of the Roman occupation.

I remained in Arles till midnight, then took the train, arriving in
Lyons at 9 the next morning. Repairing to the Hotel de Lyons I had
breakfast, and on looking over the papers became satisfied that as yet
no discovery had been made. Therefore, I resolved to carry out my third
and last financial enterprise and then return to London with all speed.

I called a carriage and drove at once to the establishment of Messrs.
Coudert & Co. I sat near the desk, conversing with the head of the firm,
and opened a dispatch I sent from Arles, and, after reading, handed it
to him, saying: "I see that I shall have use for 60,000 francs, and must
ask you to cash a draft on my letter of credit for that amount." He
immediately stepped to the safe, took out a bundle of 1,000 franc notes,
and counting out sixty, gave them to me.

As it was almost certain that the Bordeaux fraud would soon be
discovered, I determined, now that my risky work was completed, to
attempt an immediate escape from France by way of Paris and Calais. I
did not, therefore, take the train direct from Lyons to Paris, but
engaged a carriage and drove back to a junction toward Marseilles. Here
I took a train which intersects further to the northward with another
road leading through Lyons to Paris. After going the roundabout route
above described, I was back at the Lyons station at 9 p.m. in a train
bound for Paris, where I arrived without further incident.

The next morning (Sunday) as I left the railway station I thought
detectives were watching me, but, in all probability, it was only the
imagination of a guilty conscience. I was then wearing a full beard, and
as a precautionary measure I, that morning, had all shaved off save the
mustache. Not daring to leave Paris on the through express, which
started at 3 o'clock p.m., nor to purchase a ticket to either Calais or
London direct, I went to the station and took the noon accommodation
train, which went no further toward Calais than Arras, a town some
thirty miles from Paris. I arrived there about 1 p.m.

As it would be a couple of hours before the express train was due, I
went to a small hotel and ordered dinner. To while away the time I took
a stroll through the main street, where were many mothers and nurses
with children, nice black-eyed French babies. As I was always a devoted
lover of children and other small creatures, I stepped into a shop and
bought a package of confectionery, which I distributed among the little
ones and their smiling nurses, receiving therefor, almost invariably,
the grateful exclamation, "Merci, Monsieur!" I gave some to children 8
and 10 years old, a crowd of whom soon gathered about me. Perceiving
that I was attracting too much attention, it was clear that I must get
rid of my young friends as soon as possible, or the police might also be
attracted, and their presence would lead to unpleasant results in case
the frauds had been discovered and inquiry was being made for an
Englishman. Purchasing a second supply of candies I hastily gave them
out, and with a "Restez ici, mes enfants," I passed through them and
continued my walk up the street. Quite a number followed at a
respectable distance, and I was cogitating how to double on them when I
came to the gateway of the town cemetery, through which I hastily
entered. The children remained outside and watched me as I walked up the
slope and disappeared. At the rear of the cemetery I observed an old
man at work in the adjoining field. I climbed upon the stone wall, which
instantly crumbled away, and I was landed on the old Frenchman's domain
without leave, amidst a pile of stones. Startled by the racket, he
looked up from his digging, and, seeing a stranger uprising from the
ruins of the fence, began consigning him to "le diable," with a volley
of vigorous French expletives delivered in peasant patois. I listened to
him, much amused for a moment, and then held up a five-franc piece. As
soon as he beheld it a wondrous change came over him. He eagerly seized
the silver and straightway showed me to a lane which led almost directly
to the railway station. I purchased a ticket for Calais and took the
Sunday afternoon express, and here I am.

[Illustration: OLD EDINBURGH STREET.]




CHAPTER XIII.

WE TALK OF THE STARS AND DO THE OTHER THING.


After we saw George off to Paris on the train Mac and I walked up and
down the platform outside of the station, star-gazing. Mac, with his
brilliant scholarship, elegant speech, logical force and fiery
enthusiasm, made a most fascinating companion.

The study of mankind is man, the old proverb says, but like many other
proverbs there is a full measure of unreality in it. It takes a good
amount of arrogance and conceit for one to fancy he is going to study
and understand men. No man can understand himself, and by no amount of
experience or study will he ever come to understand that subtle thing he
calls his mind or understand the motives that sway him.

I only wish one of those scientists who amuse themselves by pretending
to study and understand human minds and motives could have sat in Mac's
brain that night, have thought his thoughts and heard his speech, while
remaining ignorant of our history and mission. Mac's mind was a
storehouse of erudition, his memory a picture gallery, whose chambers
were gilded and decorated with many a glowing canvas. As a child he was
familiar with the Bible, the Old Testament particularly, and, improbable
as it seems, was still a diligent student of Holy Writ. His mind was
completely saturated with Bible imagery, yet there we were with our
pockets full of forged documents walking up and down that platform
star-gazing, while he talked with intelligent enthusiasm of those silver
flowers in the darkened sky, of stellar space, how in its infinity it
proved the presence of Deity. That with him there was no great and no
little. That a thought sweeping across the God-given mind of an infant
was as wonderful and as much an evidence of power as the millioned arch
of radiant suns in the milky way. While speeding through Belgium on our
way to the Rhine, he continued until the sun shone upon the horizon. It
was something to stir one's enthusiasm to see his sublime faith in the
mighty destiny of man, and to listen to him tell of the dignity and
grace of every human soul and his sure faith that all would be garnered
in the mighty plains of heaven, and he meant and felt it all; yes, meant
all he said, believed all he said, believed that he himself was a potent
factor in the Divine economy, and, furthermore, believed it behooved
every man to do all things, to be all things good and true, yet on this
Sunday morning we were fast speeding to the scene of our contemplated
schemes, and with light hearts looked forward to a speedy return to
London, fairly well laden with plunder.

We talked the whole night through, or rather Mac talked and I listened,
and it was a treat to be a listener, he being the speaker.

A period was put to his oration by the train stopping at Luxemburg, we
being summoned to breakfast.

On resuming our journey we took a nap, and when we awoke we found
ourselves nearing the Rhine; about noon we arrived at Cologne, and going
to Uhlrich platz, drank a bottle of Tokay in a famous wine cellar there,
then hurrying back to the station we traveled across the sandy plain
that stretches from near the Prussian border to the capital. We arrived
soon after dark, and Mac went at once to the Hotel Lion de Paris and
registered. I waited across the street in the shadow of the Empress
Palace. Mac soon came out, and we went to dine in a large cafe. We
enjoyed the novelty of the scene, and were never tired of marveling over
the all-predominant militarism. Soldiers everywhere, all with good lungs
and loud voices. We spent the evening seeing the town; at midnight we
parted to meet and breakfast together at the cafe at 8. I then went to
an obscure hotel and soon was in the land of dreams. In the morning I
awoke with an anxious feeling, and found myself wishing it were night.
At 8, the appointed time, I met Mac. He may possibly have felt some
anxiety; if so, it was invisible.

When an honest man makes a mistake he has not only sympathy, but can
always pick himself up again. With a rogue a mistake may easily be and
almost always is fatal. We feared the unseen and the unexpected. Above
all, our imagination magnified the danger while tormenting us with
needless fears. In Germany the banks open at 9 o'clock, and we knew they
would receive soon after 8 the letter we had deposited in the mail in
London. We decided that it would be best for Mac to enter the banker's
at five minutes after 9. We had discovered the night before the location
of the firm. During breakfast Mac went carefully through his pockets,
taking out every scrap of paper and turning everything over to me; then
taking out from among the others in our bag the letters of credit and
introduction we made our last scrutiny of them. We had not settled upon
the amount he should ask for, but agreed that it should not in any case
be less than 25,000 gulden ($10,000). If everything seemed favorable
then Mac was to use his own judgment and demand any sum under 100,000
gulden ($40,000). His letter of credit was for L10,000, and we did not
want to leave it behind. Of course, if we drew any less sum than the
amount the credit called for, the sum we drew would be indorsed on the
letter, and it would be returned to Mac and be instantly destroyed. So
with the documents in his pockets and giving me a smile, out he went,
and I followed after, keeping him in sight, and very anxious I was. We
were on Unter den Linden. Walking one square and turning to the left
half a block away were the bankers--Hebrew, by the way. I saw Mac
saunter up the steps and disappear from view. Outside of America money
transactions are carried on with the utmost deliberation; to an American
with exasperating slowness; so I thought it possible he might remain
invisible for a whole half-hour, and a long half-hour it would be to me.
In order to have my anxiety shortened by even a half minute we had
arranged that when he came out if he had the money he was to stroke his
beard as a signal. If it was all right, but delayed, he was to put his
handkerchief to his face, but if everything was wrong he was to clasp
his hands across his breast for a moment.

[Illustration: "BOYS, THAT IS THE SOFTEST MARK IN THE WORLD."--Page
145.]

In that event I was to keep a lookout to see if he was followed; if so,
I was to give him a signal, when he would go straight to his hotel--in
passing through would dispose of his tall hat, and put on the soft hat
he had in his pocket--then pass out the back entrance and hasten to a
certain hat shop, where I would meet him, and take a cab to a little
town six miles away, called Juterbock, where all trains going south,
west and east stopped. While driving out, we would settle on some plan;
but this emergency did not arise. I had stationed myself in a little
shop across the street, and from that vantage ground was watching for
Mac's reappearance, and just as I had settled myself for a weary watch
out he came, smiling and stroking his beard. A moment's glance satisfied
me he was not followed. I hastened after, and, coming up with him as he
turned the corner, he merely said 2,600 pounds ($13,000). It seemed too
good to be true, and I said: "I don't believe you." He replied: "It is
all right, my boy; here it is," at the same time thrusting a big package
containing gulden notes into my hand. We instantly separated, I
hastening to different but near-by brokers' offices, buying for nearly
the full amount French bank notes and gold. We went straight to the
hatter's and bought one of those broad-brimmed German student hats,
which, when he had placed it on his head, put on a pair of spectacles
and parted his flowing beard in the middle, made such a transformation
in his appearance that I myself would have passed him unrecognized. In
the mean time I had picked out a cabdriver, a stupid-looking,
conservative-appearing old fellow, and engaged him to drive "mich und
meinen freund nach Juterbock." So we entered the cab, an open one-horse
affair, and started for that town. Our next objective point was Munich,
but as the train did not leave until noon we preferred to spend the time
in a pleasant drive, and at the same time make assurance of our escape
doubly sure. Around Berlin the country is flat and uninteresting. Our
driver was a crabbed old fellow, but we managed to extract some
amusement out of him.

What pleased us greatly was to see him from time to time take out from
under his seat a loaf of black bread and cut off a slice for himself and
one for his horse, and then, seeing we were in no hurry, he would get
down, and, walking beside the horse, would feed him and himself at the
same time. When we arrived at Juterbock we had an hour to spare, so we
drove to an inn, and ordering a bottle of Hochheimer for ourselves and
beer and pretzels for our driver, we passed the time pleasantly. In the
mean time we had touched a match to the letter of credit, and at train
time we went by separate routes to the depot. Each purchased his own
ticket; to Nuremberg mine was, his to some near-by city, and at 12.30 we
boarded the train and were off for Munich and more profit there on the
morrow.

Late at night we arrived, and after locating the bank we went to a
theatre, where a variety show was going on, and found the performances
good; quite up, in fact, to similar exhibitions here. When the house
closed we separated for the night, each going to a different hotel. Our
plan was to secure all the cash we could in Munich in time to take a
train that left for Leipsic a little before 10 o'clock, arriving there
soon after 1, in time to visit the Leipsic bank the same day; then
leaving the city that night we would be in Frankfort early on Wednesday.
We would then make all haste to escape from Germany to the shelter of
mighty London.

Tuesday morning at 7 we met at a restaurant, as agreed, and soon had
over again our Berlin experience; but the amount we obtained here was
only 12,000 gulden (L1,000), Mac thinking it best to ask for a small
sum, Munich not being much of a commercial city. In cashing his credit,
although the amount was in gulden, the bank paid him in New Saxon
thalers, the thaler being 70 cents. We did not like the new thaler
notes, and wanted to change them there, but there was no time if we were
to catch the 10 o'clock train. I had Mac's derby hat in a box, and in
three minutes he had the hat and spectacles on, and, with his beard
again parted, the transformation was complete, and he, a perfect picture
of the dreamy German student, sauntered down to the depot and bought his
ticket for Leipsic. I followed him, carrying all the cash and documents
in my bag. We arrived at Leipsic soon after dinner. Times were brisk,
with plenty of bustle there, for the great Leipsic fair was in full
blast. Here was an opportunity missed; we ought to have had three or
four letters to as many banks. The place was thronged and the banks were
paying out and receiving money in thousands. On the train I had sat
apart from Mac, but in the same compartment, which was filled. Arriving
at Leipsic he left the train, and, walking up the street, entered a wine
room, where I joined him. He scrutinized his letters carefully, and,
placing them in his pocket, in five minutes was in the bank. Seeing the
bank was full of customers, instead of remaining outside to watch, I
entered and stood among the crowd, anxious, of course, but letting
nothing escape.

Instead of waiting or trying to transact his business with a
subordinate, Mac demanded to see the head of the firm. He was received
at once, and upon the production of his letters was treated with the
utmost consideration. He asked for 50,000 gulden ($20,000), which was
given him at once. The amount for fair time at Leipsic was not large. In
a very short time the business was done. The money being paid in gulden
notes, it made a pretty big bundle. As agreed upon, he went direct to
the cafe, carrying the money, while I stopped at a broker's office and
bought French money, notes and gold, for my new Saxon thalers. There the
transformation scene was re-enacted, but we could not leave town until 5
o'clock. We spent the time visiting the famous fair. Leipsic overflowed
with the fair. It was fair on the brain with every one. This annual fair
has been a yearly feature of the old city for four centuries, and draws
to it people from all over the European world, even from furthest
Russia. Soon after 5 o'clock we were on the train, but, for some reason
which I now forget, we did not arrive until 10 o'clock the next day at
Frankfort.

Frankfort, the home and still the fortress of the Rothschilds.

In Frankfort the Bourse opens at 10 a.m., and closes at 2. During those
hours the bankers are to be found on the Exchange only, and not at their
offices. Many of the offices are then deserted and fast locked. It
proved to be the case with the firm to which our letters were addressed,
and if we were to do any business in Frankfort we had of necessity to
wait until 2 p.m., but as it was now Wednesday and the third day since
our affair in Berlin, the first draft drawn on London, if promptly
mailed, would probably have been delivered at the Union Bank this
morning. Of course, as soon as the manager of the foreign department
found a draft for a large sum drawn by a stranger and made payable to
their correspondent in Berlin, he would at once surmise that a fraud had
been committed and undoubtedly would send a telegram to Germany to that
effect. The forgery once known in Berlin, the rumor of it, with a
thousand exaggerations, might easily fly to every Bourse in Europe, and
I feared that by 2 o'clock the story might possibly become known on the
Frankfort Exchange. So far we had $43,000, the result of our two days'
operations, but we had from the first great hopes of Frankfort, chiefly
because it was the money centre of the Continent, therefore the bankers
were used to handling large sums of money, and so long as everything was
all right they would hand out any sum, however large. We really ought to
have taken in Frankfort first. Had we done so, we probably would have
left the town with $50,000.

Soon as we arrived we went to a cafe, and, leaving Mac there and all the
money and papers in the bag, I hastened to the bankers, hoping to find
them open and ready for business. In that case I should have talked
business--that is, about having letters of credit, etc.--and I could
probably have told by their actions if any rumors of our transaction of
the two preceding days had reached the city. Had this been so the
bankers would have betrayed it by their looks and questions, and would
have been anxious to see my credits. Had such questions been asked, I
would have simply said that my letters of credit had not yet arrived
from Paris. This would have, of course, thrown them off the track, and
given us time to move off.

But when I arrived I found the doors locked. I at once returned to Mac
and said: "We are through; let us catch the train for Cologne at once."
He was anxious to wait until 4 o'clock and make a dash. We both knew the
Germans were slow, and might not think of using the telegraph, and we
agreed that we had more than an even chance of success; but Mac said:
"My boy, you are my manager, and I leave it for you to decide." Then I
said we were through, and that he should take no more chances; so we
settled it right there, in the little French-German cafe, and taking
out all the letters and every scrap of paper we destroyed them.

This decision, of course, brought a great relief--for the strain had
been greater than either of us had been willing to confess to the other.
So, easy in mind, we ordered lunch. Of course, we would have no news of
George until we met in London. We had no anxiety about him; we felt
certain he would come out all right. While waiting for the train we
discussed the future, and took it for granted that he would secure as
much as we had done. We counted ourselves possessors of $90,000. Of
this, fully $10,000 would go to our three honest detectives in New York;
we would spend about another $10,000, leaving us about $23,000 each.
Making this calculation, we sat down, and with the cash safe in our
hands we began planning for the future. Did we say: "Now we have a sum
of money ample to start us in an honest business, and, as we have
promised, we will quit?" Nothing of the kind; we simply ignored our many
promises and resolutions. Our ideas had grown with our success, and we
felt poor; so we quickly came to the conclusion that it was the part of
wisdom, since we were already so far in, to secure $100,000 each, and
then to call a halt; so there in Frankfort, in the very hour of our
success, we found ourselves planning new schemes, and further down the
Primrose Way.

Soon after the noon hour the train started, but first I took Mac's tall
hat to the hatter's and left it to be ironed, this, of course, to get
rid of it, and leave no trace behind; then, returning to the cafe, we
started. I fell behind and we made our way separately to the depot. Mac
had absolutely nothing about him save $2,000 in French paper and gold. I
had over $40,000 in notes and some gold in my bag. He bought a ticket
for Amsterdam, and I one for Belgium, both taking us through Cologne. I
saw him safe into a car, while I sauntered carelessly up and down the
station, swinging my bag and staring at everything; as the train was
about to start I entered another carriage. The railway from Frankfort
to Cologne follows the river bank for the entire distance. We quickly
passed Bingen, Mayence, Coblenz, and about dusk reached Cologne. This is
an important junction, and here we had to change cars, having twenty
minutes to wait. Both of us went direct to the cathedral. It is close to
the station, and there we had a few minutes' talk. Here Mac threw away
his ticket to Amsterdam and I gave him mine to Brussels. We agreed to
take separate cars at the station, but at the first stopping place I was
to join him in his compartment, for we had before us an all-night ride
to Ostend (the rival port to Calais), where we would embark for Dover.
At the depot I purchased a ticket to London via Ostend. We left Cologne
all right, and at the first station out I alighted and joined him.

We had a pleasant all-night journey, arriving very early the next
morning at Ostend. How lovely the sea looked, with the morning sun
shining on its restless waves!

We got to Dover without accident, and two hours after the express landed
us in London, and we drove at once to our appointed rendezvous, the
Terminus Hotel, London Bridge. We had no news of George, but that
evening, opening the door in response to a loud knock, he walked in,
receiving a boisterous welcome.




CHAPTER XIV.

I PLAY THE SILVER KING.


The next morning we all drove to Hampton Court, the creation of Wolsey,
and when tired we went to the Star and Garter. There we talked over
matters, and came to the conclusion we must have a hundred thousand
apiece before we could afford to settle down at home.

We resolved to send off the "percentage" to Irving & Company, and to pay
all debts we were owing at home.

Mac's heart went out to his father. He longed for a reconciliation, and
he determined to send him $10,000 and so make good the money his father
had given him to establish himself in New York, at the same time write
the old gentleman he had made a big strike in a cotton speculation, in
order to explain his having so large a sum to spare.

Our accounts were pretty well mixed up, and I hit upon a novel way to
settle them and give each of us an equal start. My proposal was that we
should pool everything. To put every dollar we had in the world on the
table then and there, and let the firm assume all obligations, purely
personal as they were, save only the Irving "percentage," and pay them
from the general fund, then divide the balance. This was agreed to, and
the queerest balance sheet ever made out was soon ready.

[Illustration: "THREE OR FOUR SHOTS RANG OUT, OUR TRAIN WAS OFF THE
TRACK."--Page 281.]

We all had planned certain gifts and presents to friends in America, a
considerable sum in the aggregate; all the cost of this was assumed by
the firm. The main item was $10,000 to the New York police. When the
balances were finally struck nearly $30,000 had disappeared from our
cash capital, but on the whole it was a good plan. It drew us all closer
together, consequently increased our faith in each other and at the same
time prevented all chances of future dispute. This matter settled, we
determined to have a little recreation by taking a tour in Italy. After
studying guide books and routes we resolved to take a steamer from
Southampton to Naples, spend a few days there in seeing the town and
visiting Pompeii, etc., then north to Rome.

We had made considerable preparation for our tour, when a circumstance
arose that not only changed our plans, but in the sequel changed our
lives as well.

We had been paying another visit to Hampton Court, and in place of
dining at the Star and Garter we returned by boat on the Thames and
dined at Cannon Street Hotel. Before going to the hotel we took a stroll
down Lombard street, and, arriving at the intersection of streets
opposite the Bank of England, we came to a halt. While watching the
human whirlpool in that centre of throbbing life, I turned to my
friends, and, pointing to the Bank of England, said: "Boys, you may
depend upon it, there is the softest spot in the world, and we could hit
the bank for a million as easy as rolling off a log." No response was
made at the time, and the casual remark was apparently forgotten. Well
for us if it had been.

The next day we went for a drive to Windsor, and were to dine at a
famous old roadside inn. On arriving we, of course, visited the castle,
and, while viewing the decorations in the stately throne room, Mac
stopped us with the remark that something I had said the day before had
been sticking in his mind. He went on to say that we wanted a hundred
thousand apiece in order to return home in good shape; that the Bank of
England had plenty to spare, and it was well for the lightning to strike
where the balances were heavy. The bank would never miss the money, and
he firmly believed the whole directorate of the fossil institution was
permeated with the dry rot of centuries. The managers were convinced
that their banking system was impregnable, and, as a consequence, it
would fall an easy victim, provided, as we suspected, the bank was
really managed by hereditary officials.

Here was a picture, indeed. Three American adventurers, two of them
barely past their majority, standing in the throne room of Windsor
Castle, and plotting to strike a blow at the money bags of the Bank of
England!

The idea grew on us rapidly. After dinner we sat in the twilight of that
old inn and discussed the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street from a point
of view from which she had probably never been discussed before. I can
imagine with what scorn the idiotically puffed and bepuffed magnates of
the bank would have regarded us had they known of our discussion.

They afterwards boasted to me, as they had boasted for a century, that
their system was perfect, and as a proof that it was so they widely
proclaimed they had not changed it in a hundred years. They had
proclaimed so loudly and so long its absolute invulnerability that they
not only believed it themselves, but all the world had come to believe
it as well. "Safe as the bank" was a proverb everywhere underlying the
English tongue.

In our discussion we speedily came to the conclusion that any system of
finance unchanged in detail for a century, belief in the perfection of
which was an article of faith not alone with the officials charged with
its management, but with the people of England at large, must, in the
very nature of the case, lie wide open to the attack of any man bold
enough to doubt its impregnability and resolute to attack.

What a figment of the imagination this boasted impregnability of the
Bank of England was the sequel will show. And as for those masters of
finance, those earthly Joves of the financial world who sat serene above
the clouds, "the Governor and Company of the Bank of England," they
soon had the whole money world shaking with laughter when they stood
revealed the Simple Simons they proved to be.

We wanted a hundred thousand apiece now, and had resolved to get it from
the Bank of England. Such was our confidence that we never thought
failure possible. Truly, if there ever was a plan laid in ignorant
enthusiasm this was one. Here we were, absolutely without any knowledge
of the inner workings of the institution, strangers in London, being
under assumed names, without business of any kind, and not only unable
to give any references, but unable to stand any investigation.

Exactly how we were to manipulate the bank we did not know. We were
inclined, now we had some fifty thousand dollars capital, to avoid so
serious a thing as forgery, but had an idea for one of us to obtain in
some way an introduction to the bank and to use all the money of the
party to establish a credit. In the mean time all were to get in the
swim in or around the exchange, and use the one who had the account in
the bank for reference for the others. If some good chance offered to go
into a straightforward business we could drop forever all thoughts of
breaking the law again. This was the theory; in practice, we were almost
certain to try on the game we had of late played so successfully.

In conference it was determined an account should be opened with the
bank, anyway; after that was done we could decide what use to put it to.

As I had not yet shown up in the previous transactions, I volunteered to
go to the front in this; so, telling my two friends to go to the
Continent--Italy, if they liked--I would remain in London and manage to
get the account started. They took me at my word, and a day or two after
sailed from Liverpool to Lisbon, and passed through Portugal to Spain,
visiting the chief cities of that country.

I was left alone in London and began prospecting at once, setting all
my wits at work to see how I could manage to get an introduction to the
bank. I had only $20,000 to start the thing with, as we did not think it
policy to risk our entire capital in one place. My first idea was to
find some solicitor of standing who kept his account at the Bank of
England, to give him a retaining fee of L100 to act as my legal adviser,
telling him some fairy tales about establishing a branch firm in London,
and engage him, as soon as we started, to devote all his time to our
business at a fat salary. But there were many objections to having a
lawyer to introduce me, they being wide awake and liable to scrutinize
too closely. If one should depart so far from his policy of caution as
to introduce a new client he might after the introduction easily notify
the bank that I was a stranger to him and perhaps advise them to
investigate, and investigation was the one thing I must avoid. Of
course, one is supposed to give reference, even if introduced. Although
I had no acquaintance with this bank's methods, yet I was confident that
all those at the top must be a stupid lot of red-tape sticklers, and I
resolved to do my business with them alone. I was pretty sure that the
routine of an introduction once well over, so as to give me access to
the officials, they could be easily satisfied and made to help on the
fraud, in place of being obstacles. The result proved my surmise
correct, for such a lot of self-sufficient barnacles no institution in
the world was ever burdened with.

The dry rot of officialism permeated the bank through and through; even
the bank solicitors, the Messrs. Freshfields, were merely "highly
respectable," and sometimes when that term is applied in England it
indicates mediocrity. The Freshfields managed to spend four hundred and
fifty thousand dollars of the bank's money in our prosecution. That fact
alone would have ruined the reputation of any law firm in America, but
the ring of toadies who control that close corporation called the
Benchers of the Inn was loud in its praise of this firm for the extreme
ability shown in working up the case for the bank.

I finally made up my mind to find some old established shopkeeper who
kept an account at the bank, and secure an introduction through him.

I determined to carry out the plan at once. The thing was first of all
to find my man; so at 2 o'clock that afternoon I stationed myself near
the bank to watch depositors coming out and then follow them. Four out
of five depositors when they take money to the bank come out examining
their passbooks. That afternoon I followed several; of these I selected
three; one was an optician and electrician, an old-established firm,
doing a large business. Another was an East India importing house. The
third was Green & Son, tailors.

The next day I went to the optician and purchased an expensive opera
glass, and had him engrave on it "To Lady Mary, from Her Friend," and
paid him for it with a L100 note; then I went to the East India firm and
bought a costly white silk shawl and a lap robe fit for a prince, and
looked at a camel's hair shawl at one hundred guineas.

I had brought from America with me a Western hat, and as I had resolved
to play the Silver King, I wore it when going around among the
tradesmen. The English had, and still have, absurd ideas concerning that
desirable article, "The American Silver King." The stage article they
take for the genuine, and devoutly believe that the pavements are thick
with them in America, all marching around with rolls of thousand-dollar
bills in their pockets, which they throw out to bootblacks and
bartenders.

Therefore, I resolved to play this role. After my purchase of the shawl
and robe, I drove in my brougham up to Green & Son, and entered, smoking
a cigar, and with my big hat pulled well down over my eyes. Soon as I
saw the elder Green I felt I had my man. Certainly I had hit well, for
the firm (fathers and sons) had been depositors in the Bank of England
for near a century, and had considerable wealth; but, English fashion,
stuck steadily to business. This is a firm of ultra-fashionable tailors,
that, like the historic Poole next door, charge for their reputation
more than for the fit of their garments.

One of the firm and an attendant flew to wait upon me, but, paying no
attention to them, I started on a slow march around the establishment,
examining the array of cloths, they following at my heels. I went down
one side and returned on the other to the door. Arriving there I halted
and, pointing first at one roll of cloth and then another, said: "One
suit from this, three suits from that, two from that, a topcoat from
that, another from that, another suit from that, one from that. Now,
show me some dressing gowns." The first shown was twenty guineas. I
instantly said that would do. One may be certain the tailor and his
assistant flew around, one to measure and the other to write the
measurements of this American sheep that Providence had led astray into
their shop. When asked my name and address, I gave F. A. Warren, Golden
Cross Hotel, and then, for fear I might forget my name, I made a
memorandum of it and placed it in my vest pocket. They bowed me out,
evidently greatly impressed with my taciturnity, and especially my big
hat, confident also that they had hooked a fortune in a genuine American
silver king. I entered the brougham and drove directly to the Golden
Cross Hotel, Charing Cross, and there registering "F. A. Warren" and
securing a room I left for my hotel. This room at the Golden Cross I
kept for a whole year, but never slept there. It was the only address
the Bank of England ever had of their distinguished customer, Mr.
Frederic Albert Warren.

I did not trouble any more about the other two store people, but looked
about the town, amusing myself. In due time I called and tried the
garments on, and, when ready to deliver, I left the cash with the hotel
people with orders to pay the bill, which was done. There the matter
rested for ten days, when I drove up again, and, remaining in my
carriage, the head of the firm came out to me and I remarked: "I must
have more garments; duplicate that order," and drove off.

A week after I called to have them tried on, and then said that as I was
going to Ireland for a few days' shooting with Lord Clancarty, I would
send down a portmanteau for the garments and call for it on my way from
the hotel to the station. So I bought the most expensive trunk I could
find and sent it to the tailor. When the day came for me to call I
provided myself with six L500 bank notes, five L100 and about fifty L5
notes to go on the bottom of the roll. Before leaving my hotel I had a
large trunk put on the cab, and then taking inside of it all the
dressing bags, rugs, silk umbrellas and canes in the whole party, I
drove to the tailor's, paid my bill with a L500 note and had the
portmanteau put on the cab. I turned to go, but, halting at the door, I
remarked quite in a casual manner: "By the way, Mr. Green, I have more
money than I care to carry loose in my vest pocket to Ireland; I think I
will leave it with you." He replied, "Certainly, sir," and as I was
pulling the roll out of my vest pocket he said: "How much is it, sir?"
"Only L4,000; it may be L5,000;" to which he replied: "Oh, sir, I would
be afraid to take charge of so much; let me introduce you to my bank."
He ran for his hat, accompanied me to the Bank of England, and, calling
one of the sub-managers, introduced me as an American gentleman, Mr. F.
A. Warren, who desired to open an account. A check and a pass book were
brought and the signature book laid before me for my autograph, and I
was requested to sign my name in full, so I christened myself Frederic
Albert. I drove to the North Eastern station and telegraphed the boys at
Barcelona that the thing was done and they could, if they liked, curtail
their excursion and return to England at once.

So the first step had been taken and successfully. We talked of now
giving up all further idea of breaking the law, and starting in London
as brokers and promoters of stock companies. The plan was for me to take
the money of the firm, L10,000, place it all in the Bank of England, and
begin to buy and sell stock and keep my money moving in and out of the
bank. Then George and Mac were to start an office and launch out as
promoters and refer to Mr. Warren of the Bank of England. This would
place them on a footing at once, and I would gradually drop out of the
Bank of England after introducing George and Mac in their right names.
This was a grand plan, and had we only carried it out fortune would have
been ours, and honor as well, but we were too impatient of any delay in
securing wealth and overconfident of our success and cleverness. Above
all, we were anxious to get home again. But I have got somewhat ahead of
my story.

Soon after I had a telegram from George and Mac saying that they would
arrive in time for a late dinner, and for me to wait and dine with them.
At the time I was living at the Grosvenor Hotel, Victoria Station. We
had a pleasant meeting and a good dinner to celebrate it. I exhibited my
check book, and they were eager to know all details of my interviews,
not only at the bank, but with the tailor, and over the wine I related
with great spirit the details of the little comedy. I have to this very
day a vivid recollection of the shouts of laughter that arose from my
companions during the recital. We laughed then, but we did not laugh for
the next twenty years, neither did we partake of any sumptuous banquets.
In the world of crime success is failure, and perhaps never had the
absolute accuracy of that statement been so fully confirmed as in our
own lives.

That merriment of ours ended in anguish too deep for words. For twenty
years I never looked upon a star, nor saw the face of a woman or of a
child; that is to say, from my early years when the heart beats fast
and the blood runs warmly in the veins. That fearful gap of time was
filled to the brim with the peltings of a pitiless storm, hungry,
driven, toiling like a galley slave under the Summer's burning sun, or
thinly clad exposed to every blizzard and all the whirling storms of
Winter, until my early manhood had vanished and the best years of my
prime were all melted away, and at last I came forth from my dungeon,
but with the mark of suffering and desolation burned deep upon me, to
face a world of which I could not but be ignorant.

[Illustration: THE "SUGAR-LOAF" IN THE BAY OF RIO.]




CHAPTER XV.

PIRATICAL CRUISE IN TROPICAL SEAS.


The way to the bank vaults with their treasures had been laid open, but
there remained many matters of detail to be carried out before we could
enter them. There promised to be a delay of several months, but we were
impatient over the prospect of delay of even six months in securing the
fortunes we wanted, and which we had come to consider essential to our
happiness.

Our plan to ease the bank of a million or two of her forty million
sterling was, roughly stated, to borrow from day to day large sums upon
forged securities, the bad feature of the plan, from our point of view,
being the fact that the bank, as a matter of course, would retain these
documents, which could be produced at any future time to found a
criminal charge against us, provided justice ever had the opportunity to
weigh us in her balances.

Protected as we were by the police in New York, we felt that the chance
of our identity ever becoming known was remote. Still, there was an
element of chance we wanted to eliminate entirely. In our recent raid on
the bankers of France and Germany we never exhausted our letter of
credit, but had the amount of cash we drew indorsed upon it, and brought
the actual forged document away and instantly destroyed it. Had we been
arrested in Europe, no doubt, under the laws prevailing there, they
would have made us suffer upon the verbal statement of the banker; but
in America to convict one of forgery the document itself must be
produced in court.

I paid several visits to the bank, depositing and drawing out various
sums of money. I had talks with the sub-manager, and, on various
pretexts to get information, I interviewed bankers and money men in the
city. Finally, after many conferences, we came to the conclusion that
the boasted impregnability of the bank was imaginary, and that the
vanity and self-sufficiency of the officials would some day prove a
snare to the institution they ruled over.

The next conclusion we arrived at was that, easy as it might be to
defraud the bank, yet there was an infinity of detail which would
require six months of preparations to carry out. Then, again, the word
forgery began to look black in our vocabulary. We knew John Bull was an
obstinate fellow when he once got his back up, and we began to think it
wise to keep beyond his dull weather eye.

Finally, as the result of many debates, we resolved to abandon the Bank
of England matter temporarily, possibly forever, because it was too
dangerous, and the delay would be too great. Our new plan was to go to
South America on a buccaneering expedition. There being no cable in
1872, and it took, as we ascertained, forty days to send a letter from
Rio de Janeiro to Europe and get a reply; so that, if we executed an
operation boldly and well, we might hope for anything. We resolved to go
to South America, but to leave my account stand in the bank, and if our
success was as great as expected, we would let the Bank of England keep
the million or two we wanted, and continue her century-long slumber
until the time came when some adventurous but unscrupulous mind should
accept the temptation she held out to seize some of her bags of
sovereigns.

Our plan was, in the main, similar to the one we had lately used with so
much success in Germany and France. Only in this case we proposed to use
the credit of the London and Westminster Bank, and, therefore, obtained
the documents required to carry through such an operation successfully.

The steamer Lusitania of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company was
advertised to sail on the 12th, and we determined to go by her. Our plan
was to go on the same steamer, to be ever within supporting distance of
each other, and yet pretend to be strangers, or if associating together,
to act so as to make all observers think our acquaintance merely casual.

Mac had his tickets in the name of Gregory Morrison. He carried letters
of introduction to Maua & Co., who had branches in all the coast cities
down the coast, including Montevideo and Buenos Ayres on the east coast,
and Lima, Valparaiso and Callao on the west.

The steamers of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company, leaving Liverpool,
touch at Bordeaux, Santander and Lisbon, then are off 6,000 miles away
to Rio, never slowing the engines for a moment during the voyage. Two
days at Rio to discharge cargo and take in coal, then off again to
Montevideo, discharge cargo, and coal again, then away round the Horn,
and thousands of miles up the west coast, touching everywhere to land
mails and passengers; finally after 14,000 miles of sea travel they
reach Callao, then take the home track for Liverpool.

Modern buccaneers, indeed, were we, engaged in a nineteenth century
piratical descent upon the shores of South America. Instead of the
burly, much-beweaponed pirate of other years, we were mild-mannered,
soft-spoken, courteous youngsters, yet our steel pen and bottle of ink
were more deadly instruments or at least of surer fire and of better
aim, than the long toms and horse pistols of the piratical braves of the
seventeenth century. Our hopes of gain were high, and we counted on an
ample return for the trouble of our adventure. I say trouble, for danger
we feared none, so confident were we of our ability to carry off
everything with a high hand, and so complete was our faith in each
other that we had no anxiety as to the result, but simply regarded our
trip as a pleasant voyage into tropic seas--a happy change from the
March wind and sombre skies of England to the bright skies and balmy air
of the tropical world in the Winter months.

I had a balance in the bank of L2,335, and we, as a matter of policy,
wanted to have our capital ready at hand. The bank has a rule that a
depositor must never have less than L300 to his credit. My friends were
somewhat skeptical as to whether the bank did not regard their new
customer, F. A. Warren, with some suspicion and as a depositor to be
watched. My personal relations with the bank people convinced me
everything was all right, but to convince my friends I determined to
give them a proof that the bank would break their rule on my account.

The Monday before we sailed for Brazil I called at the bank and told the
sub-manager that I was going to St. Petersburg and on to Southern Russia
for a time to inspect some work I was doing there, and I purposed to
withdraw my account. He begged me not to do so, said many flattering
things to me, and urged that it would be convenient to have an open
account in London.

"Well," I said, looking at my passbook, "I see I have L2,335 to my
credit. I will leave the odd L35 with you." He instantly acquiesced. Had
he said: "No, you must leave at least L300, as our rules require," I
should have said "All right," and made it five hundred. I drew out the
L2,300 at once, intending to deposit L300 before leaving London, but in
the haste of our preparations I neglected it, and my balance at the bank
stood L35 for all the weeks I was on our piratical cruise to the Spanish
Main.

Storing most of our baggage in London, we took the train to Liverpool,
and, purchasing tickets for Rio, we went on board the good ship
Lusitania, but not the "good" ship, for her first trip, this being her
second, had won for her the name of being unlucky, and Liverpool
insurance men, no less than Liverpool sailors, do not bank on an unlucky
ship--their faith of ill luck following an unlucky ship has been
justified in thousands of instances, as it was in the case of the
Lusitania. But I am not going to relate the after history of the ship.

From the hour of our arrival in Liverpool we were outwardly strangers,
and during the voyage no one ever suspected that we were anything else.
We soon discovered we had a pleasant company of fellow voyagers, and as
we steamed out of the Mersey and headed southward we settled down to
have a good time. Boreas was friendly, and away we sped across the Bay
of Biscay, rapidly neared the mouth of the Garonne, on an estuary of
which is situated the old city of Bordeaux. Arriving there, the ship lay
at anchor for some hours, taking in and discharging freight, and
receiving emigrants for various parts of South America. When the steamer
was about to leave, it was a strange and rather comical sight to witness
the farewells and leave-takings from the crowds of friends who had come
to see them off. The customary performance appeared to me so peculiar
that I will describe it as well as I can after so many years: Two men
standing face to face, one clasps the other round the body, the other
passive, then leaning back lifts the party clear off the ground once,
twice or thrice, probably according to the degree of relationship or
amount of affection; then the operation is reversed, the embraced
becoming the embracer. In some cases the ceremonial is repeated the
second or third time, neither kissing nor crying being the fashion
there.

The next morning we were off the coast of Spain, watching the silvery
gleam from the ice-clad peaks of the Pyrenees--at least those of us who
were not engaged in the more disagreeable employment of discharging
their debt to Father Neptune. However, by the time the ship arrived at
the small port of Santander the passengers were mostly recovering from
the mal de mer occasioned by the rough water in the Bay of Biscay. While
leaving this tiny landlocked harbor, one of the propeller blades touched
the rocky bottom, and broke short off, but our ship continued her voyage
with undiminished speed, and within three days was steaming up the Tagus
to Lisbon. Here the passengers who wished to avail themselves of the
opportunity had a few hours on shore; then we were off for the long
diagonal run across the Atlantic.

"The Lady of the Lusitania," as she was called, because there was no
other lady among the saloon passengers, was the wife of a captain in the
British army, who was going out for a few months' hunting on the pampas
of Buenos Ayres, and, of course, accompanied by many dogs, with an
assortment of guns. There was also a chaplain in the British navy who
was going out to join his ship at Valparaiso. A strange character was
he; a big, burly man, about 28 years of age, the most inveterate
champagne drinker on board, and that is saying a good deal. Whenever he
met any of the "jolly" ones of the saloon passengers it was "Come, old
fellow, will you toss me for a bottle of fizz?" as he called his
favorite wine, and he had no lack of accepters. The majority in the
saloon consisted of a party of fifteen young Englishmen, civil
engineers, who were going under the leadership of a Swedish colonel to
survey, for the Brazilian Government, a railway line across the southern
part of Brazil, from the Atlantic to the Pacific. In all there were
twenty-five young men, full of frolic and fun, who made things rather
lively about the ship. They went in for everything from which any fun
could be extracted. At the equinoctial line they roped in the
"greenhorns" to look through the field glasses at the line, and having
fastened a hair across the field of view, of course, we could all see it
plainly. Father Neptune came on board and those of the crew who had
never crossed the Equator were hunted out of their hiding places,
dragged on deck, lathered with a whitewash brush dipped in old grease,
shaved with a lath-razor, and then tumbled unceremoniously backward into
a cask of water.

After a prosperous voyage of three weeks we arrived within sight of the
famous "Sugar Loaf," and were duly disembarked at the Custom House, our
baggage passed, and were off to our hotels, each going to a different
one, and each registering the name our letters of credit and
introduction bore. While in Rio we went by day in the parks or cafes,
and spent our evenings together, having a most enjoyable time.

This was our first experience of the tropics, and life under the Equator
proved as novel and as fascinating as it ever does to the inhabitant of
a cold climate. The show of tropical fruits in the markets was
magnificent, and, although strangers are warned not to partake of it,
yet our health was so good and our digestion so perfect that we
disregarded all warnings and gratified our palates without stint, with
no bad results following.

However, we felt after all that we were there on business; we wanted
plunder, in fact, and not pleasure, in Rio. Our pleasure lay in Europe
or America, there in the good time just ahead, when, as moneyed men, we
returned, and, surrounded by those nearest and dearest, we would enjoy
life to the full.

Mac was the grand swell of our party, and, wanting to excel us all in
his financial successes, was eager to go to the front. Accordingly, we
fixed everything so that he could everywhere strike the first and the
heaviest blow.

Of course, on our twenty-two days' voyage we had ample time for
discussion, and before we passed the Equator had settled on our plan.
First of all, it was agreed that one of the party should keep his neck
out of the noose, to stand by if either of the others came to grief.
Very much to my satisfaction, it was again decided that I was the man to
stand from under.

[Illustration: "AT 5 O'CLOCK ALL HANDS UP AND BREAKFAST READY."--Page
290.]

The firm of Maua in Rio was the most considerable in all South America,
and Mac's introductions were to this firm. The plan was for Mac to
present himself to Maua & Co., and to draw within twenty-four hours, at
least L10,000, so as to make sure of our expenses, and a day or two
before steamer day to arrange for a very large sum, twenty or thirty
thousand pounds. As soon as that was obtained, George was to go to the
Bank of London and Rio de Janeiro, and secure as much as he thought it
safe to ask for, five or ten thousand pounds. This would be paid in
Brazilian paper money, which I was to exchange for sovereigns. Then I
was to buy a ticket for myself on the steamer going south, take the gold
off and stow it away in my stateroom. At the last moment, in the bustle
and confusion of sailing, Mac and George were to slip into my stateroom,
conceal themselves and sail with the steamer, and when once out of the
harbor, to see the purser, explain that they had arranged with a friend
to purchase tickets; but, as he had not put in an appearance, they would
be obliged to pay a second time. We purposed to go down the east coast
and up the west to Lima. Visiting the cities as we went from Lima, we
would go to Panama, there catch the steamer to San Francisco, and after
a pleasant sojourn in California go overland to New York with a million.

This was our plan, but, as all the world knows, there is a vast
difference between making plans and carrying them into successful
execution.




CHAPTER XVI.

"SHOW ME YOUR LETTERS OF CREDIT."


Fate, Providence, call it what you will, seldom fails to upset
wrongdoing, making it rocky for the wrongdoer.

By an irony of fortune we carried with us that which was going to balk
all, or nearly all, our fine scheme.

In our letters of credit in some mysterious way the name of the
sub-manager of the London and Westminster Bank had been omitted,
although this was absolutely essential to the validity of the letters.
There was also another error, an error of such an extraordinary
nature--that of spelling "endorse" with a "c"--that it is enough to make
any man contemplating an unlawful act despair of success, since we could
be defeated by such mysterious and unforeseen accidents.

A few hours after our arrival Mac called at the bankers' and was well
received by the manager.

He told the manager his letters of credit ran from L5,000 to L20,000
each, and that he should want L10,000 the next day. Would they have it
ready?

The next day he went to the bank, George and myself being posted
outside. In ten minutes he reappeared with a square bundle under his
arm. He smiled as he passed us, and, turning a corner, entered a cafe,
where he joined us. His bundle contained L10,000 in Brazilian bank
notes. He assured us that everything was serene at the bank, that he
could have L100,000 if he wanted to ask for it.

I had already been to the three largest money brokers and arranged to
buy gold. So, leaving Mac and George, I got a sole leather bag we had
for the purpose, and, hiring a stalwart black porter, went to the
brokers. I bought sovereigns for the whole L10,000. It was ten bags with
one thousand pounds in each. The weight was 168 pounds. The black fellow
put it on his head, and followed me to my hotel, and found it a pretty
good load, too. So here we had one big fish landed, and confidently
counted on several more.

I related above how we had in some incomprehensible way omitted putting
on the letter of credit the sub-manager's name. How could we have
committed such a blunder? My answer is that this is only another example
of the unforeseen "something" ever happening to defeat any anticipated
benefit from ill-gotten gains.

The next day Mac went to the bankers again, and was requested by the
manager to show the letter of credit on which was indorsed the ten
thousand pounds he had drawn against it. Looking at the letter, the
manager said: "This is singular; there is only the name of Mr. Bradshaw,
the manager, on this letter; J. P. Shipp, the sub-manager's name, should
be on the credit as well." And then he went on to say that some time
since they had been notified by the London Bank that all letters issued
by them would bear two signatures.

Mac was a man of nerve, but it required all he had not to betray his
uneasiness. He said he really could not say how the omission had
occurred; he supposed it must have been accidental, but he would examine
his other letters as soon as he went back to the hotel.

The look of chagrin and vexation on Mac's face when he came out was a
sight to see, and one that is as vivid in my memory now as in that far
off day in 1872.

He went direct to the hotel, and there George and I soon joined him. We
sat down and looked at each other. The game apparently was up, and we
were a sorely disgusted party. We did not fall out with or reproach
each other, but felt we deserved a kicking. We did not ask each other
any questions, but I know our faces all wore a sadly puzzled look as we
repeated mentally, "How could we have made such an oversight?" But soon
another blunder--the misspelled word--was to crop up, that made this one
of the omitted name seem as a fly to an eagle.

Mac and I thought the game up, and were mentally planning for flight.
But George, being a man of extraordinary courage and resource as well,
declared we could and would retrieve the blunder. He declared a bold
step must be taken, that, as the bankers had only seen the one credit,
the name of Shipp, the sub-manager, must be instantly put on the others.
We had the genuine signature of J. P. Shipp on a draft, and Mac at once
sat down to write it on all the letters. It was a trying ordeal for him,
Mac's nerves having had a wrench. He was a temperate man, but under the
circumstances we advised him to take a glass of brandy to steady his
nerves. Then placing the genuine signature before him and the forged
letters, he began to put in the name. The signatures were not well
written, but under the trying circumstances they were wonderfully well
done. All this had taken place within half an hour after he had left the
bank.

It was a trying ordeal, but Mac was quite willing to do as George
advised. That was that he should take several of the letters and march
boldly into the bank and say: "Here are my letters; they are all right.
Both signatures are on all my letters but the one, and from that the
second signature has been in some way omitted." George's last word to
Mac was: "Rely upon us to extricate you from anything. Keep cool. Act up
to the character you have assumed. They can never fathom that the names
could have been written in so short a time. Boldly offer them more
exchange on London, and if there is any hesitation say you will transfer
your business to the English Bank of Rio at once."

[Illustration: "SURELY THE CLERKS IN THE BANK KNOW HOW TO SPELL."--Page
172.]

He started on his decisive errand, followed by us, in a miserable state
of anxiety. He was not long in the bank, but returned empty-handed. Upon
meeting at the designated place, he informed us the manager was
evidently agreeably surprised when shown the letters with both
signatures, and transferred the indorsement from the letter that had but
one signature to one with two. Once more we had matters all right, and
the broken place patched up again, but it behooved us not to do so any
more. But we did.

During our stay in Rio we saw much to interest us. The negro was very
much in evidence. Slavery was still the law of the land; all the toil
and burden-bearing falls to the poor slave's lot. One day we all three
took an early train and alighted at a small hamlet on the border of a
stream about thirty miles from Rio, beyond the ranges of mountains that
hem in the city. We managed to find some saddle mules and started to see
the country. We rode for some miles through a land covered with
moundlike hills, no sooner coming to the bottom of one than we were
ascending another. These hills are covered with coffee bushes filled
with red fruit, about the size of a cherry, each containing two kernels.
The coffee was being picked into large flat baskets by slaves, which,
when filled, they carried away on their heads to the drying grounds.

The roads were bordered with orange trees loaded with luscious fruit, to
which we helped ourselves. After a time we turned into a bridle path and
rode some miles through a dense forest. We emerged upon the outskirts of
a coffee plantation, where the slaves were just on their way to dinner,
and another half mile brought us to the planter's residence. Thirty or
forty slaves of both sexes and all ages were grouped upon the grass,
engaged in eating a black-looking stew out of metal dishes, their
fingers serving for knives, forks and spoons. Seeing three horsemen ride
out of the forest, they stared in stupid wonder, until one more
intelligent than the others went in search of the overseer. Presently a
white man appeared, and, in response to Mac's "Parlate Italiano," came
the smiling answer, "Si, Signor," proving, as we wagered he would be, a
native of beggarly, sunny Italy.

The overseer showed us over the place, and explained all the processes
of preparing coffee for the market. In one corner of a large, unpainted
building was what he called the infirmary, and a comfortless looking
place it was. He said there was no doctor employed, and that he dealt
out medicine to the slaves himself. After being served with coffee we
thanked him for our entertainment and returned to Rio by an evening
train.

The mail steamer Ebro was advertised to leave Rio for Liverpool on
Wednesday of the week following the exciting events narrated in the last
chapter. This was the mail that would carry the draft for L10,000 on the
London and Westminster Bank, along with a letter from the Rio bank,
stating that they had cashed Mr. Gregory Morrison's draft upon the
letter issued by them.

Twenty-two or three days after the steamer left Rio the London bank
would know their correspondents in Rio had been victimized, but 8,000
miles of blue water was between them, with no way to bridge it but by
steam; so we had at least forty-four days more to gather in our harvest.
I ought to say, apparently forty-four more days, for by an amazing
blunder we were about to bring a storm upon our heads.

The steamer we purposed to load our money on and ourselves, too, was the
Chimborazo, advertised to arrive on Tuesday and to leave for the River
Plate and the west coast the next day. So it was agreed that on Monday
Mac should go to the bank and arrange to cash his letters for twenty or
thirty thousand pounds, and go the next day for the money. As soon as
Mac came from the bank and announced that all was well, another of us
was to call at the Bank of London and Rio and the River Plate Bank,
present his letters of introduction and ask in each bank to have the
five thousand pounds or ten thousand pounds ready the next day. They
purposed to call about 11 o'clock, so as to give me time to exchange the
Brazilian bank notes for sovereigns, and to buy my ticket by the
Chimborazo, to secure my stateroom and to take the gold to the steamer,
and, above all, to get my passport vised by the police.

Monday came. We expected a nervous day, not such a paralyzingly nervous
one as it proved to be. In fact, a nervous Tuesday followed a nervous
Monday. My reader must remember that we were in the tropics, with a
blazing sun looking down on us with an intensity that made one long for
Greenland's icy mountains to cool us.

We went into the public park for our last consultation before our
fortune, which never came, was to come.

Mac had in the little morocco case in his pocket two letters each for
L20,000. Certainly no man in the world, save him, could have carried off
such a game played for such high stakes. Handsome in person, faultless
in address, cool in nerve, a master of all the languages spoken in
Rio--Portuguese, Spanish, Italian and French. Above all, he had a
boundless confidence in himself. What an honorable future might have
been his but for his youthful follies! Truly he could have achieved a
wonderful success in any honorable career. Unhappily for him, he, like
thousands of our brainiest youth, had entered the Primrose Way. In our
youthful fire and thoughtlessness we saw only the flowers and heard the
siren's song, but at last the Primrose Way led us down into a gloom
where all the flowers withered and the gay songs turned into dirges.

Looking at his watch Mac jumped up, saying: "It is 10.45 and time to be
off." So he started for the bank, we following at some distance, our
nerves all on the stretch. We felt that our lives and fortunes were
trembling in the balance. The minutes dragged like hours. While watching
we saw several persons enter or leave the bank, and still our friend
delayed his appearance.

To our suspicious minds there appeared to be strange movements about the
bank that boded ill for us. A thousand suspicions born of our fears came
and went through our minds, until at last, unable to endure the
suspense, I entered the bank myself, and stood there, pretending I was
waiting for some one. I sharply scrutinized every one and everything.
Mac was somewhere out of sight in the private offices. The clerks were
gossiping together, and that fact to me was suspicious. Then, to my
alarm, a bank clerk entered from the street with an eagle-eyed man, a
Hebrew, evidently, of about 45 years of age. Both passed hurriedly into
the private office, leaving me in an agony of suspense. My only relief
at that moment was the thought that George and myself had not as yet
compromised ourselves, and could, in the event of Mac's arrest, manage
to save him, either by bribery or a rescue.

Without appearing to do so, I watched that dingy, mottled door leading
into the private office until every crack and seam in it was
photographed indelibly on my brain.

In the trying periods of one's life, when the heart and soul are on the
rack, how strangely trifling details of the objects about one will be
noticed and remembered. It seems some cell of the brain, quite separate
from the cell of feeling and sensation, works calmly and steadily on,
photographing the material of one's surroundings.

I can never forget a flower worn by a lady guest at my table, when, in
the midst of enjoyment and surrounded by friends, the hand of the law in
the form of a burly detective was laid on me in Cuba. In all the misery
and humiliation of that scene I remember the peculiar color of the wood
of a cigar box standing on the sideboard. Doubtless each of my readers
will recall some similar phenomenon in his own life.

At last, unable to endure the suspense, above all, the uncertainty, I
went to the little door, and, opening it, looked in. To my intense
relief I saw Mac sitting there apparently talking unconcernedly with
Braga, the manager, and the Hebrew. As I had not attracted attention I
closed the door, went out in the street and gave George the pre-arranged
signal that all was well. Just then our partner appeared but with
telltale face. It was flushed with chagrin and vexation, and there was
gone from the contour of his body that indescribable port that tells,
better than words, of confidence and victory.

We went by different routes to our rendezvous, and I will leave it to
the imagination of my readers to picture our state of mind as we
listened to his recital of woe--the tale of Priam's Troy over again.

Mac had been cordially received by the manager, and had told him he
would require L20,000 the next day; would he please have it ready? The
manager replied that he did not require any more exchange on London, but
that he would send out for his broker, who would sell his bills on the
exchange. He (the manager) would indorse the bills of exchange and
indorse the amounts on his letters of credit. Of course, Mac could only
acquiesce, and Mr. Braga sent a clerk to his broker, Mr. Meyers, to come
around. This was the sharp-eyed Hebrew whom I saw enter.

The manager introduced Meyers to "Mr. Gregory Morrison," and explained
that he was to sell exchange for L20,000 on Morrison's credit, which the
bank would indorse. Meyers said: "Please show me your letters." Putting
his hand into his breast pocket and pulling out the little morocco case
containing the two letters, he handed the case and contents to Meyers,
who, probably without suspicion of anything being wrong, unrolled both
letters, and holding them in his hands, ran his sharp eyes down one of
them and read right through the body of the letter. They came to the
"note," which read: "All sums drawn against this credit please endorce
on the back, and notify the London and Westminster Bank at once." Here
he suddenly halted, turned his hawk's eye on Mac and said: "Why, sir,
here's the word indorse misspelled. Surely the clerks in the London
banks know how to spell!"

Here was a thunderbolt, indeed, that pierced poor Mr. Gregory Morrison
through and through, but he showed no sign. He coolly remarked that he
did not care to have his bills sold on the exchange, but would go and
see the people of the London and Rio and River Plate Banks, as they
probably would want exchange and would doubtless let him have what money
he required. Meyers said very sharply, "Have you letters to those
banks?" "I have," said Mac, at the same time producing two, one to each
bank, and each bearing the stamp of their respective banks.

That he had these letters was a happy thing, and no one under forty
days' time could say for a fact that they were not genuine. The dramatic
production of these letters lulled the fast gathering suspicions, and
would have called a halt had they purposed any serious action, for the
reason that during the forty days it would take to communicate with
London the credits could not be proved to be forgeries. That such
letters existed at all was due entirely to the foresight which had
provided to meet just such a contingency.

We all were for a brief few seconds utterly dumfounded, but quickly
aroused ourselves to the necessity of instant action to protect our
comrade. We saw that we must at once give over all thought of trying to
do any more business in Rio, and set all our inventions and energy at
work to save the L10,000 and to smuggle our companion safely out of Rio.
But how?




CHAPTER XVII.

ONCE MORE WE SAIL THE SEAS OVER.


Here in our country we know nothing of the annoyances and humbuggery of
the passport system, but now, as in 1872, every person desiring to leave
Brazil must be provided with a passport--if a foreigner, from his own
Government; if a native, one from the government of Brazil. When ready
to leave the country he must take his passport to police headquarters
and get it vised, at the same time notifying the police of the steamer
he proposes to sail on. Leaving the passport with the agent from whom he
buys his ticket, the latter, after ascertaining from the police that the
intending passenger is not wanted by the authorities, transmits the
passport to the purser of the steamer, who, in turn, hands it to the
passenger after the vessel is at sea.

It will be seen that these regulations make it difficult for a suspected
person to leave Brazil by the regular channels of communication, and
there are no back doors of escape in that country. Once in any seaport
town you must, if you leave at all, sail out of the harbor mouth, for in
the other direction, that is, inland, one is confronted by the mighty
tropical forests, the greater portion of which has never been looked
upon by the eye of man; and between all the seaports the same
impenetrable forest stretches.

So, straight out of the harbor between the Sugar Loaf and Fort Santa
Cruz Mac had to sail. How he should do so with safety was the problem we
had to solve. In this venture it would not do to have any blunders.
Without doubt the steamers would be watched for him, and instant arrest
and incarceration in the deadly tropical prison would be his lot if
discovered in the attempt to slip out of the country.

To complicate the matter here it was Monday, and no steamer to sail
until Wednesday, so there were forty-eight hours of frightful anxiety
ahead of us.

The Ebro, going to Europe, was in the harbor taking in cargo and coal.
The Chimborazo, going South, was not yet signaled, and we determined at
all hazards to get him off by the Ebro. We all had American passports,
and by the use of chemicals could alter the names and descriptions on
them at will.

Of course, the names in our passports were the same as we had in our
letters. George went to police headquarters, and giving a douceur to an
attendant, had the "vise" put on his passport at once. Then going to the
passenger agent he bought a ticket to Liverpool by the Ebro, and by
paying ten guineas extra had a stateroom assigned to him alone. After
this he took a boat and went out to the steamer, carrying with him two
bags of oranges and stowed them away under the bottom berths.

To make the escape a success it was decided prudent for George as Wilson
to get the agent well acquainted with his face and appearance, so if the
question was asked, "Who is this Wilson?" the police would see by the
description it was not the man they were looking for. For the next forty
hours George made the agent very tired. At one time he would want to
know if he could not get some reduction in the passenger rate, or if the
Ebro was seaworthy, or if there was any danger of her engines breaking
down, etc., until the agent got not only to know "Mr Wilson," but wished
him at the bottom of the sea.

When George started for the police office he left Mac and me alone in
the park.

[Illustration: "POINTING TO THE GOLD, MAC SAID: BOYS HELP
YOURSELVES."--Page 244.]

It was absolutely essential that Mac should put in one more appearance
at the bank. It was an ordeal, but one he had to undergo. He even
dreaded to return to his hotel, but go he must; so, just before the bank
closed, he called in and casually informed the manager that he should
start the next morning for S. Romao, a town in the interior of Brazil,
to be absent a week. He was then to go to the Hotel d'Europe, pay his
bill, at the same time stating that he was to leave Rio by the 4 o'clock
train the next morning, for San Paulo. As Mac had two trunks and other
impedimenta befitting a man of his importance, it was necessary to take
a carriage to the station, which was nearly a mile distant. It would be
unsafe to go in a carriage belonging to the hotel; therefore, he was to
say that a friend would call for him. As it was still two hours to
sunset, I suggested that after he had arranged matters he should saunter
out, walk about the streets until dark, then return to the hotel and be
ready when George should call for him at 3 o'clock the next morning.

After these arrangements we separated, George and I following to
ascertain if he was being watched or shadowed by detectives. When he
entered the hotel we remained in view of the entrance. It was not long
before he reappeared and walked leisurely along the street. A few
seconds after we saw another man come out, cross the street, and go in
the same direction. I followed him, and was soon satisfied that he was
keeping Mac in view. This sort of double hunt was kept up until dusk,
when Mac returned to his hotel, unconscious that a moment later his
"shadow" entered the place also. Here was a complication, indeed, though
it was no more than we had anticipated among the possibilities; still, I
had indulged in the hope that the bank would rely entirely upon the
passport system, and take no further steps for a day or two, which was
all the time required to carry out our plan. Though Mac had good nerve,
it was already somewhat shaken, and surely the situation would have
unnerved most men. Therefore, fearing that the certain knowledge of
imminent danger might still further confuse him and cause some false
move, we determined to keep our discovery to ourselves.

George next proceeded to an obscure part of the town, and stopping at a
small but respectable looking tavern, he engaged a room for the next
day, also a carriage, with an English-speaking driver, to be in
readiness at 3 o'clock the next morning. Promptly at the hour he was at
the livery stable, where he found the carriage ready, and was driven to
the Hotel d'Europe. Sending the driver up to the office on the second
floor, Mac soon appeared and informed him that he had promised to take
to the station a man who was stopping at the hotel. "He is going to S.
Romao by the same train," continued Mac, "and seems a good fellow, for I
had a long talk with him last night." Upon seeing signs of disapproval
in my face, he explained: "Well, you know, he said he could not get a
carriage at so early an hour in the morning, and I thought it could do
no harm to take him in, and he is waiting upstairs."

Here I joined them, and it would be difficult for the reader to imagine
the effect of this surprising communication upon our minds, for it was
clear enough that this was the very person who had been "shadowing" Mac
the day before, and had skillfully ingratiated himself into his new
friend's confidence. I could but admire his nerve in asking a
contemplated victim for a ride to the station. I said to Mac: "What in
the world can you be thinking of? Don't you see you are blocking our
whole plan? Go up and tell him your carriage is loaded down with
luggage, and express your regrets that you cannot accommodate him."

During this time the baggage was being placed in the carriage, and as
soon as Mac had dismissed his "passenger," who for some reason did not
show himself, we started rapidly for the station. On the way I requested
him to avoid making any new friends until he should find himself well
out at sea. I said:

"It might be fatal to attract the attention of any one, or to let any
one see you leave the train. Of course, this new acquaintance of yours
is only a countryman, but it is not possible to foresee what disaster
the least mistake or want of caution might originate. These cars are on
the English system, divided into compartments. You must go into the
station, stand near the ticket office until your new acquaintance comes,
then observe if he buys a first-class; if so, you take a second, and
vice versa. Pay no attention to him, and let him see you get into your
compartment, but keep an eye on his movements. In case he comes to get
in where you are, despite the different class of the tickets, tell him
the compartment is engaged. Everything depends on how you carry yourself
through the next twenty minutes. A single false step, a word too little
or too much, will surely prove fatal to all, for if anything happens to
you, we remain in Brazil."

In accordance with our pre-arranged plan, I stopped the carriage
opposite the station, it being still dark. Mac alighted, went straight
inside, and in a few minutes saw his "passenger" come puffing in, nearly
out of breath. Unquestionably supposing Mac's baggage to be already on
the train, he purchased a ticket, and after seeing his intended victim
enter a compartment, got into another himself just as the train began to
move. This was the vital moment for which Mac had been waiting, and,
quickly opening the door on the opposite side, he stepped off on that
side, hastily crossed to the other platform of the dimly lighted
station, and made his way unnoticed into the street. While this was
passing, I sat in the carriage, and it was not many minutes before I had
the satisfaction of seeing Mac coming back. But for the benefit of the
driver we then had a dialogue somewhat as follows:

"It is too bad. Our friends have not arrived. What shall we do?"

"Well, I suppose we must go back to the hotel and wait for the afternoon
train," I answered.

"But I have paid my bill there," said Mac, "and do not care to go back."

"Then," I replied, "meet me at the station, and I will look after the
luggage."

In case they recovered the trail, the information obtained from the
driver would cause confusion and delay sufficient, I hoped, to enable us
to get Mac out of Rio.

I then told the coachman to drive me into the city. It was not yet
daylight, but after a while I saw a sort of eating house and tavern
combined, and had the carriage halted there. Alighting, I entered and
said to the person in charge that I did not wish to disturb my friends
at so early an hour, and would pay him for taking care of my baggage, as
I wished to discharge the carriage. The offer was, of course, accepted,
the baggage housed and the carriage dismissed. In the mean time Mac was
waiting for us in an appointed place not far away, where I joined him,
and we went to the obscure tavern where the room had been engaged.
George was awaiting us.

So far our plan was successful. Mac was safely hidden away, while his
clever friend was speeding miles away on a wild goose chase. There was
only one train a day each way, and we knew the detective could not get
back to Rio until late. We felt certain that when he found Mac was not
on the train he would think his intended victim had slipped off at some
way station--possibly with a view of making his escape into the
interior; even if he sent a dispatch to the bank--an unlikely thing for
a Brazilian to do--it would doubtless be to the effect that his quarry
had left Rio on the early train that morning with him.

[Illustration: VIEW OF MONTEVIDEO.]

We passed some trying hours together. Then George left to take Mac's
baggage off to the steamer. He engaged two stalwart porters; they stand
on every corner busily engaged in plaiting straw for hats while
waiting for a job. Dividing the baggage between the two he had it
carried to the wharf, and, taking a small boat, quickly had it stowed in
the hold and the small articles carried to the stateroom. Soon after he
joined us on shore.

It was but 10 o'clock when he came, and it was with something like
dismay that we realized that the whole day was before us. Until the day
before, when Mac was in the bank, I had never known how long an hour
was, but this day we all came to know how long a day could be.

The Ebro was anchored out in the bay. Her coal was all stowed, but
strings of barges laden with sacks of coffee were alongside. She was
advertised to sail sharp at noon.

I went out once or twice to the bank and police headquarters, hanging
about for a few minutes to see if there was anything suspicious, but
there was nothing, and each time I hastened back to Mac.

Our presence cheered him up, and he could not brook our absence. At last
the long day drew to an end and the shadows, to our intense relief,
began to darken in our little room, where we were holding our watch. The
tropic night closes quickly in. Soon the city was shrouded in darkness,
and we sallied out to the beach at the head of the bay to find relief in
movement. The time passed quicker then, and at last we sat down on some
wreckage there and watched the tropic night as it revealed its wealth of
stars, and sitting there we began to philosophize, moralizing upon the
destiny of man and his relations to things seen and unseen, upon
spiritual force; most of all upon divine justice, which in the end evens
up all things. But like so many other philosophers who write the style
of the gods and make a pish at fortune, we failed to make a personal
application of our philosophy.

Near by there was a boat stand from which we had resolved to embark for
the steamer about two miles away. The night was lovely as a dream, and
we knew that midnight would find a large number of passengers on deck,
many of whom would pass the night there. Forward was all the bustle and
confusion inseparable from receiving and stowing cargo.

At 9 o'clock I left them to go and get the remainder of the gold not yet
on board--some four thousand pounds. The street cars passed near by, and
within half an hour I returned with the gold in a bag swung from my
shoulder by a heavy strap. I also had with me a woman's wrap and a silk
shawl. We sat for an hour longer, and then securing a boat with two
negro rowers, we pulled for the ship. Three or four small boats were
fastened to the companion ladder, and our arrival attracted no
attention. Two officials in uniform--probably custom officers--stood at
the companion way. It was an anxious moment, but we slipped through the
dimly lighted cabins and passages, and were soon safely in the
stateroom. Bidding both good-bye, and promising to be on board again at
8 in the morning, I went ashore and straight to bed, and soon was
dreaming of starlit seas, of tropic woods and Summer bowers, white and
sweet with May blossoms. My health then, as now, was perfect, and I
awoke fresh and hopeful. After breakfasting on a dish of prawns and
another of soft-shelled crabs, I was off across the bay. Soon after 8 I
knocked softly at the stateroom door, was admitted and presented the
lunch I had brought. They gave me a warm greeting, but neither had
slept. The room had been hot and stuffy, and the noise of stowing cargo
had helped to banish sleep. Both were unnerved somewhat, but I had just
come off shore confident and cheerful, and my confidence and spirits
proved infectious.

I knew by sight the chief of police and those just under him. I also
knew Braga, the bank manager, by sight. They, of course, did not know
me, and I could, unsuspected, be a looker-on in Vienna. Soon the
passengers, their friends and many idle visitors came off in boatloads,
while I, of course, scrutinized every boatload as it came up the side of
the ship.

At 9.30 I saw a boat coming, which, when half a mile away, I recognized
as containing the chief of police and several of his subordinates; ten
minutes after Braga and one of the bank officials came, the only
passengers in their boat, and at once joined the police on the after
deck and stood with them waiting and watching the boats as they arrived.
In the mean time babel reigned around the ship. About three score boats
surrounded her, the owners selling to the passengers everything from
oranges to monkeys, snakes and parrots.

I determined to conceal from George and Mac that Braga and the police
were on the ship, and about every twenty minutes I would slip down and
report "All's well;" but soon after 10 o'clock the enemy were joined by
the ticket agent from shore, and I could see they were contemplating
some movement. Slipping down to the cabin, I said: "Boys, everything is
all right; keep perfectly cool. Braga and the police are pulling to the
ship and may search it; if so, it will take half an hour to get here. I
will keep everything in my eye and give you ample notice." I then
returned on deck and stood among the officials. They conversed in
Portuguese, which was Greek to me; soon the agent dived below and
reappeared with the manifest of the passengers, and an enormous heap of
passports. After some conversation they sent the passports back; then,
headed by the agent and purser, manifest in hand, they began to verify
the list and scrutinize the passengers in the staterooms. Once more I
hurried below and reported.

Mac was naturally very dignified, but divesting himself of coat, vest
and dignity at the same time, he planted himself under the berth. Very
close and very hot quarters he found it, and we put the bags of oranges
in front, disposing of them so as to make it appear as if they filled
the whole space, when in reality they were a mere screen.

Then we opened the door to the fullest extent. We had taken off our
coats--it being frightfully hot--and with a bottle of claret and a bowl
of ice standing on the little washstand and two glasses all in full
view, we awaited the arrival of our friends, the enemy.

Our door was flat against the partition, giving a full sweep of the room
to the eye of the passerby, and George and I waited confidently for the
inspection we knew was inevitable. I sat on the foot of the lower berth,
smoking and swinging my feet. George sat on a folding camp-stool, with
his face toward the door, but not obstructing the view. Soon the
procession arrived, with the ticket agent in front. When he saw George
he at once recognized him as the Mr. Wilson who had bought the ticket,
and he simply said: "How do you do, Mr. Wilson?" and passed on without
looking in the room. Braga and the police followed, casually glanced at
us two, and were gone. I put on my coat and followed the procession, and
at 11.30 they went up on the after deck, evidently satisfied that their
man was not on the ship, and contented themselves with watching new
arrivals. I flew down, gave them the good news that the search was over,
and poor Mac, half-roasted, came from behind the bags of oranges.
Declaring he was roasted alive and dying of thirst, he finished the
bottle of iced claret.

Ten minutes before 12 the bell was rung and all people for shore were
warned to leave. Soon we heard the pleasant sound of the steam winch
lifting the anchor, and at noon precisely, to our relief, the screw
began to revolve at quarter speed, and the Ebro to respond by forging
slowly ahead. All boats fell off but ours and the police boat. At last,
after giving a good look up and down the bay, Braga and the police
entered the boats, and, casting off, soon were left behind. Once more
and for the last time I flew down to the cabin. They saw the good news
in my face; then, shaking Mac's hand in hearty farewell, we ran to the
upper deck, down the ladder into our boat, and a moment later the big
ship, putting on full steam, left us astern, we ordering the boatman to
pull hard after the ship. Mac soon appeared on the after deck, and waved
his handkerchief to us in farewell. We gave him three cheers, and,
excited and happy, with our long anxiety over, we returned to the shore.

With Mac sailing northward ho! with Wilson's passport and ticket in his
pocket, and all our money save two thousand pounds in his trunk, our
buccaneering expedition on the Spanish Main was over and all but a
failure when comparing the L10,000 we had captured with our magnificent
expectations.

Here was a gigantic and well-conceived scheme which had almost collapsed
through trifles, which, to an honest enterprise would have been light as
air, but which to us and to our plans were of crushing force, built up,
as all schemes of wrong doing are, on foundations of sand.

To conclude very briefly the narrative of this expedition, I will here
add that the day after Mac's departure, altering his passport to fit
George's description, we sailed on the Chimborazo south to Montevideo.
Upon our arrival we, with all other passengers for the town, were
promptly put in quarantine for ten days in a vile little island called
in irony the Isle of Flowers; but the mails were fumigated and sent
through, as were two additional mails arriving from Europe and Rio. When
our quarantine was over we were permitted to enter the city. We found
that some advice or rumor had reached there, and we feared to venture
our letters of credit for money. So, destroying all documents save our
passports, we paid a visit to Buenos Ayres, and then we embarked on a
French steamer for Marseilles, arriving there without any particular
adventure, and the next day had a happy meeting with Mac in Paris.




CHAPTER XVIII.

LITTLE FISHES WRIGGLING THROUGH GREEN WAVES.


Once more together and our adventures since we separated related, the
question arose: What next?

We determined to abandon our dangerous business, for we had capital
sufficient to start in an honest career, and resolved to do so. For a
long time our attention had been turned to Colorado, and we had
frequently talked over a project of going to some growing city there,
starting a bank and building a wheat elevator and stockyards. Fifty
thousand dollars would start our bank, and $10,000, with some credit,
the elevator and yards. This sum we had, with an additional $10,000 to
pay our way until profit came in from our investments. Here was another
great and honorable scheme--one easily carried out had we only gone on
with it. What a success we might have made, particularly so when
considered in the light of the development of Colorado since 1872 and
our energy and knowledge of business.

In Paris we all stopped at the Hotel Meurice, Rue Rivoli, and spent much
time sightseeing. We were particularly interested in viewing the
battlefields around Paris--so interested, in fact, that we read up the
whole history of the mighty struggle with Germany, which ended in
throwing France into the dust. We, like most of the world here, got our
ideas of the war and the battles from the current news of the day, as
published in the newspapers, and we had a general idea that the
Frenchmen had not made much of a fight. That conclusion could only be
arrived at by a superficial knowledge such as had been ours.
Investigation upon the spot and a study of impartial authorities soon
opened our eyes to the fact that France only succumbed after a mighty
and most heroic struggle. The first few weeks of the war saw her entire
regular army captive, and transported prisoners across the Rhine. That
army had made a brave but unfortunate fight. Badly commanded, with the
transport and subsistence utterly demoralized, they were no match for
the mighty hosts that Germany poured across the Rhine. Perfectly
equipped, matchless in discipline since the palmy days of Rome,
commanded by the foremost military intellects of the age, they met the
French, overmatching them at every point of contact; enveloping their
columns with masses of infantry, or sweeping them with murderous storms
of shot and shell, or launching a magnificent cavalry at them, against
which French valor--ill directed as it was--proved futile, and that
splendid array of 480,000 men had to ground their arms, surrender their
colors, and, to their own unspeakable shame and humiliation, become
captive to their foes, leaving their beloved France defenseless. But the
loss of their army, no more than their thronging foes, dismayed France.
The heart of the nation was stirred, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic,
from the Channel to the blue Mediterranean, France rose as one man. They
saw the entire military force of Germany encamped on their soil, and in
their undisciplined valor, hurled themselves against it, and gave to
their astounded foes an exhibition of Titanic force and determined valor
whose story, when known, will become the admiration of all generations
of men.

It was against the decree of Heaven that France should win in the
struggle, but she fell only to rise the higher for the fall. The year
1871 saw France in the dust, with the armies of her foe encamped over
more than half her soil, with robber-like demands for huge sums of gold
ere the modern Goths would march home again. To-day she stands the
marvel of the world. Twice the France of 1870, with the busy hum of
industry through all her borders, an overflowing treasury, a contented
people and an army and many which are the awe of Europe. To-day the
enemy that flung her to earth twenty-four years ago, seeks safety from
her attack in defensive alliances with all the nations of the Continent.

We resolved to see Europe before returning to America, so the next few
weeks were spent in a pleasure jaunt.

In the course of it we visited Vienna, remaining there some time and
bringing away many and pleasant memories of that music-loving old city
on the Danube. We finally all returned to Wiesbaden together and visited
the Casino, watching the play and players with an interest that never
flagged. Here we saw such vast sums of money ever changing hands that we
almost insensibly began to think the thousands we had were as nothing,
and when divided up, the sum coming to each seemed almost beggarly.

Gradually we began to speculate as to the desirability of doubling our
capital once or twice at least, before we threw up our hands and gave up
the game. I need hardly tell the reader that what at first was a
philosophical speculation, an airy theory of a possibility, rapidly
crystallized into steadfast purpose and determinate resolve, and soon
our brains were working, and readily brought forth a new scheme. For was
not there the Bank of England, with uncounted millions in her vaults,
and was not I, as Frederick Albert Warren, a customer of the bank, and
as such were not the vaults of the bank at our disposition?

We rated our powers high and fondly thought that, speaking in a general
way, honesty was the best policy, yet in our case there was an exception
to the rule. We felt and acknowledged we were doing wrong, but since the
wrong (apparently) profited us, we would do wrong that good might come
thereby.

Finally we resolved to go on with our postponed assault upon the money
bags of the Bank of England, at the same time evolving a plan that
seemed to promise unbounded wealth and complete immunity for us all.

So we packed our baggage, bade farewell to Wiesbaden, and one early June
morning in 1872 saw us all once more in smoky London, resolved to rouse
that Old Lady called the Bank of England from her century-long slumber
spent in dreaming of her impregnability.

In Frankfort there are several firms, Fischer by name, all bankers, and
as soon as we determined to return to London, Mac wrote a letter in
French to the Bank of England and signed it H. V. Fischer, which, of
course, would leave the manager to suppose his correspondent was one of
the Fischer bankers. In the letter he said his distinguished customer,
Mr. F. A. Warren, had written him from St Petersburg, requesting him to
transfer to his account in the Bank of England the small balance
remaining to his credit on his (Fischer's) books, therefore he had the
honor to inclose bills on London for L13,500, payable to the order of
the manager, said sum to be placed to the credit of Mr. F. A. Warren.

I took this letter to Frankfort, and, having purchased bills of exchange
on London to the amount named, inclosed them and mailed the letter. A
day or so after I received a letter at Frankfort from the manager of the
bank, acknowledging the receipts of the drafts, and announcing that the
proceeds of the same had duly been placed to the credit of F. A. Warren.
So I had over $67,000 to my credit, and had now been a depositor for
five months.

George took up his residence at a private house in the west end of
London, while Mac and I went to the Grosvenor Hotel.

This hotel was one of the very few then in England which were allowed by
the aristocrats of London society to be what they called highly
respectable, that is, exclusive, and, therefore, a fit dwelling place
for their dainty selves. In Dublin there is one of these highly
respectable hostels, the Gresham, on Sackville street. This hotel was a
type of all of the sort I mention. I once stopped at the Gresham for a
week and became one of the "nobility and gentry" that frequent these
hotels. The waiters all wore full-dress suits, faultless in cut and fit,
and the chief event in their daily existence, the serving of the table
d'hote, wore white kid gloves. The bewildering changes of varied colored
dishes (I mean crockery ware), was something to make one stare. Course
number one brought on a soup dish of pale violet color, quite a work of
art, but its contents was a watery compound with an artistic name.
Course number two consisted of a unique plate, light green in color,
with little fishes wriggling through green waves, but bearing on it a
small insipid portion of a genuine inhabitant of the deep; and so on,
course followed course, each on a different colored plate. If the dinner
was intended for an exhibition of crockery, each one of the seven I had
there was a success, but, however gratifying to the eye the dinners
might be, they were lamentable failures so far as stomach and appetite
were concerned; but when I came to pay my bill I found the white kid
gloves and the fancy china again; they were all in it, and many more
things as well. The bill was more than a foot long, filled with such
items as soap, sixpence; one envelope, one penny; one sheet note paper,
one penny; bath, two shillings; extra towels and soap for same,
sixpence, and so on through the line.

We found the Grosvenor another Gresham. However, as we wanted to stop at
a swell hotel, we concluded--so long as we were there--to remain; but
after a few days we found the cuisine "highly respectable;" that is, for
dinner one could get roast--either beef or mutton. As for vegetables, we
were strictly limited to turnips, cauliflowers, cabbage and potatoes,
and, for dessert, the famous apple tart of England, more deadly even
than our mince pie.

[Illustration: SOME NATIVES I MET IN TAWNY, SPAIN.--Page 290.]

The proprietor of a certain popular restaurant in New York has a fad for
hanging elaborately got-up Scripture texts--exhortations mostly--around
the walls of his restaurant. Interspersed with these are advertisements
of his eatables--also exhortations--such as, "Try our buckwheat cakes,
10 cents;" "Try our doughnuts and coffee;" between the two exhortations,
a third bidding one flee from the wrath to come; but the most fetching
of all are two companion cards. On the one is the legend, "Try our hot
mince pie;" on the other is displayed the apropos warning, "Prepare to
meet thy God."

So we resolved to sleep at the Grosvenor, but to avoid the apple tart.
We soon discovered a good restaurant near by, where we dined, and, as I
am on the subject of dining, I will finish this chapter with a little
narrative, the moral of which I will leave my readers to find: We were
now settled down in London, prepared to devote all our attention to that
Old Lady--The B. of E.--and, in accordance with a habit of ours, we
began to look for some safe place--hotel, cafe or restaurant--where we
could meet, run in at any time for consultation, or to write notes.
Three things were requisite--nearness to the money centre of the city, a
room where we could be secluded from people coming and going, and a
proprietor clever enough not to be inquisitive, with a genius for
minding his own business. A man who has a genius for that thing always
carries it in his face, just as his opposite--the busybody--carries
the traces of his restless inquisitiveness in the face and manner.

That same day we discovered, in a small street leading off Finsbury, a
shop with a sign over the door bearing the legend: "Licensed to sell
spirits and caterer." It had canned and potted meats, along with bottles
of wine, in the window, but was evidently fast going to seed. We pushed
our way in and found a bright, fresh-looking young Englishman,
evidently a countryman, but intelligent and civil, much like a
gamekeeper. We knew at once we had our place and man.

After some weeks we observed, now and then, a couple of sharp-looking
customers hanging about the place.

We feared being watched, and began to think it time to change, so
suddenly ceased calling at mine host's snuggery and took up new quarters
in a private house not far away. About two months later I happened to be
near and called. He received me warmly, and told me we had saved him
from bankruptcy. He had been a gamekeeper on a nobleman's estate, and
his wife had been a housemaid there. They married against the wishes of
their master, but they had five hundred pounds, and, coming to London,
started business on that. Custom was poor, and soon they were at the end
of their rope, when, happily for them, we came along and spent money
enough in his place to set him on his feet again.

[Illustration: BANK OF ENGLAND BULLION VAULTS.]




CHAPTER XIX.

WITH NO REGRETS, WITH NO TORTURING REMORSE.


Although I had the very respectable balance of $67,000 at the bank, I
had not as yet, since my arrival in London, paid it a visit. This was in
pursuance of our plans. So far I had only done business with the
supernumeraries, and none of the people at the top had ever even heard
of me. But we determined that they should not long remain in ignorance
of the great American contractor, F. A. Warren.

Three months had elapsed since our departure from London on our
piratical tour to the Spanish Main. In all nearly five months had
elapsed since Green had introduced me to the Old Lady whose impregnable
vaults we had now at last determined to loot. That in itself was a
favorable circumstance, as it would give me a chance to flourish in a
grandly indefinite way to the effect that I had "for some time" been a
customer of the bank, and none of the officials would probably take the
trouble to ascertain how very brief, in fact, my acquaintance had been.

I left London by the night mail from Victoria Station for Paris, the
first of many hurried trips I took to the Continent on the business we
had entered upon. Truly, we worked hard, spent money lavishly, brought
all our power and genius to work--for what? To have the lightning fall
on us.

Upon my arrival I drove at once to the Hotel Bristol, Place Vendome, a
swell hotel, where none but the great sirs o' the earth could afford to
stop.

Here I registered as F. A. Warren, London, and at once sent off the
following letter:

     P. M. Francis, Esq., Manager Bank of England, London.

     Dear Sir: I am a customer of the bank, therefore I take the liberty
     of troubling you in the hope to have the benefit of your advice.

     Will you kindly inform me what good 4 per cent. stocks are to be
     had in the market, also if the bank will transact the business for
     me? I remain very truly yours,

     F. A. WARREN.

By return mail came a letter wherein I was advised to invest in India 4
per cents or London Gas. I wrote an immediate order to have the bank
purchase ten thousand pounds of India stock and sent my check for that
amount, on his own bank, payable to the order of the manager. I received
the stock, instantly sold it, and replaced the money to my credit, and
the next day sent off an order for ten thousand pounds gas stock, and
repeated the operation until I had made the impression I wanted to make
on the mind of the manager, so that when I returned to London for my
decisive interview and sent in my card he would at once recognize the
name, F. A. Warren, as the multi-millionaire American who had been
sending him ten thousand pound checks from Paris.

All the time of my stay in France I had nothing to do but enjoy myself,
and I entered upon a systematic sightseeing in and around Paris. There
are some strange contrasts in that old town. One day I made one of a
coaching party to Fontainebleau, twenty-one miles from the city. Every
foot of the road there is classic ground, and I had assiduously studied
day by day the history of France. That Paris is France is nearly a
truth, and I had in my mind a tolerably clear view of the history of the
country and of the men who made its history. I was right there on the
scene of the history-making, and I found an intensity of interest in my
excursions such as I had never experienced before. The driver of the
coach was an Englishman by the name of Nunn. I mention this here, as he
eventually became my servant, and will appear again in the narrative.

To the Parisian hotel proprietor and shopkeeper the American visitor is
truly a providence. "Mine host" looks to him for loaves and fishes, and
is never deceived. The antics of our rich countrymen in Paris are
portentous in their amazing prodigality, and I fear we are the laughing
stock of the shopkeepers there.

At the Cafe Riche and Tortoni's I have seen extravagances in ordering
expensive wines and viands by my countrymen that made me regret that the
fools who were being served were not forced to toil for the mere
necessaries of existence. Certainly they were unworthy stewards of the
wealth heaven or the other place had bestowed on them by inheritance. I
remember one boy there throwing away in vice and dissipation the fortune
his father had through years of a long life spent toilsome hours in
accumulating. I sat at a table near him on several occasions, when,
after his banquet was half over, he used to reward the waiter with a
five-hundred franc note ($100), but the proprietor was ever close at
hand and would instantly despoil the garcon of his prize. He was
companioned by a member of the demi-monde, who, when arrayed in male
attire, as she was nightly, would cut up enough monkey tricks in one
night at the Valentino or Mabille to have made the fortunes of all our
comic paper artists had they been on the spot to catch her antics with a
kodak and then lay them before an admiring public.

The fortune this boy had inherited was unfortunately too vast and too
well-invested by his overfond and madly foolish father for the son to
run through it entirely. A very few years left him an imbecile in body
and mind, to become the prey of a parcel of sharks who, dressing in
purple and fine linen and faring sumptuously every day, held him in a
state of abject slavery and fear. One day, aboard his own yacht, off
Naples, they married him to a notorious woman. Under the guardianship of
his wife and her villain paramour he wandered like a spectre amid the
scene of his former riot.

For long at Monte Carlo he lingered like a ghost, and at last died in
Florence. The American colony attended his funeral in a body, while his
widow, dissolved in tears, refused to be comforted. Although many dark
stories were whispered, the Americans there forgave her all, for her
grief and sorrow were so overpoweringly evident that it would have
seemed a crime to doubt her tender love for the departed. After having
the body embalmed, she embarked with her dead love for America, and
to-day his ashes rest in that mighty city of the dead, Greenwood, under
a Greek cross of white marble, bearing the date of birth and death. I
went to see it last Easter week. The grave was strewn with flowers, and
the pedestal bears this inscription:

  "Too good for this world,
  The angels bore him to heaven,
  Leaving his heartbroken wife
  To mourn her unspeakable loss."

Unopposed she succeeded to her husband's estate. It was large then;
to-day it has grown to enormous proportions. She is not, but easily
might have been, one of the Four Hundred.

At Saratoga last August I saw her sitting on the balcony of the United
States Hotel--fat, wrinkled, vulgar-looking, covered with diamonds.
Nemesis appears to have postponed her visit to the lady. Her life from
her own standpoint has been a tremendous success. She has been
philosopher enough to appreciate what an immense factor mere eating and
drinking is in the sum of human enjoyment. Born with a cold heart, a
constitution of iron, and the digestion of an ostrich, happily for her
peace of mind she was absolutely without imagination.

[Illustration: "IN MY DREAM I WAS ON A SHORELESS SEA."--Page 286.]

To fill the sum of human happiness (from her own standpoint) she only
required one other thing, a good bank account, and that, she said,
heaven had put in her way, so her life has been filled full of joy, and
of the only sort she cared for or could appreciate. In her early years,
when her passions were strong, lover and paramour followed in rapid
succession. When her blood grew cold she found her delight in the
pleasures of the table, and keeping the same cook, who was an expert,
for twenty years, and exercising freely, 1894 found her at 60 with a
strong pulse, a perfect digestion and a keen enjoyment of sport, racing
in particular, and, on the whole, enjoying life as well as any woman in
the universe, with no regrets, no torturing remorse, but with a serene
faith that when done with this world she--never having done anything
very bad here--will have a pretty good time in the world to come.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO BULLION VAULTS, BANK OF ENGLAND.]




CHAPTER XX.

DETAILS NECESSARY, IF TEDIOUS.


After the events narrated in the last chapter, I returned to London. I
arrived early in the morning, and, meeting my companions, we had a long
and anxious talk over my near-approaching and all-important interview
with that great Sir of the London world, the manager of the Bank of
England. Happy for us if in that interview the manager had asked for the
customary references, or had used ordinary business precaution and
investigated me, or, indeed, had acted as any ordinary business man
would have done under ordinary circumstances. Our own conclusions were
that the fact that I was already a depositor, together with the
impression made by the letters and my L10,000 checks, would put the
thing through. Yet we, of course, felt that a thousand things could
arise to block our way effectually. A look, a word too much, a shadow,
or a smile in my face might ruin all; but still, after providing so far
as possible for every contingency, after planning what was to be said or
left unsaid at the interview, after my companions filling me full of
advice, we felt after all that everything must be left to my discretion,
to say and to act as I thought best under the circumstances.

This council of war was held in my room in the Grosvenor. I had arrived
from Paris at 6 o'clock. Mac and I breakfasted together at 8. George
joined us at 9, and we talked until 10, then we set out together for the
bank. Arriving there, they remained outside, watching for my
reappearance. Entering the bank, I sent in my card (F. A. Warren) by a
liveried flunkey, and was immediately ushered into the manager's parlor.
He has long since gone over to the majority, so here I will not so much
as name or describe him. Sufficient to say, that as soon as I set eyes
upon him I thought that we would have no particular difficulty in
carrying out our plans, save only so far as details went.

The manager, who had been told that I was a railroad contractor,
expressed himself highly gratified to have me do my business through the
bank, and said they would do all in their power to accommodate me. I
told him that, of course, I was financing large sums, and would require
more or less discounts before the year was out. Then I came away, and
meeting my two friends outside of the bank, in answer to their eager
inquiries as to what had transpired, I told them that, so far as the
bank officials were concerned, our way to the vaults of the bank was
wide open.

So ended the last scene of Act I.

The next day I went to the Continental Bank, in Lombard street, and
bought sight exchange on Paris for 200,000 francs, paying for it by a
check on the Bank of England. I was given a note of identification to
the Paris agent of the bank.

That night I left Victoria Station for Paris. At 10 the next morning I
had my money, and, going to the Place de la Bourse, near the Exchange, I
commissioned a broker, who was a member of the Exchange, to purchase
bills on London for L8,000. I cautioned him to buy bills drawn only on
well-known banking houses. About 3 o'clock he had the bills ready. I
paid him the amount, along with his commission, and, examining the
paper, found that he had purchased for me about what I wanted.

I will explain, for the benefit of any reader not conversant with
financial transactions, that if John Russell, cotton broker in Savannah,
ships a thousand bales of cotton to a firm in Manchester, England, the
firm in Manchester authorizes him to draw a bill of exchange on their
firm, payable at some London bank at three or six months' time, for the
value of the cotton. We will say the price is L10,000. Russell draws ten
bills for L1,000 each, say payable at the Union Bank of London. He gives
these bills to a money broker in Savannah, who sells them on the
Exchange and gets for them whatever the rate of exchange may then be on
London. The president of the Georgia Central Railroad may have ordered a
thousand tons of steel rail in England for his road, and to pay for them
he orders a broker to buy for him bills on London to the amount of the
cost of the rails. He purchases the Russell bills, and these bills of
exchange he sends in payment to the steel rail manufacturers in England,
so, as a matter of fact, the president of the Georgia Central pays
Russell for his thousand bales of cotton, but has the bills of exchange.
So, in place of L10,000 in gold being freighted twice across the ocean,
the ten pieces of paper cross only once. These ten bills for L1,000
each, drawn on the Union Bank of London at six months, in due time are
presented, duly accepted and paid at maturity by the bank.

Instead of commercial notes or bills they are now known as acceptances,
and are just as good as a bank note. Therefore, if the owner--no matter
who it is--wants the money at once, any bank will discount all or either
for the face value less the interest. In every commercial centre of the
world these accepted bills are being discounted by banks and moneyed
corporations for enormous sums, but by no bank in the world in such huge
amounts as by the Bank of England. Their daily discounts run into the
millions.

What our plan was will be made clear later.

[Illustration: A BILL OF EXCHANGE.]

The evening of the day of my arrival in Paris found me on the express
speeding to Paris. Two hours past midnight I was on the miserable little
passenger steamer that plies across the chopping channel, and which I
suppose has seen more of human misery than all the fleets that sail the
Atlantic, for the channel has stronger counter currents, and wind,
tide and currents seem ever to be in violent opposition, and here

  "E'er across the main doth float
    A sad and solemn swell,
  The wild, fantastic, fitful note
    Of Triton's breathing shell."

And Triton (old Neptune's t'other name) makes all passers over this part
of his realm pay ample tribute for "his fantastic, fitful notes."

The Paris night express lands one at early dawn in London, nearly always
weak on the legs, however. I breakfasted with Mac, and after that took
the bills to the various banks on which they were drawn, and leaving
them for their acceptance, I called again the next day and received them
back, bearing across the face, the magic words:

  "London, Aug. 14, 1872.

  "Accepted for the Union Bank of London.

  "E. Barclay, Manager.

  "J. Wayland, Assistant Manager."

Then I hurried to the Grosvenor, and we all looked at them with
curiosity, for it was upon the imitation of just such acceptances that
our whole plan was based. I intended to present this and many more
batches of genuine bills for discount at the bank until the officials
should become accustomed to discounting for me. In the mean time, as
fast as I got genuine acceptances and bills, we kept on making
imitations of them for future use, only leaving out the date until such
time as we should be ready to put them in for discount. Of course, the
success or failure of our whole plan turned upon this point. Is it the
custom of the Bank of England (in 1873) to send acceptances offered for
discount to the acceptors for verification of signatures?

This is always done in America, and had this very requisite precaution
been used by the Bank of England our plan would have been fruitless and
we should have been a few thousands out of pocket; but, if not, then we
could throw into the hopper enough acceptances of home manufacture so
that through the red tape routine of the bank millions of sovereigns
would be ground out into our pockets.

Taking my deposit book and the genuine bills, I went to the bank and
left the bills for discount. This was at once done and the amount placed
to my credit. I drew L10,000, and that night found me once more one of
500 unfortunates paying tribute to Neptune. This time I landed at Ostend
and took the train for Amsterdam. There I repeated the Paris operation,
securing L10,000 in genuine bills. I returned to London, and as before
left them for acceptance. Then my companion manufactured a lot of
imitations and put them away with those previously manufactured, to be
all ready when the day came to use them. The genuine bills were then
discounted. Again and again I went to the Continent, repeating the
operation, until at last my credit at the bank was firm as a rock, and
we were ready to reap our harvest. But these operations, simple as they
seem, lasted over a period of six months, and had been made at heavy
cost. Our ordinary living expenses were not less than $25 a day for the
three, while our extraordinary expenses were enormous. I probably
traveled 10,000 miles over the Continent in my bill-buying expeditions
to Paris, Amsterdam, Frankfort and Vienna.

Another source of expense was the commissions paid to brokers for buying
bills on the exchange. Then we had many expenses purely personal, and,
enormous as it seems, the sum total from the day of our return from
Brazil until the day of our operations against the bank began to bring
us in cash were quite $500 a week, so that we had invested $15,000 in
preparation, not to speak of our hard work--and it was hard work, and
trying, too, for there were a multitude of details to be worked out.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE EGYPTIANS PASS OVER THE RED SEA AND THE HEBREWS ARE DROWNED THEREIN.


All the details of events leading through the long Summer and Autumn
days of 1872 up to the hour when the golden shower began to fall on us
are of intense, almost dramatic, interest. I will not, however, lengthen
the narrative by giving here any further account of them, but will
merely relate the story of the last five days before the actual
presentation of our home-brewed acceptances.

The bank had been discounting for weeks comparatively large sums for me.
Many thousand pounds of the genuine article discounted had matured and
been paid, and more thousands were still in the vaults, awaiting
maturity, and would fall due, while our home-manufactured bills would be
laid away in the vaults, there to remain for four or five months until
due. Of course a full month or two months before that we could pack our
baggage and be on the other side of the world; I on some hacienda in
Mexico, George and Mac at some fashionable resort in Florida. They soon
to knock at the gates of the Four Hundred, I to spend a year or two in
Mexico, playing "grand senor," until, under the skillful management of
our friends, Irving, Stanley and White, at Police Headquarters in New
York, the affair had blown over, and they invited me to return.

But, as the sequel will show, the reality took on a different complexion
from the ideal.

[Illustration: BOW STREET POLICE STATION.]

My credit at the bank was solid as a rock. That means I had gone through
the red-tape routine. It only behooved us to use circumspection enough
to avoid making mistakes in our papers, and fortune was ours. I knew
everything was all right, but George, being a thorough business man
himself, could not comprehend that it could be quite right, and he
insisted upon one supreme test. Any single bill of exchange is seldom
drawn for more than L1,000, rarely for L2,000, and one of L6,000 is
almost unheard of. If a party in Bombay wanted exchange on London for
L100,000, his broker would probably furnish him with one hundred bills
for L1,000 each. But George had made up his mind that as a test, and to
make an impression upon the bank manager, I should go to Paris and get a
bill on London from Rothschilds drawn to the order of F. A. Warren
direct. Could this be done it would, of course, make it appear that I
had intimate relations with the Rothschilds, and as a minor
consideration we could use the Rothschild acceptance--a pretty nervy
thing to do, as Sir Anthony de Rothschild, the head of the London house,
whose name we proposed to offer, was a director of the Bank of England,
and would have to pass his own paper for discount--that is, paper
bearing his name, manufactured by ourselves.

We tried to talk George out of this notion, which Mac and I regarded as
a freak, unnecessary in the first place, and impossible anyhow. But he
was persistent, and I had to start out and try. I expected an expense of
$1,000 and a delay of two weeks, but fortune or the devil favored us.
So, purchasing at the exchange broker's in London 200,000 francs in
French paper money, once more I left Victoria Station for Paris. Once
more, an unwilling victim, I heard the "wild, fantastic, fitful note of
Triton's breathing shell." At Calais I took my place in what the French
call a coupe; that is, the end compartment on a car, which, by paying
ten francs extra, you can occupy alone. It is unlike the other
compartments in that there are no arms dividing it into seats; so one
can lie full length on the cushion.

Before this night I speak of I had cherished a theory as to what I
should do in the event of an accident happening to any train whereon I
was a passenger. In such a case I proposed to catch on to some object
and hold on, leaving my body and limbs to swing freely. My theory ever
since that night has been that I will go just wherever the breaking
timbers and flying furniture send me. I had fallen into a sound sleep
before the train started, and was aroused from it to find myself hurled
about the compartment much as a stout boy would shake a mouse in a cage,
and quite as helpless.

Our train was off the track. My carriage was near the engine, and the
momentum of the long train forced the car in the rear of mine up on end,
and it appeared as if it would fall over and crush me. I thought my hour
had come, and I cried out, "At last!" There was no fear or terror in it,
but merely the thought that after many months of almost incessant
travel, and necessarily of peril, "at last" my fate had come. It had
not. How good heaven would have been if it had sent me to my doom then
and there!

The accident had occurred at Marquise, a small town sixteen miles from
Calais and four from Boulogne, the first stopping place of the express.
It was a very long train, but the carriages were all empty except two. A
heavy excursion train had left Paris, and the cars were going back
empty. What lessened the number of passengers was the fact that it was
Sunday night. The English do not travel on Sundays as a rule. So,
fortunately, a great loss of life was prevented. However, two were
killed and half of the remaining passengers injured. My own injuries
were slight and consisted of trifling cuts on the face and hands from
flying glass. But, far worse than that, I had received a nervous shock,
which took some weeks to wear off, and during the rest of my journey to
Paris and return to London I was as nervous as a timid woman. I stayed
at Marquise until noon, when the express passing at that hour made a
special stop to pick me up.

In our glorious and free country the killing or mangling of a few
persons more or less is of no particular concern to any one beyond the
friends of the victims, least of all to the railway magnate or to his
servant. But in France an accident which results even in the wounding of
a passenger is a very serious matter to the road where it occurs and to
its officials. They always hasten to take the fullest responsibility,
and if attention or the more solid matter--cash--can comfort the
sufferer, he will have no occasion to mourn long. If one life be
lost--even a servant of the road--a strict judicial inquiry takes place
upon the scene of the accident, by a high official of the State, advised
by experts, not as in this country, by some drunken country loafer or
ward heeler, who, all ignorant of the law, has been "elected" county
coroner, and one who is more anxious to procure free passes on the road
than he is concerned for the victim murdered by the neglect or parsimony
of inefficient railway officials.

The road from Paris to Calais is known as the Chemin de Fer du Nord, and
Baron Alphonse de Rothschild, head of the Paris Rothschilds, is the
president of the road. This fact occurred to me within a few minutes of
the accident, and I thought I might make use of the affair as a means to
help me in my business at Paris. I arrived about dark, went to the Grand
Hotel, and to bed at once. My nerves were so shaken that I was timid,
even when in the elevator, but I slept well and awoke at daylight
feeling better.

At 10 o'clock, limping badly and leaning on a cane, I entered a carriage
and drove to the Maison Rothschild, Rue Lafitte. The banking house might
well be called a palace. The various offices open upon a courtyard,
while the whole architecture of the building would suggest the residence
of an officer of State or nobleman rather than a building devoted to
finance. But the currents which centre there are potent and
far-reaching, and come richly laden with tribute from the four quarters
of the world. To win that tribute slaves toil, and, toiling, die, in
Brazilian diamond mines, and thousands of coolies, entrapped by agents
in China and India, enter into perfidious contracts which commit them to
hopeless slavery and send them to wear out their lives in despairing
toil amid the pungent and murderous ammoniacal fumes of the guano
islands of Chili and Peru. The Rothschilds, too, own the Almaden
quicksilver mine and others.

They control the quicksilver industries of the world, and to swell their
abnormal hoard, portentous in its vastness, other poor wretches,
condemned under form of law, are doomed to days of wearing toil, and,
their bones rotting from quicksilver absorption, to nights of racking
pains. So, too, far Siberia contributes its quota of human misery that
the golden stream of interest on century-old loans may have no
interruption, but pour on unceasingly into the vaults of the
Rothschilds.

Alighting from the carriage and mounting the steps with difficulty, I
entered the English Department, and, seating myself, awaited the
manager's presence. He came, and expressing great concern when he
learned I was a victim of the Marquise disaster, asked what he could do
for me. I replied I wanted to see the Baron. He disappeared into a range
of offices, and no doubt told Baron Alphonse I was some important
personage, doubly important because injured on his road.

Soon a slight, sallow man of about 43 appeared, wearing an old-fashioned
stovepipe hat and a shabby suit of snuff-colored garments. The look of
the attendants testified that the deity was before me. Taking off his
antiquated chapeau he began a profuse apology for the accident,
explaining that accidents were most unusual events in France; that he
would order his own physician to attend me, that I should have every
attention without the slightest charge or expense to myself, etc., etc.,
and ended by saying I was to command him if he could serve me. In return
I told him since he was so distressed over the accident and my plight, I
should say no more about either, but as I was too badly shaken to
complete the business on which I had come to Paris I should request him
to instruct his subordinates to aid me in transmitting the funds I had
brought from London back again. He called the manager and told him to
accommodate me in anything, then, shaking hands and with many
expressions of regret, he withdrew.

I told the manager I wanted a three months' bill on London for L6,000.
He informed me that the house of Rothschild was not issuing time bills,
but since the Baron's order suspended the rule in my case, he would
procure me six bills for L1,000 each. These really were just as good for
our purpose as one bill for L6,000, but I had come to Paris on George's
demand that I should procure one bill for this unusual amount, so
perforce I had to say "No," that I wanted one bill only.

The manager began to remonstrate, saying it was unusual, and wanted to
explain the nature of a bill of exchange, but I cut him short, bidding
him recall the Baron at once. The thought of recalling that Jupiter to
repeat an order was enough to send a thrill through the entire staff,
and he instantly said: "Oh, sir, if you wish the L6,000 in one bill, you
shall have it, but it will involve some delay." So paying him 150,000
francs on account, I ordered the bill sent to me at 2 o'clock precisely
at the Grand Hotel, and drove off to the Louvre, where I spent two hours
in the picture galleries. At 2 o'clock I was at the hotel, and an
attendant came with the bill, and, pointing to a signature on it,
informed me it was that of a Cabinet Minister, equivalent to our
Secretary of the Treasury, certifying that the tax due the government
on the bill was paid. He explained the revenue stamp required upon a
bill of exchange was one-eighth of 1 per cent. of the face of the bill,
making the tax on my single bill 187 francs, or about $37. All bills are
stamped in a registering machine, which presses the stamp into the
paper; but there were no registering machines for a stamp of so high a
denomination as 187 francs either in the branch revenue office in the
Rothschild bank or at the Treasury, so the Baron had taken the bill to
the Treasury himself and got the Cabinet Minister to put his autograph
on it--probably the first and only time in history that such a thing had
been done. I wanted very much indeed to keep that bill as a curiosity,
but then the necessity of the time was on me, and I was not then a
collector of curios.

I had been only eighteen hours in Paris, and by a happy fluke the
business was done over which I had counted upon spending a good part of
the month.

When I left London I was all at sea as to how I should carry out the
objects of my visit to Paris. One plan was to procure an interview by
strategy with the Baron Alphonse and try to cajole him, but without
reference, and devoid of all business relations or acquaintance in
Paris, it was at best a questionable expedient, and I probably would
have had a take-down. But the accident at Marquise came and smoothed the
apparently insuperable difficulties in my way. But I have found that
something unusual does come to help a man on his way to the devil when
he is anxious to get there, which he is pretty sure to do, if he is only
diligent and careful to improve his opportunities.

What diligence and strict attention to business do men exhibit when they
start out to wreck their own lives and break the hearts of those near to
them! In a play by a modern writer, one scene presents Satan flying at
midnight over one of our cities, while the drunken songs and joyous
shouts of some gilded revelers rise in the night. The merry songs and
laughter are music to the ears of Lucifer. He pauses in his flight to
listen, and as the songs and shouts increase in volume he looks down on
the revelers and with a bitter sneer soliloquizes thus of them:

  "Ye are my bondsmen and my thralls,
  Your lives I fill with bitter pain."

And that sums it up pretty well; but we must look straight away from the
entrance of the Primrose Way to the exit.

Well, I had successfully played my trump card on the Rothschilds, and,
not seeing the end, thought I had won, and cleverly won; so before
sitting down to dinner I went to the telegraph office and telegraphed to
my partners:

     "The Egyptians all passed over the Red Sea. But the Hebrews are
     drowned therein."

Thinking this rather witty, I went to dinner well satisfied. An hour
past midnight the moon looked from behind a cloud and saw me, one of
many miserables, leaning over the bulwark of that wretched Dover
steamer, again paying tribute to Neptune.




CHAPTER XXII.

"ACCEPTED. LIONEL ROTHSCHILD."


When George and Mac received my telegram they, knowing the difficulties
of my mission, deemed it incredible that I had succeeded within a day,
so when my telegram came they thought I was attempting some jest. Upon
my arrival in London, walking into Mac's room--he being still in bed--I
announced that I had in my pocket Rothschild's bill for L6,000, drawn on
the London house. He flatly refused to believe me, but when he, and
later George, saw the bill, they were forced to believe. I at once took
it down to St. Swithin's lane, and, leaving it for acceptance, called
the next day, when I found scrawled across it in thin, pale ink the
mystic words "Accepted. Lionel Rothschild."

The bill itself was drawn on cheap, blue paper, on the same form as the
blank bills to be had at the Paris stationers', where I had bought some.
From Rothschilds' I went direct to the hotel where we had our
rendezvous, and the acceptance was so simple and easy that Mac had it
copied on another bill in ten minutes. The business methods of the bank
were so loose that there was no necessity for imitating signatures, but
as a precaution this was done to some extent. I then proceeded to the
Bank of England for my last personal interview with the manager. I must
halt here for a brief space in the narrative, in order to enlighten my
reader upon some new developments, also to introduce the new member we
at this time brought into our firm.

[Illustration: "NOYES ESCORTED BY AN ANGRY MOB TO NEWGATE."--Page 379]

There was a friend, a very old friend, of mine residing in Hartford,
Edwin Noyes by name. We had known each other from our schoolboy days,
and there was a warm friendship between us. Our paths in life had been
wide apart, but we maintained a frequent correspondence and often met.
He knew nothing of my primrose life, but supposed, of course, from the
style of my living that I was the possessor of a handsome income from my
business, which lay, as he imagined, in that mysterious precinct known
as "The Street," which, of course, meant Wall street, and that my
business was speculating in stocks.

He was a trifle older than myself, of a steady, reserved nature, and a
discreet and safe friend. This was the new member of our firm. How he
came to be so I must explain. Up to this time, as the reader will have
noticed, I was the only one of the party known at the bank, and, of
course, was the only one who seemed to be taking any risk. Even in the
event of discovery it would apparently be necessary for me only to take
flight. George and Mac, not being known in connection with the fraud,
could remain in London until such time as they chose to go home. To make
matters absolutely safe for me as well we got up this scheme.

I told the manager of the bank that I had bought an immense plant and
shops in Birmingham to manufacture railway material, and that I should
be there superintending the work a good deal; therefore I might
occasionally send any bills I had for discount from there by mail. I had
sent two or three lots of the genuine bills in that way. If I could send
the imitation bills the same way, Mac and George could carry on the
business through the mail in my name and I could be at the other side of
the world while the actual operation was going on, so that, far from my
ever being proved guilty, there would be proof of my innocence, for how
could I be guilty of a crime committed in England at the very time I was
on a pleasure jaunt in the West Indies and Mexico? Thus it was
arranged. Mac and George could do everything and remain in the
background themselves, provided we had a safe man whom I could introduce
at the bank as my clerk or messenger, also to represent me in different
places where I could introduce him as my messenger before I left
England.

The reader will see the extreme artfulness of the plot, but in all
wrongdoing there is sooner or later a slip up. Be the plot ever so
artful, or however safe the wrongdoing may appear, the unforeseen
something will happen.

Of course, Mac and George not being known at the bank need not care, but
it might easily be serious for me.

When the explosion came, fifty people in and about the bank would
remember my face. But if I brought Noyes on the scene to act as my clerk
I need only introduce him to the paying teller of the bank, and to Jay
Cooke & Co., the American banking house, where I proposed to buy
enormous quantities of United States bonds, paying for them in checks on
the Bank of England. Of course, the bonds being all bearer bonds, would,
with our knowledge of finance, be as good as so much cash.

So, knowing Noyes, if he would embark in the enterprise, had plenty of
nerve and could never be bribed or bought into betraying us should he by
any failure of our plans happen to be arrested, we determined to send
for him. A short time before we arrived at this conclusion I had sent
this precautionary letter to him:

                                                  "Grosvenor Hotel,
                                             "London, Nov. 8, 1872.

"My Dear Noyes: You will be surprised to hear from me from London, but
the fact is I have been here with George and a friend of ours for a
year, and have made a lot of money from several speculations we have
embarked in. In fact, we have been so successful that we have determined
to make you a present of a thousand dollars, which find inclosed. Please
accept the same with our best wishes.

"We may be able to give you a chance to make a few thousands, if you
would care to venture across the ocean. Perhaps we can make use of you.
If so, I will send you a cable. If I do, come any way, as we will pay
all your expenses should you determine not to go in with us on the deal.
Be cautious and preserve absolute secrecy when you leave home as to your
destination. Will explain the reason for this when we meet. Keep your
weather eye open for the cable. It may come any hour after you have
this.

      "Hoping you are quite well, I remain," etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days later we sent him this cable (it was afterward produced in
court in evidence against him): "Edwin Noyes, New York. Come by Atlantic
on Wednesday; wire on arrival at Liverpool; meet at Langham."

He arrived ten days later, and at a little dinner given in his honor we
told him our plot. He was astounded, and for the remainder of the
dinner, and for the day, too, for the matter of that, he acted like a
man in a dream, and we three were amazed that he did not instantly fall
into our plan.

Here was the dramatic representation of the poisonous effect of
wrongdoing. We three had by degrees become accustomed to look upon a
fraud committed by ourselves with equanimity. I say by degrees.
Insensibly we had been sinking deeper and deeper, until, our moral
senses blunted, we found excuses to our own consciences. But here was my
companion and friend; he was no Puritan, but, like ourselves but a few
brief months before, regarded crime with detestation, and now, when the
men he trusted proposed he should become a party to a crime, his mind
revolted in horror. Well for him had he yielded to the prompting of his
own conscience and fled from us and the fearful temptation of sudden
wealth. At last he said he would consider it. After a day or two of
silence he began to question us as to our mode of operation, then his
mind became more and more familiarized to the thought, until at last,
fascinated by our association, he acquiesced, saying: "I will do it. I
want money badly. The Bank of England, after all, will not miss it. So
I'll go in for this once."

By our direction he went to an obscure hotel in Manchester square, and
then purchased clothes more suitable for his new position than the
fashionable tailor-cut suit he wore from New York.

On several occasions I had gone to Jay Cooke & Co. in Lombard street and
purchased bonds under the name of F. A. Warren and giving checks in
payment upon the Bank of England. So one day I went there with Noyes and
purchased $20,000 in bonds, giving my check for them. I then introduced
Noyes as my clerk, directing them to deliver any bonds I bought to him
at any time. The next day he called and they gave him the bonds which I
had given my check for the day before, so there was no necessity any
longer for me to come in person to make purchases. Noyes could appear
there any day, give an order for bonds, secure a bill for them, and in
half an hour bring a Warren check for the amount of the bill,
pretending, of course, that he had got it from me, but really getting it
from Mac, leaving the check for collection and to call the next day for
the bonds.

The same day that I introduced him to Jay Cooke & Co. I took him to the
Bank of England at a busy time of day, and while drawing L2,000, I
casually introduced him to the paying teller as my clerk, requesting the
teller to pay him any checks I sent. Then for the next few days I had
Noyes take checks to the bank and had him order two or three small lots
of bonds from Jay Cooke & Co., so that they became familiarized with
seeing him come on my business.

[Illustration: "I DEMAND A GUARD AND SHELTER FOR MY WIFE, THE
DUCHESS."--Page 282.]

The plan was complete at last. Everything was ready to carry out our
scheme in perfect safety to all, and, as related in the beginning of the
chapter, I was now on my way to the bank for my last visit, with the
Rothschild bill in my hand. Many accounts were given of this famous
interview in the English press just after the discovery of the fraud
and prior to my arrest, also when the details transpired at the trial.
The facts were simply these: I presented myself at the bank, and,
sending in my card to the manager, was ushered at once into his parlor.
After a few remarks upon the money and stock market, I produced the
bill, remarking that I had a curiosity to show him which had been sent
me by a correspondent in Paris. It was certainly a curiosity; it was a
thing entirely unknown in the history of the bank to have a bill of
exchange bearing the signature of a Cabinet Minister certifying that the
internal revenue tax had been paid on it. This, along with the
circumstance that the bill was made payable to myself, evidently made
considerable impression on the manager and confirmed him in his good
opinion of his customer. The unusual features of this bill of exchange
led him to relate some of the inner events of the bank's history, during
which I asked him what precaution the bank took against forgery. He told
me a forgery on the bank was impossible. But I asked: "Why impossible?
Other banks get hit sometimes, and why not the Bank of England?" To that
question he gave a long reply, ending with the assertion that "our wise
forefathers have bequeathed us a system which is perfect." "Do you wish
me to understand you have not changed your system since your
forefathers' time?" I said. To which he emphatically replied: "Not in
the slightest particular for a hundred years." In conclusion I told him
I should be fully occupied looking after my different business
interests, but would give him a call if I found time. I also said I
would have the bill discounted and take the cash away with me, instead
of having it placed to my credit. He called an attendant, gave the
necessary order, and the cash was handed me. Bidding the manager
good-bye, I repaired to our meeting place and showed the notes for the
discounted bill. Even George was satisfied that my credit at the bank
was good for any amount of discounts on any sort of paper.

Everything now was ready for my departure from England. For some weeks
my partners had been busy preparing for the completion of the operation.

The first lot of bogus bills were ready to go into the mail at
Birmingham as soon as I was out of the way--it having been decided that
I should then be out of the country. So one Monday late in November I
packed my baggage, and, after many warm hand shakings, I bade my friends
adieu. We had had many talks about the happy future. We had planned
pleasant things in the future, and spoken confidently of our
four-in-hands, our Summer cottages at Saratoga and Newport, of our town
house, fine suppers and our boxes at the opera. After that I saw them
for a brief hour on the coast of France and once more said adieu. When
we met again it was in Newgate. I need hardly say that for the next
twenty years we had no boxes at the grand opera, no four-in-hands, nor
yet any fine suppers, but all that which was merely external passed
away, consumed in that fierce flame, but all that was manly and true
remained; that is, our devotion and courage and our high resolve to
conquer fate and live for better things.

Before leaving London we had squared up our cash account. It was
something to make one stare to see how our money had melted away. It was
arranged to send in the first lot of bogus bills on Thursday, giving me
two full days out of the country. Here I made a fatal mistake in
determining to go to the West Indies, then on to Mexico. As George had
planned I should have gone at once to New York, stopped at the best
hotel in the city and registered in my right name. By taking this course
I should have been safe and could have laughed at any attempt of the
bank authorities to extradite me, for the first lot of bogus bills could
have been held back until I had actually arrived in America. Then there
could not have been found a single particle of evidence against me.

I say "if I had come to New York." But there is some mysterious spell
over men embarked in crime that blinds their eyes to the plainest
dictates of common sense or prudence. This has been proved in a thousand
dramatic instances, but never more forcibly than in our own. It would
seem as if clever, daring men do almost impossible things with ease, but
there is a Nemesis which blinds them to trifles, fatal if overlooked,
causing them to make mistakes of which a schoolboy would be ashamed.

When we first got our combination together I thought we had found a
short cut to fortune, and never doubted of our success to the very end,
and amid many mishaps, that either crippled or ruined our schemes and
lengthened this short cut to fortune, I maintained my confidence until
on that day down in blazing Rio, when the letter "c" in lieu of the "s"
in indorse came to the front to crumble our "sure thing" into ruin. I
remember that in the stupefaction which for a few minutes settled down
on us, I felt we were really fighting against fate. A fate that like the
fiat of Deity says "Thou shalt not," to all wrongdoing.

For some time after that "indorce" takedown a feeling took possession of
me that such short cuts to fortune were risky, and that if success did
come the success would in the end prove a failure. But there is so much
in companionship and such magnetism in human association that when we
all three met in Paris and went in and out together, then, under the
stimulus of our union, I forgot all my forebodings and began to think
the unforeseen fatal something would not happen, and that we could
conquer fortune whether she would or no, and by any method on which we
chose to enter. But, as will be seen in the sequel, when reveling in an
unheard-of success, literally loaded down with wealth, Nemesis appeared
and by means even more simple than our error in Rio stripped us of our
wealth and dignity and left us naked to every storm that blew.




CHAPTER XXIII.

SHOWERS OF GOLD FALL--AND THEN?


I shall try and condense into a single chapter the narrative of events
in London from the time of my departure until the day, some months
later, when our scheme exploded and all took to flight when Noyes was
arrested.

Our expenses had been so enormous that we were anxious to make enough to
recoup them, so it had been agreed that the first batch of bogus bills
should not exceed the amount paid out since leaving Rio.

I left for Paris on Monday. On Wednesday, Noyes went to the bank and
drew out all the money to my credit, except three hundred pounds. The
same day he went to Birmingham and mailed lot number one of
home-manufacture bills representing L8,000.

The next twenty-four hours was an anxious time for my friends. The bills
would be delivered by the early mail on Thursday, and if all went right
the proceeds would be placed to my credit by 12 o'clock, and the bills
themselves would be stowed away in the vaults until they were due some
months ahead. George and Mac waited with the greatest anxiety until 2
o'clock. They had everything packed for instant flight, when at that
hour they sallied out of Mac's lodging and started for the bank to make
the test. They had filled out two Warren checks, one for L2,300 payable
to Warren, another for L4 10s., payable to bearer.

Noyes went on ahead, the others following, and took his stand on the
steps of a hotel in a side street not far from the bank. Keeping his
eye out for a suitable appearing party he finally stopped a uniformed
messenger, and, telling him to take the L4 10s. check to the bank, bring
the money to him there, and he would be paid for his trouble.

Of course, as soon as the messenger had turned his back Noyes bolted
around the corner to a place agreed upon, while Mac followed the
messenger to the bank and saw he was paid without question. He gave the
pre-arranged signal to George, who went with all haste to notify Noyes,
and when the messenger arrived with the cash, he found him standing on
the steps as cool and unconcerned as possible. Paying the messenger, all
three started to the bank, Mac on the way giving Noyes the L2,300 check,
which he presented. Nodding good day to the cashier he asked for L2,000
in gold and the remainder in notes, which were handed him at once, and
three very happy men sat down that evening to dinner, because the day's
operations had conclusively proved that the Bank of England methods were
fallible.

The next morning Noyes went to Jay Cooke & Co. and ordered $75,000 in
United States bonds, giving a check for them on the bank. The same
afternoon he went to Birmingham and mailed another letter, this one
containing L15,000 in bills, and later drew L2,000 in gold from the
bank. On Monday he went after the bonds, and the $75,000 was handed over
to him without questions. The whole operation was a repetition of these
tactics, but with an ever-increasing volume in the amounts of the bills.
On some days the mail brought to the bank letters with bills for
$100,000, sometimes for more, sometimes for less. So November and
December passed away, and the bank continued day by day and week by week
laying away in its vaults the worthless collateral of Mr. F. A. Warren in
exchange for its gold.

But why not be satisfied and stop while it was all right? That is the
question of a wise man, but who ever knew any man who wanted to do a
thing, whether he did it or not, who could not find half a hundred good
reasons why he should do it. But as Christmas came near Mac began to
long for home. He had repaid his father every penny of the large sum he
was owing him; there had been a reconciliation by mail, and each steamer
that came bore many long letters from parents and sisters, all speaking
of their joy over the happy turn of events that was going to bring the
absent member of the flock home within its walls again. The father's
heart, long estranged, grew very tender toward his boy, and with pride
he thought his eldest had thrown off the follies of his youth, and in
manful strength was making ample atonements for the thoughtlessness and
the wanderings of his youth. He and they were all destined to a terrible
awakening. For soon the press of the world was to teem with accounts of
his son's arrest and incarceration for participation in a gigantic
fraud. When the blow fell it came with crushing force on that home, and
a shadow deep as night settled down on the household; all joyousness and
even hope itself fled when the cable bore the news that their boy had
been condemned to life imprisonment in a foreign dungeon. And one by one
the members of that family passed away from a world that held no more
for them since their good name had been tarnished.

In London the boys talked of spending Christmas at home, but the
argument to stay--and it prevailed--was that since the money came in so
easily and in such amounts it was a pity to run away from it. Then,
again, by obtaining an enormous sum and putting it in a place of
absolute security, the bank would be glad to compromise the matter in
consideration of receiving a million or two back again.

So they spent a pretty merry and an exceedingly expensive Christmas in
London, but later in February they determined to pack up and leave.

Everything smiled upon them. The gold and bonds they had, meant fortunes
for all. I was away in tropic islands leading an idle life with my
bride amid the cocoanut and palm trees. Mac and George had never
appeared in the transaction, and as for Noyes, not a soul in all America
knew he was in Europe, and in all Europe only three or four people had
seen him, and knew him as representing Warren.

The business was finished. All three laden with money were going to
leave England, leaving the bank to slumber on for weeks until the first
bills became due before there could be a discovery. By that time the
cash would have been safely stowed, and how or where or to whom could
anything be traced?

So in council they had decided to be content with the enormous amount
they had. The last batch of bills was in the mail. Only one day more and
the strain on the nerves would be over. That day Noyes bought bonds and
drew cash for more than $150,000. At 3 o'clock they sat down to lunch,
their last in London, and then went direct to Mac's apartments in St.
James' place. All the material for making fraudulent bills was there,
and what could be burned was to be thrown into the grate, and the rest
to first be filed into blank nothings and then thrown into the Thames.
The three were there and they were happy. They had engineered a gigantic
scheme, had struck for wealth and won. The short cut to fortune in
defiance of fate had been traversed and now they set about a grateful
task--that of getting themselves and their rich argosy out of England.
Mac being the artist of the party, and having executed the actual
writing, drew the sealed box containing the unused bills up to the fire
and began throwing them in one by one. In doing so he occasionally would
throw some bill more elaborate than the common run on the floor beside
his chair. He had finished his task and took from the floor those he had
thrown there, looked at them for a moment, then crumbling them together,
raised his hand to throw them in the fire, but as the devil always
forsakes his friends at the critical moment, he stopped, smoothed out
the bills and turning to the others, said: "Boys, these are perfect
works of art; it is a pity to destroy them." From our point of view it
was, since it was only necessary to drop them into the mail and they
would coin us thousands. Then George said: "Suppose we send them in."
The others said "All right," and our doom was sealed.

There were in the lot nineteen bills of exchange for L26,000. A date had
been left off one of them! They failed to note it! Poor fools, we had
sold ourselves.

Was this an accident? No, it was Nemesis; it was anything you want to
call it, but it was not an accident.

So a letter was written, the bills, with memorandum, inclosed, the
envelope directed and stamped, and the three fools went to Birmingham,
mailed the letter, and then laughed over their success in the fight
against society, facilitated themselves that they had discovered the
undiscoverable, that they had safely traversed the short cut to fortune.
There is no short cut by wrongdoing to fortune, Boss Tweed and the long
list of robber barons to the contrary!

The bills were mailed on Monday. As that fatal letter slipped from their
fingers into the mail-box the last act of the deadly tragedy began. When
it ended the curtain fell upon us descending from the dock into the
chill dungeons of Newgate, never, so far as the sentence was concerned,
to emerge again.

On Tuesday morning the letter with the bills arrived at the bank.
Following the routine, they went to the discount department, were
discounted and placed to my credit. As I had a balance of L20,000, when
the proceeds of the bills were added to it, it brought up the whole to
the handsome sum of L46,000.

[Illustration: "THE DAY OF MY DESTINY IS OVER."--Page 304.]

When the bills arrived at the bank a strange thing occurred. The fatal
omission was made on an acceptance of Blydenstein & Co., a great banking
firm in London. The discount clerk noticed the omission of the date of
acceptance, but this being a mere formality, he thought it a clerical
error on the part of the bookkeeper of Blydenstein & Co. He made no
report of the matter, and it was discounted along with the other
eighteen, which were put away in the vaults with the batches that had
preceded it, while he laid this one aside until the next day, which was
Wednesday. At half past ten he gave it to the bank messenger, telling
him when he went his regular rounds to take the bill to Blydenstein's
and request them to correct the omission.

At 2 p.m. on Tuesday Noyes went to Jay Cooke & Co. and ordered $100,000
in United States bonds, and gave them a check on the Bank of England for
the amount. He was to call for the bonds next day, of course, after the
check had gone through the Clearing House and had been paid.

As soon as the bank opened on Wednesday, in order to test if everything
was all right, Noyes sent in a messenger with a small check, and the
money was thrown out as at all other times without remark. And that was
a complete demonstration that everything was all right. So it was then,
but within thirty minutes from that second the messenger was going to
start with the bill to Blydenstein's for correction.

This was 10 o'clock Wednesday. The bills had been twenty-five hours in
the possession of the bank, had been discounted and the proceeds placed
to my credit for twenty-four hours.

Who with intellect less than an archangel's could have divined the true
combination? First of all, that men brilliant and clever, gambling with
their lives, could have made such an omission, damning, fatal. Second,
if made, that the great Bank of England, thought absolutely infallible
by the whole world, conservative, supposedly cautious, would have
discounted a bill for L20,00 with the date out of the acceptance, and
having done so, hold the bill well on into the second day, without a
discovery, and that, too, when the firm whose acceptance was a forgery
was not 100 yards away! So when at 10 o'clock on Wednesday Mac saw the
small check paid without question to the messenger it seemed he had an
assurance doubly sure and a bond of fate that all was well, and that the
last batch of bills was packed safely away for another three months in
the vaults of the bank.

So Noyes went at once to Jay Cooke & Co., and as the check had been paid
at the bank they handed over, as in so many other occasions, the
$100,000 in bonds to him.

Mac and George were outside. George took the bonds and gave Noyes a
L10,000 check, and one minute from his leaving Jay Cooke & Co., Noyes
was at the counter of the bank. The cashier counted out the $50,000 to
him. He walked out of the bank with a lighter heart and more buoyant
step than ever before, for was not the danger all over and the long
strain on the nerves at an end, the transaction complete and fortune
won? He was never going to the bank again.

They had arranged to meet at Garraway's Coffee House in Exchange alley.
This is the Garraway's that became so famous at the time of the South
Sea Bubble, and its fame continued down to the end of the wars of
Napoleon. Then its glory departed as a centre of speculations, but its
renown as an old-fashioned chophouse remained till 1873. Everywhere in
contemporary English literature, from Swift and Addison to Goldsmith and
Johnson, one meets references to Garraway's.

The Dean immortalized it in his well-known lines on 'Change Alley:

  "There is a gulf where thousands fell,
    Here all the bold adventurers came,
  A narrow sound, though deep as hell,
    'Change Alley is the dreadful name.

  "Subscribers here by thousands float
    And jostle one another down.
  Each paddling in his leaky boat,
    And here they fish for gold and drown.

  "Meantime secure on Garraway's cliffs
    A savage race by shipwreck fed,
  Lie waiting for the foundered skiffs
    And strip the bodies of the dead."

Dickens also makes it the scene of the writing of the famous chops and
tomato sauce letter from Mr. Pickwick to Mrs. Bardell.

One can imagine the elation of my friends as they sat around that little
table at Garraway's. It was only 10:35. Their income that morning had
been $150,000. And many more such days had gone before. All danger was
over, wealth was won. They saw themselves back in America, among the
Four Hundred, possessors of a fortune, however wrongfully obtained, yet
obtained in a way that would leave behind no ruined widows and orphans
to linger out the remainder of their blighted lives in poverty and
misery. That was a point which added zest to their enjoyment of the
prospect.

"I am never to go to the bank again. Come, shake hands on that," said
Noyes. And in their excitement and wild delight they shook hands again
and again.

But they would have moderated their joy had they known that at the very
moment the bank porter, pale and frightened, was rushing past the room
where they sat, carrying the news to the bank that the two-thousand
pound bill was a forgery. Instantly all was confusion and excitement in
the bank. Telegrams were at once sent to the detective police, and at
that moment swarms of them were pouring out of the Bow street and
Scotland Yard offices.

That already stories of gigantic frauds, multiplied a thousand fold by
rumor, were flying everywhere that every bank in London was victimized.
In ten minutes the story reached the Stock Exchange and a scene of
terrific excitement ensued, and, through it all, our three innocents sat
on in that dingy old coffee-house, serenely unconscious of the fearful
storm that was rising. Still they were safe. Everything was confusion in
the bank. The terrified official, frantic with fear, could only describe
a tall young man, an American, who said his name was Warren.

Had my three triumphant friends only known what was up they might have
sat where they were the day through and drank porter out of the pewter
mugs in safety. There were a hundred thousand men in London who would
answer any description the bank could have given of Noyes, Mac and
George had never appeared in the transaction, and I, the F. A. Warren
they were looking for, was living quietly with my young wife in a lovely
isle in the tropic sea.

Surely then, these three high-toned financiers still had the game in
their own hands. They had nothing to fear. They had wealth. There was no
clue to their identity and the world was before them--a world which lays
her treasures and pleasures at the feet of him who commands wealth.

But that mighty Something had decreed otherwise, and a subtle spirit
under whose power they were but purposeless puppets inspired them to
commit an act of folly which was to hurl them from the fools' paradise
wherein they were reveling down to the pit of despair.

Upon Mac casually remarking that they had still a balance of $75,000 to
Warren's credit, Noyes spoke up and said: "Boys, that is too much money
to leave John Bull; suppose you make out a check for L5,000. I will run
over and get the cash, and it will do for pocket money." And the two
others, triumphant in success, became idiots and assented. Making out a
check for L5,000, Noyes started for the bank, check in hand, and
entering, instantly found himself with a hot and angry swarm of hornets
about him.

[Illustration: A NEWGATE SCENE.--DON'T WANT HIS PICTURE TAKEN.]

There were twenty-five detectives in and around the bank. Special
messengers had summoned the affrighted directors. The great bank parlor
was packed with a host of stockholders and directors, who were
questioning the manager and clerks. And excitement rose to fever heat
when, with twenty hands holding him, poor Noyes was hustled in among
them. They rushed at him like a pack of wolves. Had that been a bank
parlor in festive Arizona, they would not have endured the delay
incidental to procuring a rope, but would have ended it and him by
gunnery at short range. Noyes could not be shaken; his nerve never
failed. He said a gentleman had hired him as a clerk, and that was all
he knew. He had left him at the Stock Exchange; if they would let him
go, he would try and find him and bring him around to the bank. J. Bull
is gullible, but not so much so as to swallow that yarn.

So they held tightly to him, and a committee of indignant Britons
escorted him to Newgate.

[Illustration: A SENTRY.]




CHAPTER XXIV.

POINTS FOR JUSTICE TO PICK UP.


Mac and George were without, and were stricken with consternation, for a
minute's observation of the gathering crowd and the rushing into the
bank of excited people convinced them something unusual was in the wind,
and they knew Noyes must be in deadly peril. Mac rushed into the bank in
hope to warn or to be of help. Everything there was in confusion.
Unobserved in the excitement, he made his way into the parlor and there
saw what made his heart stand still--Noyes surrounded by an angry crowd
of officials. With great presence of mind and great nerve he pushed
through toward Noyes, who saw him and knew he was there to help if he
had a chance to bolt from his captors; but there was no chance. As they
were about starting for Newgate, Mac slipped outside and told George
what had befallen Noyes, and discussed the possibility of a rescue when
on the way to Newgate with him. While they were waiting in the entrance
Noyes came out in custody. He saw and recognized them. They joined in
the crowd and were within arm's reach of him every rod of the short
distance to Newgate, but the crowd was packed so tight that one could
hardly move, and a rush for escape was hopeless. Arrived at Newgate, Mac
in his desperation was entering with the escort, when George pulled him
away, and as they got out of the crowd they heard the newsboys crying:
"Great forgery on the Bank of England by an American; L10,000,000
obtained." That afternoon Lionel Rothschild, president of the Board of
Directors, called on him at Newgate, and offered him his liberty and
L1,000 reward if he would tell all he knew; but Noyes' nerve was not to
be shaken. He said a gentleman, an entire stranger, had hired him as a
clerk and messenger, and he knew nothing about Mr. Warren nor his
business.

[Illustration: "NOYES WAS SURROUNDED BY AN ANGRY CROWD OF
OFFICIALS."--Page 236.]

All this time the $150,000 drawn that morning was in a stout bag behind
the counter at Garraway's.

Little did the barmaids dream of the treasure that was in the bag at
their feet. When Mac went for it, one of the barmaids asked him if he
had heard of the great bank robbery. He drove to St James' place, and
soon George joined him there.

Here again was enacted the scene we had in Rio; as there, so here, they
looked at each other in helpless stupefaction. Why had they not been
satisfied? Why had they let Noyes go for a paltry L5,000? Why had they
not understood the meaning of the evident excitement in and around the
bank?

In Rio there was only a suspicion aroused. Here our companion was a
prisoner in Newgate. Scarcely an hour had passed since he was free and
without a fear had joined in the congratulatory scene at Garraway's. Now
ruin was threatened. Upon cool reflection they came to two conclusions.
First, that Noyes not only would never betray them, but that he could be
depended upon to keep so close a mouth that no clue could be pumped from
him; and next, that he could never be convicted of the forgery.

He might, of course, be subjected to a few weeks of Newgate life. That
was very awkward, of course, but it would come all right.

So they resolved for the present to remain in London and await
developments.

That night the cable flashed the news of the forgery over the world,
dwelling particularly upon the fact that the perpetrator was an
American. The next morning the London press overflowed. Every prominent
paper gave a leader in the editorial column, and when the weeklies and
monthlies came out they followed suit. These editorials make now to us
who were on the inside amusing reading. They were full of Philistine
talk and amazement, and generally conceded that Noyes was an innocent
dupe, and all more or less doubted if his principal, the mysterious Mr.
F. A. Warren, would ever come back to say so.

Day after day went by, and Mac and George hung around London reading the
accounts of the affair and of the examination of Noyes before the Lord
Mayor.

They had communicated with him through his solicitor, and he sent them
word to leave England at once. In the mean time they had been sending
away the cash, and so entrenched were they in the belief that by no
possible chance could their names become mixed up in the affair that in
every instance but two they sent the money or bonds to America in their
right names.

In the mean time the bank very wisely sent a cable to their legal agent,
Clarence A. Seward, in New York, asking him to set the American
detective force on the alert. He was a man of the world and understood
quite well what sort of men then ruled at Police Head quarters. So he
sent at once for Robert A. Pinkerton and gave him entire charge of the
American end of the line. Eventually they unearthed the whole plot,
secured the evidence that convicted us and recovered the greater part of
the money. The first step taken by the private inquiry men was to have
our friends, the detectives at headquarters, led to believe that they
had the case entirely in their own hands and to strengthen this
Pinkerton had the Bank of England agent in New York go to headquarters
every day and pretend to consult with Irving.

After the continental raid, on our return to London we sent Irving
$3,000 in greenbacks in a registered letter, but in order to have a
hold on our three honest friends at headquarters in case of any possible
treachery in the future we put the money in the envelope in the presence
of a magistrate and had his clerk register it and make it a part of the
court record. The envelope was simply addressed "James Irving, Esq., 300
Mulberry street, New York," and of course the officials in London
supposed it a private address.

When we returned from Rio we sent another $3,000, $1,000 each for
Irving, Stanley and White, and took the same precautions.

Soon after the floods of money coming to us in London Mac sent $15,000
to Irving in another registered letter, without any precautions,
however. Irving & Co. did not know what game we were playing, but were
very happy over the dividends past and to come. But when they read the
cable dispatches in the press about the bank forgeries, their bliss was
ecstatic. Each in fancy saw himself decked out in a magnificent diamond
pin and ring, spinning along Harlem lane behind a particularly fast pair
in a stylish rig. This was their day vision. At night each saw himself
in certain resorts ordering unlimited bottles, or seeing New York by
gaslight at the rate of $100 a minute, and the Britishers paying for it
all. But the lawyers and the Pinkertons between them played Irving and
headquarters for fools and knaves. Day after day one of the lawyers
visited Mulberry street, and, being tutored by Pinkerton, gave deceptive
points to Irving, who, with his two chums, was completely hood-winked
and never suspected the game being played on them.

But as I have got somewhat ahead of events in London I will return there
and very briefly narrate what was taking place there. Nearly every day
Noyes was brought before the Lord Mayor and officially examined, but,
acting under advice of his lawyer, he was strictly non-committal. The
detectives and officials were convinced he knew all about it, and tried
by both threats and promises to make him talk. Baron Rothschild and
others of the directors visited him again, but our friend was deaf, dumb
and blind, and they were foiled. In time two Pinkerton detectives had
arrived in London, and by a series of lucky hits soon began to let in
some light on the business.

In searching Noyes the English police had found his garments were made
by a certain London tailor who had several establishments. They brought
the foremen and salesmen down to see him, and none could identify him;
but the American detectives went over the ground again, and discovered
that the London officers had missed one branch store. This was the one
Noyes had patronized. They remembered him as a customer who had, when
ordering garments, given the name of Bedford. This in itself was a bad
point against Noyes, and the New York men wanted very much to make him
talk, and had they been permitted to adopt the vigorous American methods
they might have succeeded.

A salesman remembered seeing Noyes or Bedford one day walking in Mayfair
with a gentleman who really was Mac, of whom he gave a good description,
and taking the clerk the detectives started out to make a house-to-house
investigation. Now, No. 1 Mayfair, the first house they entered, was the
residence of a famous London doctor by the name of Payson Hewett, and
Mac had been a patient of his. But Hewett knew absolutely nothing about
him save only his name and the address he gave, Westminster Palace
Hotel. The detectives were elated, and flew to this hotel, but as Mac
had never been a guest they could learn nothing; still they had cause
for rejoicing. Here was Noyes giving a fictitious name to a tailor and
in company with an elegantly dressed American, who gave a fictitious
address to his surgeon. And they were well satisfied that whenever the
matter was dug out it would be found that the elegantly dressed
stranger, as well as the clerk, had a hand in the business. Payson
Hewett stated that Mac said he was a medical graduate from an American
university, and said that, no doubt, he spoke the truth, as he had a
perfect knowledge of medical subjects.

Here they were getting matters down pretty fine, and cabled all the
facts to America with orders to look Mac up, also his friends. This
information was the fruit of hard work--many blind trails had been
followed that ran nowhere.

In the mean time George and Mac had determined to return to America. The
last thing Mac did before leaving his lodgings in St. James' place was
to roll up in three rolls $254,000 in United States bonds and send the
trunk containing them by express to Major George Mathews, New York. He
wrapped them in a nightshirt belonging to me, which in some way had got
into his baggage. Then he bought a ticket to Paris and sent his baggage
over, waiting in London a day or two longer before going himself.

George determined to go to Ireland, and to Ireland he went, and I shall
let him in a later chapter tell in his own language the stirring events
in Ireland and Scotland that finally ended in his arrest in Edinburgh
some weeks later. Mac, before sending his baggage away, had intended to
sail from Liverpool by the Java of the Cunard line, and he cabled Irving
at Police Headquarters to meet him on the arrival of the steamer. Mac
went to Paris, stopping at the Hotel Richmond, Rue du Helder, under his
right name, never for a moment thinking he could possibly come under
suspicion.

In the mean time the Pinkerton men continued their house-to-house
visitation of the fashionable lodging houses to hunt out Mac. This, in
huge London, was a Titanic task, but they exhibited a marvelous activity
in tracing out clues. In a lucky moment for the Pinkertons, a
subordinate inquiring at every number in St. James' place if an
American gentleman was lodging or had lodged there was informed by one
landlady that Mac had been a lodger, but had left a few days before. As
soon as this important report arrived they flew to St. James' place and
found the landlady a warm friend of the man they were looking for. The
detectives were forced to tell her their business. She was indignant
that any one should so wrong Mac, and ordered them out of the house.

They brought the bank solicitors and other important people to see her
before she would consent to be questioned; when she did, her information
was important indeed. She had seen very little of George, but much of
me, though she had never heard my name, but still the detectives knew
from her description that the man she described was the F. A. Warren
they wanted, and whom to get meant fame and comparative fortune for
them.

The rooms had been unoccupied since Mac left and a careful search was
made for clues, but nothing was found until she was asked for the
waste-paper basket. The basket proved to be a bag, and when turned out
some pieces of blotting paper appeared, which, held in front of a
mirror, of course would reflect the writing the same as on the written
sheet, and on holding the last of the lot to the glass they were
thrilled through when the Pinkertons saw reflected there:

  Ten Thousand......................Pounds Sterling.
  F. A. WARREN.

which, when compared with a canceled check of mine, then in the
possession of the bank, exactly fitted it. Here was a piece of evidence,
which, if it could be brought home to Mac, was a chain to bind him fast
and sure.

Pinkerton and his man started at once for Paris, and going to the
American bankers, where most Americans register on arrival, they found
Mac's name as large as life, registered at Andrews & Co.'s as stopping
at the Hotel de Richmond.

Pinkerton was not long in reaching Rue du Helder, and learned that Mac
had left for Brest the night before. In short order he was at the Paris
agency of the steamship company, and found that Mac had purchased a
ticket to New York by the Thuringia, which was due to sail that very
hour from Brest. He did not let the grass grow under his feet between
the ticket and telegraph offices, and there he telegraphed the
authorities to arrest Mac, but he had a speedy reply that the Thuringia
had sailed half an hour before his telegram came. On second thought he
quite possibly was not sorry Mac had got off to New York, as it would
lengthen out the bill and scatter some of the bank's money in New York.

He therefore cabled to his office in New York particulars as to Mac's
departure, and then he turned all his attention to discovering who this
F. A. Warren could be. Mac had cabled Irving that he was coming by the
Thuringia. Pinkerton, feeling that there was no secrecy required about
his man being on the steamer, gave the fact to the press, and Irving
discovered, very much to his chagrin, that all the world shared with him
his secret as to Mac's whereabouts, and that if he would save his
reputation he would have to be on hand, not as a friend and confederate,
but in his official capacity and make a genuine arrest--that is, unless
he could arrange to have Mac taken off the steamer in a small boat as
soon as she came into the lower bay and before the police boat, with its
load of officials, came alongside. This Irving and his two subordinates
resolved to attempt, so he took into his counsels a great chum of his
and a well-known burglar by the name of Johnny Dobbs. To him was given
the job of getting Mac off the steamer, but he made a serious blunder.
Instead of hiring and manning two boats, one to relieve the other, he
got only one. For a day or two they came within hailing distance of all
incoming steamers, but were ashore on Staten Island, taking a rest, when
bright and early one morning the Thuringia slipped into the harbor.
There was a man in the boat with Dobbs who knew Mac, and the plan was to
meet the steamer, and as Mac was sure to be on deck on the lookout, to
shout to him to jump overboard and they would pick him up and make for
shore. Once ashore and warned they would not have seen him again.

After the Thuringia came into the harbor, Irving kept the police boat
waiting over an hour. Then, supposing his friend was safe ashore, he
boarded the ship. There were five United States Marshals on the police
tug, the bank lawyers and some of the private inquiry officials.

Irving, accompanied by White and Stanley, jumped aboard the big ship,
after giving orders to the captain of the tug not to let any one off
until he gave permission. Mac saw the tug and recognized his three
friends, but was in no way alarmed until Irving, shaking hands with him,
hurriedly explained the state of affairs. Mac took them to his cabin and
gave them $150,000 in bonds, $10,000 in greenbacks, which he had bought
of the brokers in London, besides English bank notes and two or three
valuable diamonds. Then taking out several bags of sovereigns he said:
"Now, boys, help yourselves. Load yourselves down and keep them from the
enemy." What a picture those fellows loading up with that golden store
of sovereigns would have made! They knew the marshals and detectives
they held entrapped aboard the tug would be furious, and morally sure
that Irving & Co. had plucked their bird. Therefore any appearance of
pockets bulging out might lead to disgrace, so, while they hated to
leave any, for their fingers itched for all, yet they were forced to
that cruel self-denial.

One amusing piece of impudence on Irving's part occurred when looking
with greedy eyes on the eight-carat diamond Mac wore on his finger, he
said: "My God, Mac, I wish I had brought along a paste diamond. You
could wear the ring and give me yours in exchange." The ring having been
seen by so many he feared to chance taking it. No doubt his enforced
denial for long sat heavy on Jimmy's soul. What a penchant all our
honest detectives have for gems, and where do they get them?

In the mean time a storm was raging among the rival officers, who did
not relish being duped, and finally by threats forced the captain to
bring the tug alongside the steamer. Then they rushed on board to find
Irving & Co. with their prisoner awaiting them.

The marshals went to the cabin and found some L4,000 or L5,000 in
sovereigns, but when Mac was searched nothing was found on him but $20
in greenbacks. He was turned over to the United States officials and
landed in Ludlow Street Jail, pending an examination before the United
States Commissioner with a view to his extradition.

How the Pinkertons unearthed the $254,000 wrapped in old clothing in
Mac's trunk at the European Express Office, 44 Broadway, would take too
much time to tell here, or how circulars were sent out to the banks and
trust companies warning them to hold all funds deposited by any of our
party, or how Pinkerton and his men recovered large sums in various
places, must all be passed over here. Suffice it to say that the fatal
piece of blotting paper was produced in New York along with many lesser
points of evidence, and after a hard legal fight Mac was finally ordered
to be given up to the English Government to stand his trial for
complicity in the great bank forgery.

The legal proceedings before the commissioner lasted three full months.
The array of counsel on both sides made it a forensic contest between
giants, in which all past history was invoked for precedents. This
extradition case attracted wide attention.

After United States Commissioner Gutman had finally decided to surrender
him to the demand of the British Government, appeal was made to the
United States Circuit Court, Judge Woodruff, then to the Supreme Court,
Judge Barrett, before whom Mac was brought by writs of habeas corpus;
but the commissioner's decision was sustained. Mac was sent to Fort
Columbus for safe-keeping while counsel were vainly arguing on new writs
of habeas corpus and certiorari, but before any conclusion could be
reached, he was hurried away by his custodians. He had scarcely time to
bid good-bye to his counsel, when with a United States officer he was
hurried into a carriage in Chambers street, guarded by Chief Deputy
Marshal Kennedy and Deputies Robinson and Crowley, and driven rapidly
down Broadway to the Battery, so that the large crowd who gathered to
witness his departure from the metropolis had very little time to feast
their eyes.

He was transferred from the Battery to Governor's Island by a tugboat
and subsequently handed over by the deputy marshals to the charge of
Major J. P. Roy, who had him escorted to Fort Columbus.

The following morning United States Marshal Fiske, with Deputies Crowley
and Purvis; Mr. Peter Williams, solicitor of the Bank of England; Sergt.
Edward Hancock, a London detective; Deputy Marshal Colfax and others,
boarded the steam tug P. C. Schultze at the Battery and steamed across
to Governor's Island. At 10.30 o'clock Capt. J. W. Bean, on post at the
fort, received an order to deliver him over.

Capt. J. W. Bean then delivered him over to United States Marshal
Fiske's charge, with whom he descended the steps from the balcony of the
fort, and marched, with a deputy at either side, through tiled pathways
and groved and shaded avenues, to the wharf at the other end of the
island, where the Schultze was awaiting his arrival. A large crowd of
spectators, soldiers and civilians lined the wharf, lingering anxiously
to see him off. But he walked very leisurely, smoked, laughed and
appeared in a state of unaccountable good humor.

It was nearly 11 o'clock when the Schultze steamed away from Governor's
Island wharf and whistled and rattled down the Bay to await the arrival
of the Minnesota, which lay at anchor during the forenoon near Pier 46,
North River, and did not sail until some minutes after 12 o'clock. The
Schultze meantime waited, steaming around the lower bay until the
Minnesota arrived. The steam tug neared the bulky and huge vessel, and
Mac was finally taken on board by United States Marshal Fiske and Deputy
Marshals Robinson, Crowley and Colfax, and given into the custody of the
English detectives, Sergts. Webb and Hancock, who in return gave the
usual receipt to Marshal Fiske.

For the present, I leave Mac on the Atlantic, sailing swiftly eastward,
to meet his terrible doom.

[Illustration: DRAWING STONE.]




CHAPTER XXV.

THE IRONY OF FATE.


In this chapter I give in his own words George's account of his flight
from London and his arrest.

"Without the remotest suspicion that my right name was known or that
anything had been discovered to show my connection with the fraud, I
resolved to take the steamer Atlantic of the White Star line at
Queenstown for New York. Knowing that all the railway stations in London
were being watched, and that any man buying a ticket for America might
have to give an account of himself, I sent a porter to purchase a ticket
for Dublin via Holyhead. I intended taking the 9 p.m. mail train, and,
as a precaution, I waited until the last moment, after the passengers
were on board, and the waiting-room doors shut. As the mail was being
transferred from the wagons to the train, I took the opportunity to walk
through the big gate unobserved amid the rush and confusion. The car
doors were all locked, but on showing my ticket to a guard (conductor)
he let me into a compartment, no doubt supposing that I had obtained
admission to the station from the waiting-room and had been loitering
about. The same was probably the case with the two or three other men
looking out of the waiting-room window at the platform, whom I judged to
be detectives. The train rolled out of the station, and soon I was
leaving London behind at the rate of fifty miles an hour. After midnight
we took the steamer at Holyhead and arrived at Dublin about 7 a.m. I
should not have felt so comfortable throughout this night's journey had
I known that the telegraph was flashing in all directions five thousand
pounds reward for my capture.

"A whole column regarding myself and my supposed movements was published
in the Dublin papers of that morning. Not suspecting they contained
'news' regarding me, I neglected purchasing one, and, remaining ignorant
of my imminent danger, took the train for Cork, where I arrived about 4
p.m. I had two or three London papers of the previous day in my hand as
I left the station. I had never been in Cork until then, and as I passed
into the street two detectives, who were watching the passengers, turned
and followed me. A few yards from the station one of them stepped up by
my side and said:

"'Have you ever been here before?'

"I slightly turned my head toward him, gave a haughty glance as I
replied: 'Yes,' then looked straight ahead and continued my slow gait,
paying no further attention to him. He continued walking by my side for
a few steps, as if irresolute, then dropped to the rear, rejoining his
companion. I did not dare to look around or make inquiry as to the
location of the wharf from which the tugboat started to convey mail and
passengers to the New York steamers, which waited in the outer harbor.
Therefore I continued my walk along what appeared to be the main
business street, perhaps for a quarter of a mile, then turned into a
druggist's and called for some Spanish licorice. This was done to enable
me to ascertain if the detectives were still following. In a moment they
passed the shop gazing intently in and saw me leaning carelessly against
the counter with my face partially turned to the street. As soon as I
had paid for the licorice I continued my walk in the same direction, but
saw nothing of the men, they having evidently stopped in some place to
let me get ahead once more. In a short time I approached an inclosure
over the gate of which was a sign that informed me I had come by
accident direct to the wharf of the New York steamers. Entering I found
the place crowded and the tugboat ready to convey the passengers to the
steamer Atlantic. Before attempting to step aboard the tug I took a
covert look around and saw my two detectives standing back in one corner
with their eyes fixed upon me, all but their heads being concealed
behind the crowd waiting to see their friends off for America.
Apparently unconscious of their presence, I threw my papers, one by one,
down among the passengers; and as the deck of the boat was eight or ten
feet below, the detectives could not see to whom they were thrown. I
stood leaning on the rail a short time gazing at the scene, then left
the wharf not even glancing in the direction of the detectives. I felt
that any attempt of mine to embark would precipitate their movements,
therefore I at once abandoned all ideas of taking passage from
Queenstown.

"Now mark the irony of fate! That was the last passage ever made by the
magnificent steamer Atlantic! Some magnetic influence deranged her
compass so that she ran twenty miles out of her course, striking on the
coast of Nova Scotia, at Meager's Head, Prospect Harbor, broke in two,
then rolling into deep water sank in a few minutes. Out of 1,002 persons
on board 560 perished, including most of the saloon passengers and all
the women and children. The elegant cabins and staterooms became their
tombs--and one might have been mine. But not for me such favoring fate;
a moment's struggle ended their sufferings, while I was left to undergo
the pangs of a thousand deaths!

[Illustration: A CORRIDOR OF THE TOMBS, NEW YORK.]

"I continued my walk up a hill among the private residences of the city,
and, hailing a cab, told the driver to take me back to the station.
Eager for a job, he asked to drive me a mile beyond on the railway.
Thinking I might elude the detectives at the Queenstown station, I
acceded, and he made his little Irish horse rush along at a pace
which brought us to the stopping place just before the train arrived.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF AN ENGLISH CONVICT PRISON.]

"I purchased a ticket and hastened into a carriage, where, lo and
behold! sat the two detectives. A few minutes brought us to Cork again.
I was not yet aware they were in possession of my right name and the
knowledge that a reward of L5,000 was offered for my capture, nor that
their hesitation was occasioned by doubts as to my identity, which the
first false step on my part might remove. I did not suppose they were
looking especially for me, but for any one in general whose actions and
appearance might indicate that he was one of the operators in the bank
forgery. Under this erroneous belief I crossed to the Dublin station,
which was a quarter of a mile from that of the Cork and Queenstown. As I
entered the waiting room I saw my two detectives standing at the other
side. 'Well,' I thought to myself, 'this is very strange; I left the
Queenstown station ahead of them and here they are again, all alive!' I
walked away into the most thronged streets of the business part of the
city; turning a corner I glanced backward and saw them following at some
distance in the rear. As soon as I had fairly turned the corner I
started at a fast walk, turning the next before they came in view, and
after three or four such turnings I went into a small temperance hotel
and took lodgings for the night. There was but a single commercial
traveler in the sitting room--a special room set apart in every English
hotel, sacred to the 'drummer' fraternity. In the course of the evening
he handed me a small railway map of Ireland, which, in my subsequent
flight through the country, proved of incalculable service to me.

"The next morning I went out and purchased a handbag, a Scotch cap and a
cheap frieze ulster. My night's cogitations had not enabled me to solve
the detective problem, but I felt confident that something was decidedly
wrong. I then hired a covered cab, driving past the postoffice to
recoinnoitre, and saw one of the detectives standing in the doorway.
This sight deterred me from going in to ask for a letter. Dismissing my
cab, I took another and drove to the place where I had made my
purchases, taking them into the cab and going through a by-street which
brought me close to my hotel.

"From the commercial room in the second floor front I looked out and
marked the farthest house I could see to the left on the opposite side.
Stepping to the desk I wrote an order directing the postmaster to
deliver any letters to my address to the bearer. This I gave to a
cabman, instructing him to drive to the postoffice and bring my mail to
the house I had marked, returning myself to the commercial room to
watch. In a few minutes I saw the cabman drive to the house, and seeing
no one waiting there, he turned and drove slowly down the street past
the hotel, holding up at arm's length a letter to attract my
notice--which it did to my two detectives walking along a short distance
behind him, on the hotel side of the street, with noses elevated and
eyes peering everywhere.

"'Well,' I thought, 'this is getting to be hot, and it is time for me to
leave Cork.' I was now fully aroused to a sense of my danger. No one
happening to be in the commercial room for the moment, I left my hat on
the sofa, and wearing the Scotch cap, slipped downstairs just as they
were past the hotel, following them until I came to where the cab was
waiting with my luggage. I ordered the driver to take me to a canal-boat
wharf, where I dismissed him; then, with bag in hand, I walked across
the canal bridge, stopped in a small shop and hired a smaller boy to go
for a jaunting car, and a few minutes later I was rolling to the
northward.

"On the road I threw some small coins to poor-looking people, who then,
as now, comprised among their numbers the most honest patriots and the
truest-hearted sons of Erin.

"Seeing me throwing the pence to the poor folk, cabby took it into his
head that I must be a priest--a good criterion of the estimation in
which the benevolence of the fathers is held by their own people. And I
may here remark that all the Catholic priests I have known, occupying
the post of chaplain, were without exception faithful and entirely
devoted to the duties of their holy calling. I had no intention of
traveling as a priest, and when I told the driver as much he would not
believe it, but insisted that I was really a priest traveling incognito;
therefore, when we stopped at a small wayside tavern, about twelve miles
from Cork and two to Fermoy, he privately informed the mistress that I
was a priest who did not want the fact to become known. Accordingly the
good woman treated me with marked attention during my short stay. It was
then nearly sunset, and as I did not wish the cabman to get back to Cork
until late at night, I kept him eating and drinking until dark, when I
paid the bill and started him homeward, uproariously rejoicing. I then
started for Fermoy station, about two miles distant, taking the hostler
along to carry my bag. When within half a mile of the village I let him
return. While passing through the village I went into a shop and
purchased a different Scotch cap, the 'Glengarry.'

"Arriving at the station, I noticed a man near the ticket office who
appeared to be watching those who were purchasing tickets. This made me
change my plan--instead of taking a ticket to Dublin, I bought one for
Lismore, the end of the road in the opposite direction. The exclamation,
'Well, are you going to stay all night?' was the first intimation I had
of our arrival at that place. I rubbed my sleepy eyes, and saw with
dismay that all the passengers were gone and one of the porters was
putting out the lights. At the platform I found a cab, and by 9 p.m. I
was at the Lismore House. After eating supper I entered the sitting
room, finding a single occupant whom I took to be a lawyer, and judging
by his conversation and manner, in the light of later events, I do not
doubt that he surmised who I was. He was reading a newspaper, which he
once or twice offered to me; but, not dreaming of the interesting nature
of its contents, I declined to take it from him. About 10 o'clock the
gentleman retired, leaving his paper on the table. I carelessly picked
it up, and the first thing that caught my eyes was a displayed heading
in large type, offering L5,000 reward for my arrest.

"A thunderbolt, indeed! For a few minutes I stared at the paper in blank
dismay. It was fortunate for my temporary safety that there were no
witnesses present. 'Well,' I thought to myself, 'this is a predicament!
How did they obtain any clue to me? I thought we had covered up the
whole affair so deep in mystery that not a clue to our personality could
ever be obtained!'

"I sat for an hour alone in this Lismore Hotel, utterly dumfounded,
bewildered, paralyzed. I had experienced some shocks, some 'take-downs,'
in my time, but never one to compare with this.

"Arousing myself from a state of mental stupefaction hitherto unknown, I
began to realize the necessity of immediate action if I wished to avoid
falling into the merciless jaws of the British lion. I put the paper
into the fire, and retired to the room allotted to me.

"Before daylight in the morning I had decided upon the first step, and
as the lawyer had asked me if I intended to remain over Sunday, I
resolved to be as far away as possible before he was out of bed. While
it was yet dark in the house, I left my bag in the bedroom and crept
gently down the stairs to the basement, where the porter-hostler was
sleeping in a box of rags. I suppose the poor wretch had not long
finished his multifarious duties, for I could arouse him only to a state
of semi-consciousness, and could get no information from him. I then
went up to the front door, carefully turned the key and stepped out on
the piazza which ran along the front of the hotel. Another shock was in
store for me. A man posted on the other side of the street was watching
the hotel!

"It was now quite light, and I sauntered carelessly up the street,
apparently taking no notice of the man over the way, and endeavoring to
show by my actions that I was out for an airing before breakfast.

"As I turned the next corner and glanced back, I saw him following. I
noticed a place where jaunting-cars were to be let, but passed on, at
each turn glancing back to see my follower the same distance in the
rear. I now took a circuit around by the hotel, but instead of going in
I hastened and turned the next corner beyond--he, when reaching the
corner near the hotel, not seeing me, doubtless thought I had gone in,
and planted himself in his old position. I thought Lismore to be getting
rather hot, and hastening to the livery stable, found the hostler just
getting up. He informed me that all the horses were engaged for the day
except one, the fastest they had, but as this was engaged for a long
journey on Tuesday, they were letting him have a rest. I said: 'But, my
good fellow, I must have a horse, and at once, with you to drive, and
there will be a half sovereign for a good Irishman, such as I see before
me.' My 'blarney' began to do its work. Scratching his head, he finally
said: 'Well, I will waken up my master, and you can talk with him.' So
he rapped at a window, and soon a night-capped head appeared, and after
some parley the master consented to let me have his equipage. In a few
minutes from the time I had lost sight of my follower we were rattling
out of the town of Lismore at the full speed of a blooded Irish horse. I
had left my bag behind, taking only the Scotch caps and ulster with me
from the hotel. I found, by reference to the small map and railway
guide, that Clonmel was less than thirty miles distant, and connected
with Dublin by a branch line. When I engaged the jaunting-car I had
told the owner that it was uncertain what part of the day I should
require it, and after we were about five miles from Lismore I said to
the driver:

"'You say that you are going to Clonmel on Tuesday for a passenger.
Well, now, as I must go there before I leave this part of the country,
you may as well continue in that direction, and I can return with you on
Tuesday.'

"This pleased him, and we drove on till about noon, when we stopped at a
country grocery about five miles from Clonmel. As we drove up to the
door, the words of an old Irish song went jingling through my brain:

  "'At the sign of the bell,
  On the road to Clonmel,
  Pat Flagherty kept a neat shebeen.'

"The rain poured down in torrents. I gave my driver a lunch of bread and
cheese, which--of course, there--included whisky. I also gave him a
sovereign, telling him to pay his master for the horse-hire and keep the
change for himself; then started him back, brimful of delight and the
'craythur,' receiving his parting salute:

"'Yer 'onor is a jintleman, and no mistake.'

"I arranged with the storekeeper to let a boy take me in his car to
Clonmel.

"The Green Isle! Well, I found out that day what keeps the grass green
in Ireland. My Irish frieze and every thread on me were water-logged,
yet the Irish lad, my driver, took the 'buckets-full' as a matter of
course. Amid this deluge of rain we arrived in Clonmel and stopped at a
'shebeen,' kept by the boy's uncle--driving into the back yard through a
gate in a board fence fifteen feet high, which shut it in from the
street.

[Illustration: "I AM JOHN CURTIN OF THE PINKERTON FORCE."--Page 332.]

"I went into a room in the rear of the sale room, the door of which
stood open so that I could see all that passed within, and, as I stood
drying my clothes by the turf fire, I saw how thirsty souls on the
'ould sod,' evaded the Sunday liquor law. The proprietor stood in the
shop in a position whence he could covertly keep an eye on the policeman
patrolling the street, and as soon as he was out of sight a signal was
given, the backyard gate thrown open, when a dozen men rushed in, and
the gate closed. Coming hilariously through the dwelling into the shop,
these were soon busily drinking their 'potheen.'

"It was now 2 o'clock p.m., the rain had ceased, and starting out, I
walked along a main street until I saw a sign 'cabs to let.' I went into
the house and was shown into an inner room, where the proprietress sat
crooning over a turf fire. She motioned me to a seat beside her, and
when I told her I wished for a conveyance to take me to Cahir, a place
eight miles distant, she asked me several questions, among others, how
long I wished to be gone, and if I were not an American. To all of which
I replied to the following effect: That I was going to visit some
friends who were officers stationed in the fort at Cahir; and as to her
mistaking me for an American, the ancestors of the 'Yankees' went from
about Norfolk County, England, to America, of course, taking the accent
with them, and I being from the former place, (Norfolk) of course had
the same accent.

"This explanation appeared to satisfy the old lady, and she became quite
confidential; and, anxious to remove from my mind any trace of offense
at her unusual questioning, she drew closer to me and said:

"I can see that you are all right; but the fact is that the captain of
police sent an order that I should notify him at once in case any
stranger wished to hire a vehicle, especially if I thought him an
American. But I do not care for the curs; they are nothing but a parcel
of spies and informers in the pay of the English Government; so even if
you were the one they are looking for they will wait a long time for me
to inform them, and you shall have my best horse and a good driver.'

"I heartily thanked the good old Irish lady--for I have found true
ladies and gentlemen among the poor and humble, as well as the wealthy,
especially in Ireland--and in a few minutes I was bowling gayly along
toward Cahir.

"This is a small, ancient, walled garrison town, the nearest railway
station being at Clonmel. This miniature city has been the scene of many
a heart-stirring event in the distant past. Here Cromwell was for a time
held at bay, and his fanatical hordes made their Celtic opponents pay in
blood for their patriotic and desperate defense of their homes and
firesides.

"Driving through the town gate, I saw in the main street a grocery store
with a blind down, and telling the driver to halt there, I paid him and
sent him back. I then went into the grocery, and after taking a lunch of
bread and cheese, continued my walk up the street. I saw a hotel just
ahead, but not wishing to attract attention to my movements, I crossed
to the opposite side, and while doing so glanced back and saw a car come
through the same town gate I had just entered, and dash furiously up the
street, pulling up at the walk a few yards behind me. Just as they
sprang out I turned to the left in a narrow lane in which I saw a
gateway to the fort, just within the entrance of which a sentry was
pacing, there being opposite several roofless cottages. The soldier's
back being turned, quick as thought I sprang unseen within one of these,
and in a moment I heard some men run around the corner and interrogate
the soldier, who stoutly declared that no one had entered. The men then
demanded to see the captain, were admitted, and after a short time I
heard them come out and depart. I stood in that ruin two mortal hours
until dusk, then walked out unseen by the sentry, and turning to the
left, came into a narrow street lined with small dwelling houses."




CHAPTER XXVI.

"EXCUSE ME, SIR, FOR QUESTIONING YOU."


"Crossing the narrow street in Cahir, referred to at the close of the
last chapter, I went in haphazard at the first door, without knocking,
and saw a family eating their humble supper. As I walked in I addressed
the family at the table thus:

"'Good evening. Pardon my intrusion, and do not disturb yourselves; but
by all means finish your supper.'

"'Good evening, sir,' was the reply from the man, whom I will call
Maloy. 'We are glad to see you; will you sit by and have pot-luck with
us?'

"'No, thank you,' I answered. 'I am an American--and it is my custom
when traveling in any country to make unceremonious calls like this, in
order to see the people as they really are at home.'

"After supper was over I related to Maloy and his family several stories
and incidents concerning the Fenians and their doings in America, which,
of course, interested them greatly. When it was fairly dark I arose to
go, and Maloy went outside with me. He had previously informed me that
he was employed by the government in the civil service. I will not state
in what capacity, for, although so many years have elapsed, the
true-hearted Irishman may still be earning his bread in the same humble
employment, and the knowledge that he assisted one whom he supposed to
be a Fenian leader in 1873 might even now cost him dearly. When we were
outside the door I said:

"'The fact is, Maloy, I am a Fenian leader, and the police are after me!
I have been dodging them for two days, and they are looking for me now
in Cahir! I have important papers for prominent Fenians in various parts
of Ireland, and it would delay our plans if I am obliged to destroy
them. But I fear I must do so at once unless you can help me. I would
almost sooner forfeit my life than to lose these papers, and I shall
fight to my last breath rather than let them fall into the hands of the
police, for it might be the ruin of several good men! My plan is to
double back to Clonmel, and I want your assistance to get me out of
Cahir!'

"'Oh, sir,' he replied, 'it is too bad you did not let me know a little
sooner, for the mail car is gone; it starts at 6 o'clock.'

"Just as he had finished speaking, a car came rumbling past and he
exclaimed joyfully:

"'We are in luck! There goes the mail car to the postoffice! Come with
me!'

"We hastened through a narrow, dark lane to the gate--the same I had
entered from Clonmel--walked through and at a hundred yards beyond
waited for the mail car, which soon came along. Maloy being well
acquainted with the driver, hailed him, saying that a friend of his
wanted a ride to Clonmel.

"After shaking hands warmly with Maloy, I climbed upon the car, and the
next instant I was whirling along--into fresh dangers--in that unique
vehicle, an Irish jaunting car.

"Arriving near Clonmel I saw a tavern, and ascertaining from the driver
that it was near the railway station, I left the car and entered the
place, only to find that the best, and, in fact, the sole food to be had
for supper was eggs. Having been on the move since dawn, after a
sleepless night, and almost without food, I hesitate to divulge how many
eggs I disposed of that evening, for the statement might tend to throw
distrust on the general veracity of my narrative. Having dried my wet
clothes and put myself into a presentable condition, I went to the
railway station to take the 11 p.m. train to Dublin. Seating myself on a
bench outside, I handed some money to a porter and sent him for a
ticket, which he obtained. There were but a few waiting about, so I
stepped into the small waiting room and sat down near three other men.
The one nearest, whom I at once put down for a local policeman in
private clothes, turned and spoke to me. I replied with civility to his
questions until finally he said: 'But are you not an American?' I
replied to his startling question in such a manner that he appeared
satisfied.

"'You must excuse me, sir, for questioning you,' he explained, 'but
there has been a great forgery in London, and it is said some of the
parties are in Ireland, and I am anxious to get a claim on the L5,000
that is offered for each one of them.'

"I told him that instead of being offended I was greatly pleased to see
the zeal he exhibited in the execution of his duties, and expressed the
hope that he might be successful in securing at least one of the
forgers, which would give him not only the L5,000, but undoubtedly
promotion. I got on the train all right, resolving that I would not
speak another word of English while in Ireland, and forthwith turned
into a Russian, who could speak 'une veree leetel Francais,' confident
that I should not be in danger of exposure by encounter with any one who
could speak the Russian language. I threw away the ordinary Scotch cap I
had been wearing, and put on the Glengarry. When I arrived at the
Maryborough junction, the train on the main line from Cork was late, and
I walked up and down on the platform, well knowing that the detectives
would scrutinize more closely those who appeared to shrink from
observation; therefore, I affected the bearing of a Russian prince as
nearly as I knew how.

"I got on the train unmolested, and arrived in Dublin at 1 a.m.

"There appeared to be some special watching of those leaving the train,
but I passed out unchallenged and took a cab. Not knowing the name of
any hotel, I told the driver I would direct the route as we passed
along, and he drove away at a great pace. Very soon I noticed another
cab following at an equal speed. I had mine turn a corner, but the one
behind came thundering after; and though I bade my driver to turn at
nearly every corner still I could not shake off my supposed pursuer
until, after apparently being followed about two miles, the stern chaser
turned off in another direction, much to my relief. We soon approached
the Cathedral Hotel, where I alighted about 2 a.m., rang up the porter,
and was shown to a room.

"At 7 o'clock in the morning I sent for my bill, left the hotel, went
direct to the 'Jew' quarters, and purchased a valise and some
second-hand clothes. Noticing the old Jewess' looks of curiosity at
seeing one of my appearance making such purchases, I remarked: 'A Fenian
friend has got himself into a scrape, and the police are after him; so I
am going to get him out of the country, and wish to let him have some
things that do not have too new a look.' At hearing those (in Ireland)
magic words, 'Fenian,' 'police,' she became all smiles, let me fill the
valise with old garments at my own price, and at starting said: 'God
bless you! May you have good luck, and get off safe to America!'

"I then went to a more pretentious locality, where I procured a silk hat
draped with mourning crape, put the Glengarry in my pocket, and became a
Frenchman. At this moment I discovered that I had left in my room at the
hotel a large silk neck-wrapper on which were embroidered my initials. I
immediately stepped into a shop and left my new purchases, resuming the
Scotch cap, and started for the hotel (where I had given no name), to
secure the dangerous article left behind. Coming in sight of the hotel,
I saw a man stationed opposite, leaning on a cane, who appeared to be
watching the house. As I approached nearer he kept his eyes covertly
fixed upon me; therefore, instead of entering the hotel, I walked past
it and turned the next corner, glancing backward as I did so, and, to my
dismay, saw the man following me. I now adopted the same plan of action
that succeeded so well at Cork, and in half an hour I had shaken him off
and returned to the place where I had left my new silk hat and valise.
Donning the hat, with valise in hand, I was soon seated in an Irish
jaunting car, on my way to a station about ten miles out on the railway
to Belfast.

"Upon reflection I was satisfied that the chambermaid had found the silk
wrapper and taken it to the hotel office. There the initials, together
with the knowledge of my arrival at so unusual an hour, without baggage,
and my early departure, had aroused suspicion, and the police had been
notified. At about 11 o'clock I arrived at the station, and going into a
store paid my Dublin cabman and called for lunch. About five minutes
before the train was due from Dublin I walked into the empty station,
presented myself at the ticket office, and said: 'Parlez vous Francais,
Monsieur?' and received the reply, 'No.' I then said in a mongrel of
French and English that I wished for a ticket to Drogheda--not daring to
purchase one through Belfast. Supposing me to be a French gentleman, he
was very polite and ordered the porter to take my baggage to the
platform. There I found myself the solitary waiting passenger. As the
train approached I saw a pair of heads projecting from the carriage
windows, eagerly scanning the platform. Two men jumped off, and,
hastening to the station master began to talk to him in an excited
manner, all the time glancing toward me. As I passed near the group to
get on the train, I heard the agent say: 'He is a Frenchman.' No doubt
he informed them that I had purchased a ticket to a way station only--a
fact that would naturally allay suspicion. At the next stopping place
they actually arrested a man, but went no further.

"I afterward ascertained that twelve men were arrested on that and the
preceding day, among the number being a fraudulent debtor trying to
escape by the same steamer, the Atlantic.

"The following extracts from contemporary newspapers will give the
reader some idea as to what a 'hot' place Ireland was for me:



                          "(By Cable to the New York Herald.)
                                                     "London.

     "Three shabbily dressed men, who, from their accent, are believed
     to be Americans, were arrested in Cork, Ireland, this morning while
     attempting to deposit $12,000 in that city.

     "They are supposed to be the parties who recently committed the
     frauds on the Bank of England."

                       "(From the London Times of same date.)

                                         "To Editor of Times.

     "Sir: The case of Dr. Hessel has been so lately before the public,
     and so much has been written both in the English and German papers
     against the English police, that probably a little evidence upon
     the procedure of the German (or, I ought probably to say, the
     Bavarian) may not be uninteresting at the present moment. Myself
     and son, a sub-lieutenant, R. N., made a great attempt to reach
     the grotesque old city of Nuremberg on Saturday last, arriving
     there about 7 o'clock. We were asked to put our names in the
     stranger's book, as usual, which we did, and retired to bed.
     Imagine our surprise, on rising on Sunday morning, at receiving a
     visit from one of the chief police officers, requesting us to
     'legitimize ourselves.' I asked him his object for making this
     demand, when he replied that a man named Warren was wanted by the
     English police.

     "In vain I showed him an old passport and letters addressed to me,
     showing that my name was Warner; he informed me that I could not
     leave my room, and placed two policemen at the door. At 1 o'clock
     I remembered an influential inhabitant of the town who knew me, and
     I sent for him. He at once went to headquarters and gave bond for
     me to a large amount, and at 6 o'clock in the evening myself and
     son were released. You will remember that in the case of Dr. Hessel
     four persons swore to his identity before he was deprived of his
     liberty. In my case a similar name to that required was sufficient
     to deprive me of mine.

     "I have since received, thanks to the strenuous and prompt action
     of the British Minister at Munich, a very ample apology in writing
     for the blunder that had been committed. It was signed by the
     Burgermeister of the city, and as the intelligence of this worthy
     seems to be equaled by his simplicity, he sends me a safe pass to
     protect me in my further travels, in case Warner should again be
     considered the same as Warren. I remain, sir, your obedient
     servant,

                                             "CHARLES W. C. WARNER,
                                  "Ex-Sheriff, London and Middlesex



"I now return to my narrative. In the second-class compartment where I
sat were two burly, loud-talking, well-informed farm proprietors, one of
whom had imbibed a little too freely of the native distillation. The
sober one had just finished reading a column article on the 'Great Bank
Forgery' to his lively companion, who at length turned and addressed me.
I answered him politely in broken French, and he then went on to give
his opinion of the bank affair, as nearly as I can remember, as follows:

"'You, being a Frenchman, don't understand about our great bank; but I
tell you those Yankees did a clever thing when they attacked that
powerful institution. The one they have got penned up here in Ireland
can't possibly escape; indeed, according to the newspapers, he is
already in the hands of the police. I am almost sorry to hear it, for in
getting the best of that bank so cleverly the rascal deserves to get
off; and see, here is a description of him.'

"I looked at the paper and saw that it was a fair general outline of my
appearance, even to my ulster which I had with me in the valise, and
the Scotch cap which was in my pocket. Before we reached Drogheda I had
explained to one of my new friends, in broken French, that, owing to my
ignorance of the English language, I had purchased a wrong ticket, and
being liable to make a similar mistake, should feel obliged if he would
take the trouble to procure me a ticket at that station. He readily
assented, and by this means I procured it without exposing myself. The
hunt for me was becoming so extremely hot that I dared not show myself
again at a ticket office; and if I should be found on a train ticketless
that fact might lead to closer scrutiny--the rule in that country being
that every passenger must be provided with a ticket before entering a
car.

"The train arrived in Belfast at 9 o'clock, and I at once took a cab to
the Glasgow steamer. It was very dark, and I went on board unobserved,
two hours before the time of departure. Going down into the saloon
cabin, I saw the purser sitting near the entrance, to whom I said:
'Parlez vous Francais?' He shook his head. I then asked in jargon for
'une billet a Glasgow.' Surmising what I wished, he gave me a ticket,
putting on it the number of my berth.

"Expecting to be followed, I had taken that instant precaution of
impressing on the purser's mind that I was a Frenchman. I passed into
the washroom, just opposite where the purser sat, washed myself and
brushed my hair. Just at this moment I heard steps descending the cabin
stairway, then the words:

"'Purser, a cab just brought a man from the Dublin train. Where is he?'

"'Oh, you mean the Frenchman,' replied the purser; 'he's in the
washroom.'

[Illustration: ONE WHO HAS BEEN ROBBED IDENTIFYING THE THIEF AT
NEWGATE.]

"While this was passing I had put on my silk hat and taken up my valise,
and was standing before the glass (a la Francais) taking a final view of
my toilette, and snapping off some imaginary dust and lint, as the
two detectives stepped in, and after looking me well over went out, and
I saw them no more. That proved to be the last ordeal through which I
passed in Ireland. After being convinced that they had left the steamer
I went to my berth, and being thoroughly exhausted I fell asleep in an
instant, not awaking until the steamer was entering the harbor of
Glasgow.

"After my arrest a month later in Scotland, during the transfer to
London and afterward to Newgate, while awaiting trial, the detectives
told me that they were in Cork three hours after I had left, and one of
them related their adventures substantially as follows:

"'We arrived in Cork Saturday afternoon and were not long in finding the
temperance hotel where you stayed on Friday night, and the hat you left
behind. After a long hunt we ascertained that a jaunting car had left
the stand some hours previously and was still absent.

"'We had a good laugh at those blunder-heads, the Cork officers, letting
you slip through their fingers, and then showed them how we do things.
After some delay we traced the cab across the bridge to the shop where
you got the boy to go for it. The shopwoman was quite voluble about you,
saying she knew all the time that you were an American by the accent,
and described the bag and ulster which we had ascertained were in your
possession. Of course, we were now satisfied that we were on the right
scent, but could get no further trace or the direction taken by the cab.
We therefore sent dispatches to all the telegraph stations within fifty
miles to put the police on the watch and sent messengers to the outlying
places, but somehow you slipped through our meshes, and nothing turned
up until the car man returned at about 11 p.m., as drunk as a soldier on
furlough. After putting him under a water tap until he was half drowned
we got him sober enough to tell where he had left you; but he swore you
were a priest, and his evident sincerity caused us all to roar with
laughter. This angered him, and he said: "Ye may twist me head an'
dhroun me intirely, but I wull niver spake another wurrud about the
jintelman at all, at all," and sure enough we could get nothing more out
of him.

"'We had a carriage ready, and, jumping in, we were at the wayside inn
by midnight and terrified the old woman half out of her wits in arousing
her out of bed. After a while she gathered them sufficiently to show us
that you had six hours the start of us. The boy who carried your bag
could give us no points, but we concluded you intended taking the branch
line at Fermoy for Dublin. We drove right on, arriving at the Fermoy
station at 1 p.m., but, getting no trace we telegraphed to all the
stations along the line to Dublin, and there as well to be on the
lookout. Who would ever have thought of your taking the opposite
direction, penning yourself in at the end of a branch line, at a small
inland town like Lismore? Why, you were, as we discovered the next
morning, at that moment sleeping quietly at the Lismore Hotel, and only
about ten miles from where we were working so industriously for that
L5,000! Well, you "done" us fine that time!

"'After you so cleverly threw us off the trail, we could get no trace
until Sunday morning, when we received a dispatch from Lismore, stating
that a man had come on the last train, stayed at the hotel and left at
daylight without paying his bill. "Hello!" said I, as soon as I read the
dispatch, "we never suspected Lismore; he has been there all night and
is off again!" We telegraphed to Clonmel, Waterford and other places;
then left for Lismore, where we arrived, paid your bill and took the bag
with us. Surmising that you might make for Clonmel, we looked for and
found the place where you got the car, but no news as to what direction
you had taken. It would have made you laugh, as it did us, to see the
old livery man stamp about and tear his hair when he found how easily
he could have made the L5,000--if he had "only known."

"'Starting on the way to Clonmel, we soon had news which satisfied us we
were once more on the right track. Shortly after we met, sure enough,
the cab you had sent back from the country store. Arriving there we took
the boy, who had just returned from driving you to Clonmel, with us,
and, feeling sure that we should soon come up with you, we made our
horses spin toward that town. Arriving there, we saw the inspector, who
informed us that he had sent a constable in pursuit of a man who had
hired a car to go to Cahir.' (This must have been one of the men in the
car whom I escaped by dodging into the ruined cottage.) 'It being then
sundown we drove to Cahir with all speed, arriving there just after
dark, passing the Clonmel mail car inside the gate; but it contained no
one but the driver.

"'We soon found the constable sent from Clonmel, who said you had
disappeared into the fort, where a friend must have concealed you, and
that you must be there still. He then took us to the fort, which was
closed for the night. As soon as my eyes lighted on the ruined cottages
I asked him if he had searched them and received an answer in the
negative. "Why," said he, "they are, as you see, all open to the day,
without roof, doors or windows, and no one would think of hiding in
them." "You are a fool," I replied. "Give me your lamp and come with
me." After a look around and seeing how easily any person could stand in
a corner out of sight, I remarked to him emphatically that he was the
biggest specimen of a goose I had ever seen in my line. "I think," said
I, "you had better go home and play pin. Here is where he dodged you,
and now he is off again, with an hour or more start." We worked until
after midnight and gave Cahir such a "turning over" that the inhabitants
won't soon forget, but could not get hold of the least trace, except at
one place (Maloy's), where a woman said a stranger came in at supper
time, who said he was an American seeing the people in their homes. We
cross-questioned the man, but could get nothing out of him more than
that you had departed.

"'At last we gave it up, went to the hotel to get some sleep, which we
needed badly, and the next day went to Dublin, heard about the finding
of your neck-wrapper at the Cathedral Hotel, and knocked about Ireland
for some time. During this time we arrested several persons, but soon
discovered none of them was the right party, and we never obtained a
genuine trace until you were discovered later in Edinburgh.'"

[Illustration: MARKET CROSS, EDINBURGH.]




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE FLOWERS IN THE PRIMROSE WAY ARE SWEET.


As narrated in an earlier chapter, I left England two days before the
first lot of forged bills were sent in. I left serene and confident of
the future. My departure was a happy event in a double sense. All my
negotiations had been carried on at a considerable expense of nerve, and
in leaving I left everything in such trim that success seemed certain,
with all chance of danger eliminated from the venture. I felt that the
trying toil was now all over, with nothing for me to do but to reap the
harvest, and that without effort or care on my part.

So, when the late November sun looked down on me--I crossed by daylight
this time--standing on the deck of that same wretched Channel steamer,
it looked on a happy man. I did not know then that success in wrongdoing
was ever a failure. The anxious toil of the London and Continental
negotiations was a thing of the past. Was I not young; wealth was or
soon would be mine; was I not in perfect health, body sound and
digestion good, and, above all, was not the woman I loved awaiting me in
Paris, to give herself to me, in all her youth and beauty, and then
somewhere across the Western waters would I not find in some tropic seas
a paradise, which gold would make mine, where I could bear my bride, and
there, turning over a new leaf, live and die with the respect of all
good men mine?

Here was a stately structure I was going to erect, but how rotten the
foundation! I, in my egotism, fancied, in my case, at least, the eternal
course of things would be stayed, and that justice would grant me a
clean bill of health. She did give me that, but it was long years after,
and only when she had had from me her pound of flesh to the very last
ounce.

I joined my sweetheart and her family at the Hotel St. James, Rue
Saint-Honore. She was an English lady, and for a whole year our
courtship had been going on, and now, our wedding day being fixed a week
ahead, we all set out sightseeing and having a good time generally. I
now engaged the coachman I had met before as my valet, and a very good,
all-around, handy man he proved to be. Of course I was anxious to hear
that the first coup on the bank had succeeded, but I was tolerably
confident it was all right. Had it fallen through it would have proved
awkward for me. In that event the Paris climate would have been too warm
for me, and I would have had to find a score of excuses to hasten our
marriage and leave for the Western World as speedily as possible.

I had a four-in-hand coach, and we drove everywhere in and around Paris,
once to Versailles and on to Fontainebleau, where we dined, a merry
party. What a strange world is this, what a stage it is, ever crowded
with tragedies, too! How absolutely in the dark we are as to the motives
and actions of men.

There I was, the centre of merry pleasure parties in gay Paris. A young
dude, driving my four-in-hand, and yet a criminal, waiting in hourly
expectation a telegram announcing success in a great plot which, when it
exploded, was destined to startle the business world, and to hurl me
from the summit of happiness, where I was reveling, apparently free from
care, to the misery of a dungeon, banishing the happy smiles from my
face and the joyous ring from my voice, leaving in place of the smiles
the sombre gloom of the prison, and in place of the snatches of song and
eager accents I was wont to speak with, the hushed voice subdued to
prison tones.

Late one morning, on opening my eyes, my first thought was: It will be
hit or miss at the Bank of England within the next sixty minutes. We had
engaged for a coaching party to Versailles and were to dine there. I
left for the drive that day with a dim fear that before the sun set I
might be under the necessity of leaving Paris in a hurry.

When starting for Versailles I left my servant behind to wait for the
expected telegram, and to bring it to me by rail. We were at dinner, and
I was just raising a glass of champagne to my lips when I saw my valet,
Nunn, crossing the esplanade. He entered the room and handed me a
telegram. Tearing open the envelope I read:

"All well. Bought and shipped forty bales."

That meant the first lot for $40,000 had gone through safely. It was
certainly a great relief. The next day I received $25,000 in United
States bonds, from George in London, my first share of the proceeds. I
sold the bonds in Paris, receiving payment in French notes.

On Thursday, the day before our marriage, I had a telegram from Mac and
George to meet them in Calais, and to Calais I had to go. I arrived
there at midnight, just before the Dover steamer got in, and was on the
pier to meet them. We exchanged warm greetings; as we did so Mac placed
a small but very heavy bag in my hands, and they began laughing over my
surprise. It contained L4,000 in sovereigns, and was stuffed with bonds
and paper money. We went to a hotel near by, and there they counted out
to me the very nice sum of $100,000 in gold, bonds and French money. As
they were going back on the same steamer, and I was to return to Paris
by the train carrying the passengers of the steamer just arrived, we had
only a brief half hour's talk. After giving me the money we went out
and sat down on the pier, and that conversation and scene are forever
impressed on my memory. I shall make no attempt to describe either, but
could both be put on the stage, with the audience in possession of a
full knowledge of the enterprise we were embarked in, there would be
seen a picture of human life such as the novelist or playwright never
had the imagination nor the daring to depict. To the earnest student of
human life it would have been a revelation.

There we were, three earnest, ambitious young men, enthusiastic for all
that was good and noble. I about to wed a pure-souled woman, who thought
me an angel of goodness, and about to fly with my plunder and bride to
Mexico. My two companions were returning to London to continue carrying
out a giant scheme of fraud against a great moneyed institution, but
there we were, with $100,000 in plunder at our feet, sitting under the
stars, listening to the dash of the waves, and talking not at all like
pirates and robbers, but much more like crusaders setting out on a
crusade, or like pilgrims going on a pilgrimage.

I told my friends I should go to the City of Mexico for a year or two,
and then meet them somewhere in America where we would unite our wealth
to inaugurate some scheme that would benefit thousands in our own
generation and millions in the generations to come. We would hedge
ourselves about with kindly deeds, so live as to win the respect of all,
and when under the sod live in the eyes and mouths of men.

Too soon the whistle sounded, and we had to say good-bye, which we did
in an enthusiasm that told how deeply we felt. We were walking in the
Primrose Way, its flowers and songs were sweet, and we thought their
perfume and melody eternal.

I again arrived in Paris at daylight, but early as it was, my
sweetheart, escorted by my servant, was waiting my arrival. It was our
wedding morning. During our drive to the hotel, radiant with joy, she
told me the separation had been a cruel one, and she was so happy to
know we should never be separated again!

At 4 o'clock that afternoon we were married at the American Embassy.

I had told every one I was going to leave the next day for Havre, to
embark for New York. Our baggage was all packed and placed in a van,
which I accompanied to the Havre station, and had stored there. Sunday I
purchased one ticket to Bayonne, one for Madrid and one to Burgos, each
from different agencies. On Sunday morning I took a van to the Havre
station, and transferring our baggage to the road into Spain, checked
all of it to Madrid.

My purpose was to sail by the Lopez & Co. steamer El Rey Felipe from
Cadiz to Mexico, which was advertised to sail ten days later.

We were married very quietly on Friday, and our friends, wisely
recognizing the fact that young married people like to be alone, the
next day said good-bye and returned to Normandy. We spent a quiet and
happy Saturday and Sunday, and on Sunday night we left--my wife, servant
and self--for Cadiz, via Madrid. My wife, like all English people, knew
little of geography, and had such hazy notions of America that she
thought it quite the thing to go to such an outlandish and far off
quarter of the globe as America via a Spanish port. Columbus, she knew,
had gone that way, and why should not we?

We had an all-night ride to Bayonne in one of those antiquated
compartments used in railway carriages all over Europe, but the ride was
not tedious, nor was the night long. This little earth had no happier
couple, and, talking of the happy years that lay before us, the night
rushed by like a fairy dream.

Where was my conscience? Why, my dear reader, I had sung it such a song
that it was delighted with the music, and had, I was going to say, gone
to sleep, but it had not. It was wide awake, and we were good chums. We
both--conscience and I--had persuaded ourselves it was a virtuous deed
to do evil that good might come. My conscience was perhaps as old as the
sun, but I myself was young and too inexperienced to see the fallacy of
the argument, since I myself was the doer of the wrong; but, of course,
I should have hotly denounced any other such philosopher as a villain
and rogue.

The night flew by, and to our surprise we found 240 miles had slipped
away and we were in Bayonne. Thirty minutes more and we were speeding
south, and soon crossed the Bidassoa, the boundary between France and
Spain. Then my wife saying, "Now I will sleep," laid her head on the
shoulder of the happiest man in or out of Spain, and in ten minutes her
regular breathing told me she was in the land of dreams.

The Pyrenees, in dividing France and Spain, stand between two distinct
peoples, and as the centuries go by the streams of national life meet,
but only to repel each other, never to mingle. One has but to cross the
bank to realize that he is among a different race. Dress, food and
cooking--social life, religious devotion, modes of thought--are all
different. To us here in America it is difficult to realize that so
slight a thing as a mountain barrier, easily traversed, crossed by many
defiles and good roads, should continue to separate two distinct
peoples. But so it is. Stranger still, for nearly all time the
inhabitants of the Spanish mountains have been more or less opposed to
the people of the Spanish plains, and every century has seen several
insurrections among the mountaineers. In 1872 and '73 the Carlists held
the mountains and more or less fusillading was going on. The possibility
of my way being blocked by the Carlists never entered into my
calculations.

The railway from Bayonne to Madrid is owned in Paris, and it seems that
the directors were paying blackmail to Don Carlos, ostensibly to him,
but really to several marauding bands who plundered under the name of
fighting for the Don, upon the understanding that the railroad was not
to be meddled with. The directors had been paying 100,000 francs a
month. As will be easily believed, there was a difficulty in the
distribution of the money among so many greedy and inartistic robbers,
and the discontented determined to hold up the railroad itself and stop
all trains. Unluckily, the train we were on was the one they proposed to
experiment on first, and they proposed drastic measures, too--in fact,
had blown up or down a short tunnel, and torn up the rails in front of
our train. As we crossed the frontier a French gendarme and Spanish
civil guard appeared, demanding passports. It was, of course, a sure
thing that I had them all right. It is a safeguard under the protection
of which the man who has anything to fear slips through the fingers of
frontier guards and police, while the honest man quite frequently
neglects the necessary formalities and is detained.

Our train crossed the bridge over the Bidassoa and we were on Spanish
soil. Soon we entered the gorges of the Pyrenees, and while speculating
whether I should awaken my wife to see the magnificent scenery all
necessity for awakening any one on that train was over. Three or four
musket shots rang out, our train was off the rail, and after a crash or
two came to a sudden stop, and then a babel arose, while the train was
surrounded by armed men. It was laughable. It seemed like an opera
bouffe, the real thing, this motley array of brigands, all trying to
maintain under difficulties the grave Spanish exterior.

One monkey of 18 or 19 years, armed, came to our compartment, and,
pointing to my chain, said he wanted it and my watch. None of us
understood Spanish, but we all comprehended his meaning readily. I
refused to make him a gift, and got rid of him easily.

We were all ordered to alight and our captors seemed inclined to be
ugly. Myself and party were about the only well-dressed people on the
train, and, seeing a priest close by, I went up to him, and ascertaining
he could speak French, I began, in very bad French indeed, to threaten
with very dire consequences Don Carlos and every band of Carlists who
dares to annoy an English Duke and Duchess, and demanded instant shelter
and a guard for my wife, the Duchess. We could hardly keep from
laughing, it was so very like a melodrama. My wife thoroughly enjoyed
the situation, and I should have done so too, had I not had such strong
reasons for quick passage through Spain to blue water on the South, for
I desired to speedily put some leagues of Neptune's domain between
myself and the Old World.

The priest, although a sallow, sombre fellow, was a very good one, and
seemed to realize the gravity of the situation, for, calling the chief
to him, he warned him to be careful. That gentleman came up, and drawing
himself up said very proudly: "Sir, we are soldiers, not robbers." I
said I was very glad to know it, and demanded to be informed if I was a
prisoner or not, and was told I was not, but with the same breath he
said he would be obliged to detain us for a few days. There was a fonda,
or inn, close by, and leaving my wife there, I finally managed by a
liberal use of money to secure an ox-cart, and by virtue of great
generalship on the part of myself and servant, got all our baggage out
of the wrecked train and safely up to the inn.

Spaniards are provokingly slow, but by riding mule-back five miles away
I succeeded in seeing the local commander of the Carlist forces, and he
promised to send me the next day a pass through the lines, going either
south or north. I got him also to include in the pass my fellow
passengers. I did this because there was a Portuguese family who had
tickets for South America. They were then on their way to embark at
Lisbon, and the old gentleman, the head of the family, was very weak and
ill.

My safe plan would have been to return to France, make my way to Brest
and embark from there to New York, and that would have been my course
had I had any conception of the slowness of the Spanish officials and of
the fierce storms and snows that dominate the passes of the Pyrenees in
Winter.

We were informed by many officials, railway guards, Custom House
officers, Carlists, etc., that by crossing thirty miles south we would
pass the lines and get to a little town on the railway where trains left
frequently for Madrid. The Spaniards about the place would never have
let us start out on that perilous trip had it not been for the money
there was in it. I had secured at a round price three century old
bullock carts, and in the afternoon of the second day we got off. I had
all the women and the sick Portuguese in one cart, with the two other
carts ahead heaped with luggage. Thus there were eight bullocks, four
mules and (unlucky number) thirteen men engaged.

I had very misty notions as to our destination, but took it for granted
the baker's dozen of natives I had with me knew what they were about.
Snow was everywhere, and we were mounting up, up, up, on wheels, but I
supposed the highest altitude was only four or five miles away, and that
the down grade would be easy until we reached some snug inn where we
would find shelter for man and beast. Then an early start by daylight
and our novel jaunt would come to an end in civilization and a railway.
But I did not know Spaniards, their country, the Pyrenees, nor what
blizzards can blow in sunny Spain.

Myself and my servant Nunn trudged on alongside the cart with the women.
It took an hour to get out of sight of the fonda, and then we struck a
fine, wide military road that wound in and around the mountains, but
always up and deep in snow. Three, four o'clock came and still no sign
of the summit, but with the road winding in and out for miles ahead. The
sky began to darken, and without warning down came the snow. Then
frequent halts of the caravan to rest the cattle. Deeper grew the snow,
and as the darkness began to settle down I realized the responsibility I
had unwittingly taken on my shoulders. I had four delicate women in my
forlorn party and found myself fast in the midst of a snowstorm, in a
wild pass of the Pyrenees. I recognized one blessing, however, and was
profoundly grateful--the air was calm--and though the snow fell thick
and fast it was not driven by a storm.

Nunn proved to be thoroughly reliable, helpful and full of cheer.
Between us we kept up the spirits of the party. But all hands began to
grow hungry. Fortunately I had in my baggage a large pate de foie gras.
That is a fat goose liver pie, and it was fat, happily so, as it went
the further. Then I got rugs and wraps out of my trunks for the women
and a couple of bottles of brandy, and administered liberal doses all
round. I soon had them happy and full of courage. It was certainly
better to have them full of Dutch courage in a fool's paradise than to
have them awake to their position, for I quite expected it would end in
a night camp-out in the snow and sending an empty cart for supplies. Two
hours after dark we came to a dead halt, and my guides--they were
beauties--said they could go no further; the oxen could not pull the
carts. There was a fonda, they said, two miles away, but did not show
any disposition to help to get there, and for that matter did not seem
to care whether we did or not. I ordered them to leave the middle cart
behind and divide the teams, one team to be added to the front cart and
one to be hitched in front of the mules. Our interpreter was one of the
Portuguese women, but we did not get on very well, the Spaniards
objecting to anything being done, all of them apparently waiting for
the Virgin or some of the saints to come to our aid; but as neither did,
Nunn and I were exasperated, and finally took the matter into our own
hands. By my orders, despite the energetic protests of the drivers, he
unhitched the oxen from the middle team, and between us we got them to
the mule cart, hitched them in front of the mules and pulled out and
past the other carts. Here the Spaniards halted us, and after an angry
altercation in the dark--and it was dark--they agreed to go on. So,
taking a yoke of oxen from our cart, they were put in front of the four
of the first cart, and off we started. Nunn volunteered to stand by and
guard the stranded cart; so giving him two blankets and a little brandy
we drove off in the darkness. But not until, in sight of all, I had
given him a revolver, and each of the unlucky thirteen a good nip of
brandy. My anxiety about serious results was over as soon we started,
and in an hour and a half we halted in front of a wretched mountain inn,
patronized by muleteers, with the first story for a stable, but none of
us were disposed to be particular. A supper of Spanish beans was soon
ready, and then a bed was made up on the floor, and the women were soon
asleep. After seeing that the mules and oxen were fed, I took half an
hour's nap. Then with two drivers we started back, taking three yoke of
oxen. What a tramp I had back through the snow and storm! I was very
happy, however, for I knew my wife and party were safely sheltered, and
the excitement of action kept one from being gloomy.

In due time we found our stray, hitched to and started, but it was hard
pulling and the exhausted oxen had to come to frequent halts. At last,
just as I was beginning to feel tired, we came to the fonda.

The snow had slackened, but the wind was beginning to blow, so Nunn and
I carried all the luggage and traps into a corner of the stable below,
and tumbling down into the hay we were soon in the land of dreams. In my
dreams I was on a shoreless sea in a bark that silently and swiftly
circled around. Dark clouds closed in on all sides, while my boat sailed
between ever-narrowing walls, the clouds still closing in, until a giant
hand grew out from a ragged edge of the cloud wall, which, seizing the
prow of my boat, pulled it into the gloom and darkness. I felt the
clouds brushing my cheek. I heard the roar of falling water, and felt
that my doom was sealed. I thought of my wife, and, trying to call her
name, was dumb. I looked behind. Far off and far up there was a glow of
rosy light, and within the aureole was her face, full of sorrow, looking
at me with pity in every feature. As I looked, her face was slowly
eclipsed by a cloud. Then with one cry I plunged into the sea--and
awoke.

That dream would easily have joined the long procession of forgotten
dreams, but it was recalled many a time during many years. And, try as I
might, I felt it to be a portent and a prophecy.

When I awoke in the morning I was dumfounded to find a blizzard blowing
that the cattle could not face, and with every appearance of
continuance. In reply to my inquiries I learned they sometimes blew in
those altitudes for a week. This was unpleasant news for me, and the
prospect made me nervous. It was now Thursday, the fourth day since our
departure from Paris. And what might have happened in London in that
time! Here was I as completely isolated from the outside world and from
all news about my companions in England as if on a desert isle. For all
I knew discovery might have been made, and full details of the fraud
might be blazing in the press of Europe. I began to fear I had run into
a trap. To make matters worse, the steamer El Rey Felipe was advertised
to sail Monday from Cadiz, and to miss her seemed danger indeed.

[Illustration: PRISONERS WAITING TRIAL, AT NEWGATE, RECEIVING VISITORS.]

I was a prisoner in a wretched inn in a defile of the Pyrenees, with a
civil war raging, and no telling what might arise to detain us. Our
objective point was only some thirty-five miles away, but with roads
deep in snow, with wretched cattle and more wretched Spaniards for
drivers, there was poor prospect of making headway. I felt it would
never do for me to suffer longer detention.

I determined to leave my wife and baggage in charge of Nunn, to put the
$120,000 I had in a bag and start back to the French frontier, cross
into France and catch the Saturday steamer from Havre to New York,
explaining to my wife that important business demanded my presence in
America, that she could follow on the next steamer and that I would meet
her on arrival.

In the mean time my unlucky thirteen were happy. For were they not
sheltered, with plenty of food and high wages, all out of the pocket of
the great lord the Virgin herself must have sent to them? In fact, they
were winning from me what to them was a fortune. I was paying each man a
dollar a day and $5 for each team and cart.

From my experience I must give the Spaniards a good name for honesty. Of
course, they were charging me cut-throat prices, but they were poor,
and wealthy lords did not often come their way. Aside from that they
were very honest. Many things, such as rugs, shawls, lunch baskets,
dressing cases, etc., that must have seemed of value to them, lay around
everywhere, but not a single article was missing during the entire trip.

All day long the blizzard blew. It was a novel situation, and how I
should have enjoyed it had I only possessed that greatest of all
blessings--a good conscience! As it was, I was in misery, and could find
no peace, not even in my wife's smiles and evident content to be
anywhere with me.

I saw that the cattle were well cared for and that the men had both food
and wine. Then my servant skirmished around and decapitated sundry
chickens he found. So we had roast chicken three times a day, and as I
had a case of brandy in my luggage, we did not suffer. Nunn roasted the
chickens, made the punch, got the Spanish men and women to dance for our
entertainment, and made himself generally of service. About midnight the
storm broke up, and to my great satisfaction the stars came out. That
night I slept in the same room with the women, with a sheet hung between
us.

At 5 o'clock I had all hands up and breakfast under way. I ordered the
drivers and hangers on to have the teams hitched up and ready at
daylight. They all ate breakfast heartily enough, but were not zealous
about starting out. They made all sorts of pretexts and excuses to avoid
leaving their comfortable quarters. Certainly the road was not an
inviting prospect, there being quite eighteen inches of snow, but I was
determined to start one way or the other, either south with the party or
north alone. After long argument they, thinking they had me at their
mercy, refused to hitch up the cattle to make the attempt. I at once
paid and dismissed them all. Determining to set out immediately alone
for the French frontier, carrying only a small bag slung over my
shoulder, and concealing the bonds and paper money on my person, I would
leave the greater part of the gold in charge of my wife. I knew Nunn
would be a trusty guard to her.

I had not given her any intimation of my purpose, but got my bag ready,
and, secreting about me the bonds and paper money, I took my wife into a
room, and, first telling her she must be very brave, explained my plan,
pointing out I must not miss the Saturday steamer. She should follow on
the next, and I would leave her $20,000. But she pleaded to go with me,
said she would be no encumbrance, would ride mule-back to the railway,
no matter how far away. I then called Nunn and told him I should leave
him in charge of the baggage, and that we were going to set out at once.
I praised his fidelity, and informed him I would make him a present
when he arrived all safe in New York with the baggage. But when the sick
man and his family were told we were going they raised a howl. The women
all hung on me crying and imploring me not to leave them to despair and
death. They would all perish, etc.

[Illustration: Henry Hawkins, Esq. Q.C. Hon. Sir. J. Kellog, KKT Judge
of the Queen's Bench Rt. Hon. Sir R. J. K. Cockburn, Chief High Justice
of England]


[Illustration: The Lord Chancellor. Sir C. Russell J.C. Queen's
Counsel.]


[Illustration: Witnesses. Clerk of The Old Bailey. "I object My Lord".]

I had secured a good saddle mule, but with a man's saddle, and my wife
was sensible enough not to make an outcry over the prospect of a ride
man-fashion. She came out warmly clad and mounted the mule, and I
strapped some rugs and a bundle of lunch behind the saddle. The owner of
the mule was at his head, halter in hand, ready to lead off. The entire
population were out staring open-mouthed. I delivered a speech to my
lucky-unlucky thirteen, telling them in the best way I could that I was
going in order to deliver them all over to the vengeance of the military
chief of the district. That I should accuse them as robbers and thieves,
and that they might look for anguish that would wring their hearts and
souls.

They were greatly moved, and, pulling out my watch, I informed them by
pantomime and bad Spanish that if they got the teams in harness and the
luggage all packed on the carts in twenty minutes I would take them into
my favor and resume our journey southward.

Spaniards are proverbially slow. But these Spaniards were not slow, and
a very few minutes saw us all once more mounted on our cart, with the
two baggage carts following, and on our rocky way southward.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

FEAR SAYS "NO" TO HAPPINESS.


We passed during the day a military post and several squads of armed
men. Poor fellows! they were wretchedly equipped, so far as garments
went. They all examined us curiously, but did not offer to stop or
question us while I marched on ahead of the cavalcade like a drum major,
giving the military salute to each party as we passed. I ought to have
been fatigued, but I was not. After about five miles of uphill work we
began to descend. The road was a masterpiece of engineering, and well it
might be, for it was one of five military roads the great Napoleon
ordered to be constructed across the Pyrenees, and it was done in a
thoroughly workmanlike manner. It wound in and out and along defiles of
stern beauty.

We halted for rest and refreshment at noon, and again at 4 o'clock for
an hour. At the last place we found some Carlist officers, one a young
Englishman, who was a good fellow and most attentive. He was an
aide-de-camp on Don Carlos' staff. He told me there was no chance of his
side winning, but he was in it for the fun of the thing and in hope of
seeing some fighting. He had taken part in a number of skirmishes, and
was by no means satisfied yet. He volunteered to escort us through the
lines, and was evidently more than pleased to meet an English lady in
the person of my wife.

It was beautiful to see him order about my muleteers and bully them up
hill and down dale, not hesitating to use his whip on them. About 5
o'clock we started off in great shape, having some twenty miles to go to
the little town on the railway south of the Pyrenees. We had two
lanterns and a number of torches; it was a picturesque caravan in the
darkness. The young officer rode beside the first cart, conversing with
my wife, while I walked in the rear. We had reason to congratulate
ourselves over our escort, he being a brave and brilliant fellow and
evidently a person of importance. He little thought whom he was
escorting. I was pleased on my wife's account, as he was company for
her, and, altogether, she thoroughly enjoyed the novelty of the whole
situation.

We had made a fine bed of hay and blankets for our sick man.
Nevertheless, he was a source of much anxiety and trouble. At last, to
the intense relief of all, we heard far away the shrill whistle of a
locomotive. It was sweet music to my ears, for I realized the peril of
the delay. We had now arrived at the base of the southern slope of the
Pyrenees and the plain stretched out before us. We had just passed
through an intrenched camp that guarded the entrance to the valley. Our
escort had ridden ahead, and not satisfied with smoothing the way for
us, had turned out the guard to do us honor. We halted for a few
minutes, and several uniformed officers came forward and were introduced
to my wife and me. It was a picturesque scene. The mantle of snow
covering all, the strange-looking mountaineers, the eager-faced, boyish
officers--French, English, Austrian--all soldiers of fortune, who, in
the dearth of great wars, were seeking fame in the inglorious civil
contest; our torches casting fantastic shadows until the forest-covered
mountain, dark and frowning, though snow lay everywhere, seemed peopled
with hosts of men--all made a picture never to be forgotten by some of
the observers.

Another mile and our escort had to leave us, but the town, standing dark
against the snow, was in plain view. By his advice I went ahead on foot
with two men, in case any of "the enemy" were prowling around, but found
none until we arrived in the town; then a scene of great excitement to
the townspeople arose.

We were examined and cross-examined, and our statements taken down in
writing and sworn to by all hands. In the mean time I had made beds for
our sick man and the ladies in the waiting room of the station, and
about 2 o'clock I went to sleep. The station was fortified and full of
soldiers, but I did not care, being told the Madrid train would start at
daylight; if so, I would be in time for El Rey Felipe, and would be
sailing out of Cadiz harbor on Monday over the blue water, westward ho!

After a two hours' nap I was up, paid off my lucky thirteen, giving them
a present in addition to their due, with a written paper certifying that
they were honest and brave, and had delivered me and mine in safety.

The weather continued very cold, and when the train, consisting of two
passenger and one baggage car, arrived we found there were no heating
arrangements, and we shivered at the thought of an all-day's ride
without fire or heat across that windy plain. I determined to have a
compartment to ourselves, for my wife and I had not had a moment's
privacy since the smash-up of the train. So we fixed up a bed on the
floor of a compartment for our sick man, and I put his family in to look
out for him. When the train left we found ourselves, very much to our
satisfaction, alone. I had telegraphed ahead to Burges to have hot water
cases, then the only mode of heating cars in Europe, ready on our
arrival.

The engineer of our train was an Englishman. As it was so important that
I should not be delayed I gave him a sovereign and his stoker another,
and asked him as a favor to make time. He said he would and kept his
word. But arriving at Burgos we found that the train from Santander
going south was two hours late, so my wife and I started out to see the
famous town.

After a short view we made our way to the Cathedral, and it was a sight!
It is one of the many sacred edifices which the piety of former ages
bequeathed our own. One of these sacred buildings--like the Strasbourg
and Cologne Cathedrals, in the construction of which generation after
generation of pious souls--pious according to the fashion of their
times--had given their days to the building and decoration of the
cloister or church where their lives were lived, and all was done with
loving and patient care.

We in our day may sneer at the monks and brothers of the Dark Ages, but
in those times of rude violence all gentle hearted, scholarly souls
found in the sanctity and quiet of the cloister the only refuge open to
them, and they did good work, both in the domain of mind and in the
world of material things. Much that was "piety" and much that was
"faith" in their day is termed superstition in ours; but who will deny
that the simple piety and credulous faith of their day was a million
times better than the restless skepticism and sad unrest of ours?

At Burgos I tried to get an English paper, but none was to be had and no
one there had ever seen one.

But here some startling news came flashing over the wires. Nothing less
than that there had been a revolution at Madrid, the capital. Amadeo,
the lately elected king, had suddenly resigned, and a republic had been
proclaimed with Castelar at the head.

I began to see more and more what a fool I was to let myself be caught
at such a time in such a land, but still had so much confidence in my
good fortune that I felt I would be on time for the steamer on Monday.

It was now 3 o'clock Friday. We were all aboard for Madrid and just
pulling out of the station. We would be due there the next morning. From
Madrid to Cadiz there is only one through train in twenty-four hours,
and that leaves seven mornings a week; but, as it runs only fifteen
miles an hour, and is seldom on time at that, one must figure on taking
an entire twenty-four hours for the journey. Still, as we would be due
Saturday morning, I had a big margin for delay.

At last we were off. On the train and in every group we passed there
were signs of subdued excitement. Between Royalists and Republicans
sharp lines were evidently drawn which soon were to culminate in bloody
conflict.

Soon after 10 o'clock we arrived in the walled town of Avila, about
eighty miles from the famous Escurial built by the second Philip, and
about 150 miles from Madrid. Here we got an excellent dinner and good
coffee. But dinner was spoiled for me by the disastrous intelligence
that martial law had been proclaimed and that the Government had seized
the roads running north from Madrid to transport troops.

Here was a pretty pickle! I was enraged. I saw the chief of the railway
at Avila, but he was a fool, and under the unwonted state of affairs had
lost what little head he ever had.

So once more our baggage was all piled out of the train, and once more
we had to go into camp on the floor of the station, with a terrific din
around us.

I arose early, and looking up the telegraph clerk and railway chief, I
made them both rich by the present to each of five escudos.

Then I telegraphed Castelar and the Minister of War that I was an
Englishman, that I had my family with me, and having important business
in Madrid I must not be detained in Avila. I demanded that he should at
once direct the military officials to send me on to Madrid by special
train. I also sent a telegram to Hernandez, president of the road in
Paris, offering 5,000 francs for a special train. Another urgent message
was sent to the superintendent in Madrid repeating the offer for a
special train, the same sum to himself if he expedited the train. I also
authorized him to spend a similar amount if necessary in bribing the
military authorities.

[Illustration: TRIAL OF THE FOUR AMERICANS AT THE "OLD BAILEY," LONDON.]

At 11 o'clock I had a long telegram from him saying a train would be
made up at Avila. But an hour having passed away, I sent him a message
to order up an engine and one car from Madrid. Another message arrived
at 12 o'clock, and down came an engine and car.

Our baggage was hustled into the three front compartments. I put Nunn
and the Portuguese party in one and my wife and I occupied the rear
compartment. Thank Heaven! once more alone together. The soldiers and
inhabitants flocked around, and we were the observed of all observers.

The local railway chief was more than anxious to see us off, as I added
another five to the five escudos already given. Just then the telegraph
operator flew out with an order for our train to await the arrival of
the train from Madrid.

I stormed. I kept the wire hot with messages of protest to officials.
Two messages came from Madrid saying the delay was but temporary. So
there I sat in that musty compartment, my wife by my side and with a
heart full of bitterness, for I saw the precious hours slipping away,
and with them my chance of taking the Sunday morning train so as to
catch the Cadiz steamer. To miss it, I thought, meant ruin.

Hour after hour passed by, and there we sat. My secret cause of unrest
had to be kept locked in my breast, while my young wife, all
unsuspecting, was merry and happy, chanting little snatches of song and
telling me a hundred times she was the happiest of women. She did not
care for revolutions, nor for delays. Was she not with me! The sun
began to go down the sky, and the shadows fell. Still we sat on,
expecting every moment an order to proceed. The suspense was terrible.

At last about 6 o'clock an order came to have everything ready to pull
out for Madrid at 7, so very reluctantly we dismounted to take supper in
the station, and once more got into the car. But no order came. The
hours dragged on, and I saw fate closing her hand on me.

The night wore on, when suddenly, toward midnight, the operator rushed
out of his office and, shouting to the engineer, flew up to our
compartment, said good-bye and in a minute we were off. After that long
and terrible day it was happiness to be moving.

I had given the engineer a tip; he put on steam, and as we flew over the
road hope returned. I felt we were safe. At the rate we were going I
should have two or three hours to spare. We soon were at the Escurial.
As fate would have it we found here an order to run us on a side line
and to keep the track clear for a train going north. For two miserable
hours we waited and no train. Then I set the wires in motion again, and
just as the eastern skies grew gray we started.

Soon after midnight I telegraphed to the railway authorities at Madrid
to hold the train going south to Cadiz until my arrival, offering $100
an hour for every hour's detention.

Madrid is situated on a high sandy plain, storm-swept in Winter worse
than any plains in Northern Europe. We had a wheezy engine. Four miles
out it broke down, and then I gave up the struggle.

At 4 o'clock Sunday afternoon, nine hours too late for the Cadiz train,
we arrived at Madrid, too late to reach Cadiz by a special train. Not
too late could the train have been started off as soon as ordered, but
in Spain a special train is an unheard-of thing.

Mine from Avila was an innovation, only possible because there was so
much money behind it to all concerned at both ends of the line. No
Spaniard was ever known to be in a hurry, and no particle of matter
between his chin and his sombrero holds any lurking suspicion that
anything born of a woman could be in a hurry or have any reason for any
such insanity.

Here I was at last in the much-longed-for Madrid, but not on time, and I
had nothing to do but to put in execution some new plan. Had I even at
that late date resolved to go to New York, I could have returned to
France by the Eastern route, via Barcelona, and all might have been
well.

I telegraphed to Lopez & Co. to Cadiz inquiring if they would hold the
El Rey Felipe for twenty hours. They replied they were under contract
with the Government and had to sail on time. So I said good-bye to that
plan.

On consulting my memorandum I saw there was a French steamer sailing
from St. Nazaire, on the west coast of France, for Vera Cruz, Mexico,
which would touch at Santander on Saturday for mails and passengers, and
I resolved to go by her; this, of course, meant retracing our way
through the hated Avila to Burgos, and changing there for Santander.

Here we saw the last of the Portuguese family with their sick member.
They said good-bye with every expression of gratitude, and in truth I
was glad to see them off. We were all very tired of them, and they had
been a serious expense. That is, might have been serious, but as I paid
that expense out of the Bank of England's cash I naturally could be
liberal in the extreme, and gave a salve to my conscience by reflecting
what a good-souled, charitable young man I was in looking out for these
strangers and putting my hand freely in my pocket in their behalf.

As soon as breakfast was over I hurried to the English Embassy, and
there securing files of the London papers looked eagerly and nervously
through them. To my intense relief I saw there was nothing in them.
Therefore, I knew all was serene in London and that the Old Lady was
without doubt giving out sovereigns by the tens of thousands for us.

Very much relieved in mind I returned to the hotel, and we set out to
see Madrid.

[Illustration: A DETECTIVE IDENTIFYING OLD OFFENDERS AT NEWGATE.]




CHAPTER XXIX.

I WATCH THE PYRENEES SINK IN THE SEA, THEN SAIL O'ER GREEN NEPTUNE'S
BACK.


It was 11 o'clock when we started. The streets were thronged, and the
throngs moving in one direction. That was to the street lined on both
sides with churches, whose doors were flung wide open to the surging
masses. We went with the current and entered a famous church which was
crowded with the pious, their souls rapt in their devotion. Like all
European churches, there were no seats, but the audience, closely
packed, knelt or stood. We joined the worshipers, but looked around with
curious eyes. When the prayers were ended the street was one living mass
of people, all moving toward the outskirts of the town. We went with the
tide, and with the tide entered the arena, where a bull fight was
on--curious transition from church to arena. It was a great sight--I
mean that of seeing the people--there were 15,000 present in that
amphitheatre. It looked just like the old Roman arena, and to us was in
all its details intensely interesting.

On Monday we visited the picture galleries and museums, and on Tuesday
we got our baggage down to the depot once more, and purchasing our
tickets we were off for Santander. I was too anxious to enjoy the
scenery. We were a day and a night on the journey, and arriving on
Wednesday I still had before me three days of anxiety.

Being thoroughly sick of Spain, I longed to be on blue water with our
good ship's prow pointed to the Western World. Then I felt I could begin
to enjoy life. I had a charming wife--delightful companion--and once up
anchor all my haunting fears would die, and life's pleasures would be
mine to the full. But there in Santander the time dragged wearily. To be
sure, I had the English papers, but they were nearly a week on the way,
and a bad conscience finds many a cause for fear. I was aching to be
aboard. Saturday came at last, and going early down to the headland at
the harbor's mouth, with my field glass I anxiously scanned the Bay of
Biscay to see if I could discern anywhere on the horizon the smoke of
the approaching steamer. Lingering there until the dinner hour, I
hastened to the hotel.

My wife was merry and happy. I was glad to see her so, and found it
difficult to conceal my solicitude. Going both together to the headland
we spent most of the afternoon there. Night and then midnight came, and
no steamer's lights flashed in the dark waters of the bay. Heartsick and
anxious I went to bed, half resolved to take my wife into my confidence,
tell her in some measure the truth, and point out to her the necessity
of my taking flight, leaving her to follow at her leisure. It would have
been a terrible shock to her, but I began to fear that the truth would
come to her ears some time.

Early the next morning my servant awoke me, asking me to look out of the
window. I ran to it, and looking out, there in the bay, just in front of
the hotel, lay a steamer of the largest size and magnificent in her
beauty. It was a happy sight for me.

Nunn hired a boat for our luggage and a second for me, and then, after a
hurried breakfast, we boarded the steamer, Nunn following with the
baggage. Among other things I had a favorite dressing case, and had
given the servant strict orders to keep it under his eye, but as soon as
he came aboard he inquired in great agitation if I had brought it off
with me. Upon my saying no he was quite overcome, at the same time
explaining that he had laid it on top of the baggage in front of the
hotel, and some one had stolen it. While he was speaking a passenger
came walking by with the identical case in his hand. Nunn flew at the
man and seized both him and the bag, and sure enough he had the thief,
but I ordered him to let the man go, and he went away shamefaced enough.
He little thought when stealing the bag that the owner was going on the
same steamer. At last we were afloat, and now I was all eagerness to
hear the steam monkey start to bring the anchor a-peak. It is simply
amazing how a bad conscience "moldeth goblins swift as frenzy's
thought." Even as I stood there I was not at rest, but was impatient and
suspicious of every movement from the shore. As the long day dragged
slowly on and 4 o'clock came, preparations for getting under way were
going rapidly forward. I took my field glasses, stationed myself on the
after deck and anxiously scrutinized every boat leaving the shore.
Suddenly a boat started out from the head of the bay, pulled steadily by
eight rowers, and my conscience told me it meant danger, but the boatmen
pulled down along the shore, then suddenly stopped, and I could see that
they were passing a bottle around, taking a drink. Soon I discovered a
heap on the stern, which on closer inspection proved to be nets, and my
fears boiled down showed me they were simply fishermen and I an ass and
somewhat ashamed of myself. I felt I had really no cause for fear, even
had the steamer remained in harbor for a week. Just then, with a mighty
throb, the screw gave a turn, and it was music to my ears. Then the
waters of the bay were churned into yeasty waves. The city and shores
seemed to glide by and our prow was pointed direct to the blue sea
rolling beyond. Soon the joyous billows were toying with our ship, and
huge as it was were tossing it as lightly and easily as a child a toy.

But, still ill at ease, I walked the deck restless and unhappy.

I no longer feared arrest, was confident that never would hand of human
justice be laid on me, but I dimly felt that there was a divine justice
which would exact retribution. I felt that if there was mind behind this
frame of matter we see, then He who made the natural law and decreed a
penalty for every infraction must have made an infallible decree for
every violation against the moral law. If so, where could we poor
insects go or hide, or how scheme or dodge to escape the divine
vengeance?

But as I stood on the deck that night and watched the mountains sink
into the sea I felt this all dimly, and tried to shake off the feeling.
I stood fascinated, with many conflicting emotions sweeping through my
mind, sadly watching the receding shores of Spain, and just as the
highest mountains were sinking in the sea my servant appearing at my
side informed me that dinner was ready and my wife waiting. Sending him
away and turning my face to the land, I strained my eyes through the
gathering gloom to discern the distant shore. Then with a bitter feeling
in my heart I set out for the saloon, but stopped and quoting these
lines--

  "The day of my destiny is over,
  And the star of my fate hath declined"

--went below.

Soon, under the warming influence of wine, forgetting all my forebodings
and looking into my wife's face beaming with love and content, I could
not refrain from saying to myself: I am a fool to doubt that happiness
is mine. Am I not Fortune's favorite? With love, youth, enthusiasm,
health and wealth on my side, what else save happy days and nights and
long years filled with content can be mine?

So, shaking off my forebodings, the eighteen days of our voyage over
green Neptune's back were ideal, and we became objects of envy to all
the passengers.

Our ship was the Martinique, with French officers and crew, and a fine,
manly lot of men they were. The passengers were mostly colonial people
returning home to the French colonies in the West Indies. They were
nice, refined people, but we were rather reserved and kept to ourselves.
One of the passengers had a dozen Spanish fighting cocks, and they
afforded us much amusement. There were frequent mains on the after deck
and sometimes on the dinner table. These were very popular, particularly
with the ladies, who were continually asking to have the cocks brought
on after dessert. A space would be made in the centre of the table and
two cocks placed on it. How they loved fighting! They certainly enjoyed
it far better than the spectators. There were four long tables, all
crowded, but when the main was started the other tables were deserted
and the passengers packed around ours.

Our opposite neighbors were two Sisters of Charity who were on their way
to the City of Mexico to fill a gap that death had made in the ranks of
their order there. They were simple, sainted souls and had never known
any life other than the religious, and never emerged from the cloister
save only to do deeds of mercy in the country town outside. They had
been selected by lot to go to Mexico. We were favored to become fast
friends of theirs, and I was glad to have them accept such attentions as
we could give. It was delightful to meet such simple, unsophisticated
people under circumstances when, they being travelers, the rules of the
Church permitted them to throw off their reserve, to associate with
strangers and to live--so far as food and drink were concerned--like the
people they were associated with for the time.

My wife and I grew to like them well, and I was never tired of getting
their views of men and things. Truly their lives were a thing apart from
the world and the ways of men. They told me with a kind of rapture that
the average life of one of their order in Mexico was only five years,
and they thought heaven had been very gracious in selecting them, that
they might give their lives to the Church and so become members of the
mighty army of martyrs who were honored in heaven by looking upon the
face of the Virgin and her Son and serving them.

They knew nothing of wines and did not suspect the costliness of those
which during the entire voyage they drank at my expense.

The dinners were rather formal affairs and occupied an hour and a half,
and between the good sisters and us two we always finished a bottle of
claret and two of champagne, and about a like quantity between dinner
and bedtime. I don't believe that up to the hour they left the world
they ever quite understood why they were so happy and merry on that
voyage.

We used to visit the steerage forward nearly every day. There was an
unmistakable lady so unfortunate as to be a passenger there. She
appreciated our visits, and eventually confided the story of her life to
my wife, and what a story it was of woman's love and man's perfidy!

I had an electric battery which I frequently took into the steerage to
astonish the natives. When I first put a silver piece in a basin of
water and told them the man taking it out could keep it, what a rush
there was! There was one would-be clever clown who was perfectly willing
to test the power of the battery, but was so clever he never would take
hold of both handles at once. He dodged around for two or three days
greatly pleased with his sharpness, but I determined to have him some
day and have him hard when I got him. So one morning when dancing about
as usual he happened to be barefooted. Apparently by accident, I upset
the basin of water over the deck, making it a good conductor, then
accepting his offer to try the machine by holding one handle, I dropped
the other on the wet deck and gave him the benefit of the whole power
of the battery. He let one terrific yell, then stood rooted to the deck
speechless for a moment; then gave vent to a series of whoops that would
have made the fortune of a Comanche Indian. When freed from the current
the clever fellow made a break for the steerage and never appeared again
at any of my electric seances. All those ignorants insisted that my
battery was surely el diablo.

After eighteen days we cast anchor in St. Thomas harbor, and pleasant as
our voyage had been we were glad to see land. We were to stop a day for
coaling.

Taking the two sisters, we went ashore in one of the many boats
surrounding the ship, all manned by scantily robed black fellows. The
town, with its hordes of gaudily dressed and noisy blacks, was most
interesting. I had hired the boat for the day, so the three black
fellows accompanied us around the town. Each wore a stovepipe hat. The
remainder of their furniture consisted of cotton shirt and trousers. The
men were barefooted, of course.

My wife was the typical blue-eyed, golden-haired Englishwoman, and was
the observed of all observers in that black mob. I myself was all in
white, from canvas shoes to white umbrella. So, between the two sisters
in their black robes and white bonnets and our attending boatmen, along
with a mob of half-naked black boys that followed, we formed quite a
circus and created a commotion in the town.

First I took the sisters to the cathedral. Both were grateful and knelt
at the altar for a full half hour while we waited. Then after visiting
several stores to make some small purchases, we went to a circus showing
there that week. I bought ten tickets for my party. Everything they saw
in the town was marvelous and strange to them. When we entered the
circus tent the sisters were perplexed and thought it must be a new sort
of church. But words would fail to express their amazement when they saw
the clown and bespangled horseman enter the ring and the performance
begin. They were in a new and hitherto undreamed-of world, and gazed in
childlike wonderment on the scene, and, like children, only saw the
glitter of the spangles and thought both men and women performers were
angels of beauty. Even after the thing was over the magic and witchery
of it all rested on them. Their hearts were deeply stirred and their
thoughts were with the performers. To please them we sat until the
audience had dispersed, and, when going out, one of them, speaking of
the performers, told my wife they must be "very near to God."

Then we went to the hotel. I dispersed my cortege and ordered a room for
ourselves and one for the sisters, and we all took a nap until evening.
Then we had some negro singing and dancing for our amusement in the
courtyard of the hotel, and at 9 o'clock we went out for a moonlight
walk under the tropical sky. About 10 we found we had had enough of it
and were glad to betake ourselves to bed.

We all breakfasted together in the courtyard the next morning and soon
after went aboard. At noon up came the anchor and we were off for
Havana, our next stopping place, twenty-four hours' sail away. The
steamer after one day's detention to take in cargo would continue her
voyage to Vera Cruz. It was my intention to go on to that port, and from
there across the country to the capital, the City of Mexico. There was
no cable to Mexico in 1873, and things there were in rather a primitive
condition. Of course, I never anticipated pursuit beyond New York, and
took it for granted that my friends at Police Headquarters would squelch
it there. But once in Mexico there would have been no danger for me. To
be in Mexico was like being in the centre of darkest Africa. There was
no extradition treaty, no railroads and no telegraph; above all, I had
plenty of cash.

I intended to buy an estate near the capital, and settle down for two
or three years, and by a liberal expenditure of money secure the
friendship of the government officials and the chief people of the
country. Official and social morals being not of the best, if my history
transpired I would probably become the lion of society, as they would
all esteem it a creditable thing to any man to secure a few millions
from the English, whose enormous wealth is the plunder of India and all
the world for centuries.

The next morning I found we were sailing along the Cuban coast, quite
near the land, which looked so inviting that I made up my mind to go
ashore and stay a month in Havana, so I had my baggage got on deck. Soon
after dinner the engines were stopped for some hours for repacking, the
captain informing me that it was doubtful whether we should arrive in
Havana in time to go ashore that night. At 6 o'clock the sunset gun is
fired, the custom house closes and no more debarkations are allowed that
day. If I went ashore the next day I must be up and off at an early
hour, as the ship sailed at 7.30, so I told the captain if he arrived
before 6 o'clock I would go ashore and wait for the next steamer, but if
we were late I would go on to Vera Cruz with him.

Once having made up my mind to go ashore, I was all eagerness to push
matters. To do so I even asked the captain to tell the engineer to force
the engines a little if possible. It was well on to 6 o'clock when we
steamed past Moro Castle and dropped anchor in the harbor. I engaged two
of the boats alongside, our baggage was hurried into them, my wife went
down the ladder, and speaking some hurried farewells I ran down after
her and sprang lightly into the boat. That instant the sunset gun was
fired. Two minutes later and the custom house officers on board would
have forbidden my leaving the steamer. I say two minutes, but it was
less than half a minute. Half a minute! Thirty seconds changed my
destiny.




CHAPTER XXX.

"HAPPINESS AND I SHAKE HANDS FOR A TIME."


Cuba! What a productive and fertile island it is, with its charming
climate and lovely scenery! But, as in so many of the green spots of
this world, man has blasted and spoiled all that indulgent nature has
lavished here. From the days of Columbus the story of Cuba has been one
of wholesale murder of natives, of revolutions--later of insurrections,
and deadly civil strife, which have ruined whole provinces once covered
with large sugar, coffee and tobacco plantations.

Slavery now, as in all her past Christian history, is everywhere.
Previous to 1861 40,000 slaves were yearly imported in slave ships into
the harbor of Havana.

Perhaps all men are cruel when they are absolute masters of the lives
and fortunes of their fellows and amenable to none for their acts.
Certainly the white Cubans, as a rule, are cruel masters in all their
dealings with their slaves.

Probably to-day, certainly in 1873, most of the large plantations
witnessed scenes of cruelty never surpassed in the long annals of human
servitude.

During my stay I was invited to visit many plantations, but visits to
two were enough for me, there being too many signs on the surface of the
brutality that lay beneath. I could easily give cases that I saw or
heard of, but refrain from doing so here.

One day's stay in Cuba convinced us we could spend a month very happily
on the island, and, discovering that Don Fernando, the proprietor of
the hotel, had a furnished house in a lovely situation to let, we
resolved to remain, renting the house for a month at a fixed rate per
day. This rate included the ten servants--slaves--in the house, he to
furnish good horses and everything except wine. The service proved good,
and the cooking exquisite. This was rather expensive, but certainly a
handy kind of housekeeping, taking all worry and household cares from my
wife's shoulders.

There were a large number of American visitors on the island, lovers of
and seekers after sunshine and warmth, which they found in abundance
while swinging in hammocks under the palm or cocoanut trees, or in
strolling along the white strand, with its innumerable sunny coves,
while the Winter storms and blizzards were raging in the Northern
States. Here we formed many pleasant acquaintances, and, throwing off
much of the reserve maintained during the voyage, we mingled freely in
the nice but gossipy society which winters there.

Our house was on a lovely slope in full view of the Gulf of Mexico, and
in the midst of what was more like a tropical plantation than a garden.

I made the acquaintance of Gen. Torbert, our Consul, and was introduced
by him to the Spanish officials, including the colonel of police. I
assiduously cultivated the acquaintance of the latter, and frequently
had him out to the house to dinner and lunch, and felt pretty confident
that if any telegrams came about me he would certainly bring them to me
at once for an explanation. Even if my presence became known, and
telegraphic orders for my arrest should arrive, no speedy action would
be taken and ample time given me to escape. In all the assemblies,
picnics and balls I was gratified to find my wife very much sought after
and admired. It was well she had a few happy days; enough misery lay not
far ahead.

In the mean time I had no word from my friends in London. In fact, they
did not know where I was. When I bade them good-bye at Calais they told
me not to inform them of my destination until I had got there, and then
to do so through some relative.

Every day I watched the New York papers to see if there had been any
explosion in London, but the silence of the press told me my friends
were having an amazing success, and we might expect two or three months
more to elapse before there would be any discovery.

We had been some weeks in Havana.

It was well into the month of February when one day, being in my hammock
on the veranda, with my wife sitting near me, my servant rode up with
the papers, and, handing me the New York Herald, I leisurely opened it,
while chatting with my wife, but could not suppress an exclamation when
my eyes fell upon an Associated Press dispatch from London, in staring
headlines. They read:

  AMAZING FRAUD UPON THE BANK OF
  ENGLAND!

         *       *       *       *       *

  MILLIONS LOST!

         *       *       *       *       *

  GREAT EXCITEMENT IN LONDON!

         *       *       *       *       *

    L5,000 REWARD FOR THE ARREST OF THE
    AMERICAN PERPETRATOR, F. A. WARREN.

    "London, Feb. 14, 1873.

    "An amazing fraud has been perpetrated upon the Bank of England by a
    young American who gave the name of Frederick Albert Warren. The
    loss of the bank is reported to be from three to ten millions, and
    it is rumored that many London banks have been victimized to
    enormous amounts. The greatest excitement prevails in the city, and
    the forgery, for such it is, is the one topic of conversation on
    the Exchange and in the street. The police are completely at fault,
    although a young man named Noyes, who was Warren's clerk, has been
    arrested, but it is believed that he is a dupe.

    "The bank has offered a reward of L5,000 for information leading to
    the arrest of Warren or any confederate."

[Illustration: "I FIRED POINT BLANK, AND DOWN HE WENT AS IF FELLED BY
LIGHTNING."--Page 334.]

I took a long walk on the beach to think over the situation. I was
alarmed over the arrest of Noyes, which I knew ought not to have
occurred if the proper precautions had been taken, but I concluded that
at the worst his arrest only meant for him a brief incarceration.

I knew that no human power and no fear could ever make him betray us.
Two things never entered my calculations at all; that is, that my right
name would ever transpire, or that George and Mac would ever, by any
possibility, be brought into question for the fraud.

So I came back from my walk with my plans outlined. It was to remain
quietly where we were for a fortnight longer, then take the steamer to
Vera Cruz, go to the City of Mexico and there buy an estate, as I had
originally proposed. Then, after a few months, leave my wife there and
travel incog. through Northern Mexico and Texas, meet Mac and George and
afterward return to Mexico.

Not a soul in all Europe knew I was in Cuba, and so long as my name did
not transpire I was as safe in Cuba as if in the desert.

Consequently I determined to go on in the same way since our landing. In
the mean while I would watch the papers, and if any signs of danger
appeared I could take instant measures for my safety.

As the days passed the cable dispatches appearing in the papers
increased in volume, and the papers everywhere had editorials, which, as
a rule, were humorous or sarcastic, poking fun at the Britishers in
general and the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street in particular. Then the
comic papers took it up, and from week to week published cartoons
intended to be funny.

One of the funniest of these came out in one of the New York comics,
which appeared after the mail arrived from London with the particulars
of the simplicity of the bank officials in their dealings with the
mysterious F. A. Warren. This full-page cartoon represented a young dude,
seated on a mule, riding down a steep declivity.

At the bottom the devil stood, holding in the fingers of his extended
hands a quantity of thousand-pound bank notes tempting Warren, and John
Bull stood behind the mule, belaboring it with an umbrella and driving
Warren down to the devil.

I tried to keep the papers from my wife, but one day she came home from
a visit with a flushed face and eager to talk, and began telling me
about some daring countryman of mine "who had the audacity to rob the
Bank of England," and "who ought to have a whipping." On several
occasions Americans there asked my opinion as to who the party could be.

I always told them he was some clever young scamp, with plenty of money
of his own, who did it for the excitement of the thing and from a wish
to take a rise out of John Bull.

The next French steamer for Mexico was advertised to land at Havana for
passengers and mails for Vera Cruz in a few days, and I determined to
sail by her. Soon after my arrival I had formed the acquaintance of a
wealthy young countryman of mine from Savannah by the name of Gray. We
soon became fast friends, and I had him out to dinner nearly every day.
He had a warm friend in Senor Andrez, a rich young Cuban planter, and
had accepted an invitation to visit his coffee plantation in the Isle of
Pines, the largest of all that immense body of islets and keys of the
south coast of Cuba in the Carribean Sea, one of the loveliest tropical
isles imaginable, and Gray insisted upon my making one of the party.

It was proposed to spend a week on the island, and to take three days in
going and coming. But if I went then I would be unable to sail on the
steamer of the 25th, and would have to wait another week.

One day Gray brought Senor Andrez to dinner, along with a common friend,
a Senor Alvarez. All three joined in imploring me to make one of the
party, promising sport as novel as good; said the wild boars were
plentiful; that we would have two days' shark fishing, turning turtles
and hunting their eggs, and could vary it by a slave hunt, the jungle
and some of the smaller islands being "full of runaways," and as they
were by law wild beasts we might be lucky enough to shoot a few of
them--shoot, not capture, as the planters knew that a runaway slave who
had tasted the joys of freedom if caught was useless as a slave. So, as
a matter of sport, as well as a warning to other slaves, they organized
yearly hunts to bag a score or two. But so great is the depravity of the
human heart that these wretches, in their desperate wickedness, objected
to being shot, and at times were guilty of the enormity of shooting back
again. History records how, on certain occasions, they did so with such
good effect that the hunted became hunters; but these were rare events.

After long urging I consented. At the time there were only two short
railways in all Cuba. We were to cross the island to the south coast,
and there embark for the Isle of Pines in a boat owned by our host,
which would be in waiting. The railway would take us to the little
hamlet of San Felipe, some forty miles south, and there we were to take
horses to the seaport town of Cajio. We were to start on Saturday, two
days ahead. My wife did not relish my going, and I disliked it more than
she did, but for totally different reasons. Mine were that, as a matter
of prudence, I ought to recall my consent and remain in Havana until
steamer day, and then sail without fail to Mexico. But fearing the
ridicule of my friends, I went, persuading myself that there could be no
danger and that everything in London was buried in so dense a fog bank
that the detectives would struggle in vain to find a way out of it or
any clue to our identity.

Had I known of the clever work of the Pinkerton brothers in London and
the discoveries in Paris I should have been ill at ease; but had I known
that Capt. John Curtin--then a member of the Pinkerton staff in New
York, but now (1895.) of San Francisco--had with perfectly marvelous
intuition and rare detective skill let daylight into the whole plot, and
had reported to his chief that whenever F. A. Warren was discovered he
would prove to be Austin Bidwell; I say if I had known this, instead of
going off on a ten days' pleasure jaunt into an isolated corner of the
world I should have taken instant flight, leaving Cuba, not by the usual
modes of departure, but by sailing boat, and alone, for one of the
Mexican ports.

Capt. Curtin had been detailed to work on the New York end of the case,
to look for clues. It seemed a hopeless task. He is a warm friend of
mine now, after twenty years, and has long forgiven me for the bullet I
lodged in him in 1873. A few years after arresting me in the West Indies
he went to San Francisco and started a private inquiry office of his own
at 328 Montgomery street. When, after twenty years' incarceration, I
arrived there one lovely May in 1892, he was waiting for me at the
ferry, and gave me warm greetings, and as hearty congratulations, too,
as any man could give another; then introduced me to his friends
everywhere, and, in fact, from the hour of my arrival until my
departure, three months afterward, was never tired of doing me a service
and forwarding my business, so that by his kind offices I made a great
success out of what, by reason of the great financial depression, might
otherwise have proved a failure. But as Capt. Curtin, after effecting my
arrest, having recovered from his wound, was one of the four who took me
to England, I will wait until a later chapter to tell how it was he
discovered my name and located me in Cuba.

On Saturday morning our party of four, accompanied by a following of
black fellows and half a dozen dogs, set out by train. Before reaching
San Felipe our bones had a shaking. The roadbed was execrable, the
trucks of the cars were without springs, and to me it seemed as if we
must leave the rails at any moment.

In Havana we regarded Don Andrez as a good fellow, but upon our arrival
at San Felipe he had grown into a man of importance. When we came to
Cajio he had grown into a person of distinction, and at the island he
had swollen into a local Caesar. At San Felipe, a mere hamlet, horses
were waiting for us and mules for the baggage, but before setting out we
went to a nearby hacienda and sat down to what was simply the best lunch
of which I ever partook.

The town was chiefly remarkable for the number of its fighting cocks. At
the hacienda there were dozens, each in its separate
compartment--regarded the same as horses and game dogs are in England
and America--and half the black boys we met were carrying game birds.

At last, starting for Cajio, the road soon degenerated into a mere
track, which led through some barren hills with scanty growths of a
species of oak without underbrush, and here and there a sprinkling of
cacti, and in the lower reaches between the hills grew dense green walls
of Spanish bayonet.

We were crossing Cuba at its narrowest part, and from San Felipe to
Cajio was only some thirty miles. After fifteen miles we came into the
fertile coast belt and passed a number of deserted sugar plantations
where tropic vegetation was trying to cover up the work of ruin wrought
by man. Residences and sugar houses destroyed by fire were very much in
evidence. To my surprise I learned that bodies of insurgents--who then
held and had held for six years nearly the entire eastern province of
Santiago de Cuba and Puerto Principe, and part of the extreme western
province of Pinar del Rio--had only a few weeks before landed by night
at the port La Playa de Batabano, fifteen miles away, and with the cry
of "Free Cuba and death to the Spaniard!" had blotted out the town and
then marched into the heart of the country, burning houses, killing the
whites and calling upon the slaves to join them in freeing Cuba. Many
did, and terrible were their excesses, and terribly did they pay for
these. The Spanish soldiers and loyal Cuban volunteers closed in upon
them, and at the little hamlet of San Marcos, where we halted and
examined the too evident signs of the battle and massacre that followed,
they made their last stand, but were no match for their well-armed and
disciplined foes. After a desperate struggle they were overpowered, and
every surviving soul was butchered by the infuriated soldiers. It was
better so. Had they been spared it would have only been for the moment,
for by official decree of the Captain-General of Cuba, indorsed by the
Madrid Government, every inhabitant within the insurrectionary line,
without regard to age or sex, was doomed to death without form of trial.

At San Marcos we made a halt to view the scene of the fight and examined
the heaps of ashes where the fires were kindled which consumed the
bodies of the slain. Two or three were my countrymen. At the time it was
quite the thing for venturesome Americans to go and join the rebels and
help the fight for "Cuba libre." For some years every few days notices
would appear in the press about some Americans having been shot for
joining or attempting to join the rebels. This went on until the affair
of the steamer Virginus, when her crew and passengers, to the number of
150, were shot, the steamer having been captured close to the shore and
about to land men and guns. Then our Government awoke and forbade
Spanish officials to shoot Americans without trial.

As I stood there curiously examining the marks of the conflict, or
examining some part of an unconsumed bone, I little thought that in a
very few days I myself would be a fugitive, creeping through jungles and
over tropic plains, seeking to join the comrades of the men on whose
ashes I was then treading, to aid their fight for free Cuba.

Perhaps my subsequent fate made me ponder over my happy life in Cuba,
and compare the horrible misery of my prison life, with its hardships
and degrading detail, with the brightness of those days, when love,
obedience, wealth and luxury were mine.

But in those long years, when in their gloom and depression I was
fighting to keep off insanity by ignoring the dreadful present and
dwelling on the past, no incident of all my life on the island haunted
me more than this at San Marcos. Every detail was photographed on my
brain, and as I recalled that blackened spot strewn with ashes soddened
by tropical rains, soon to be all the greener for the fertilizing
tragedy, many a thousand times I said, "Would to God my ashes were
mingled with the dead there."

Soon after leaving San Marcos, striking into the jungle, the road became
so narrow that we had to go single file. I found the silence of the
tropical forest impressive, and think it had its effect on us all--even
the negroes and dogs moved on, making no sound. Although novel scenes,
yet I was glad when 5 o'clock came and we emerged from the jungle on to
the coast road. It was sandy, but well traveled. Another mile and we
were in Cajio, and the Caribbean, blue and lovely as a dream, lay spread
before us, with hundreds of palm crowned islets and coral bays, all with
sandy beaches of dazzling whiteness.

Senor Andrez had a house here, and as they had notice of our coming
everything was prepared for our reception. Entering the house, we were
served with black coffee and thin rice cakes fried. Gray and I wanted a
swim before supper in the waters, which looked very tempting, but it
would have been a breach of etiquette to indulge then--and, by the way,
there is a strange repugnance to water inherent in the Spanish nature,
there being no bathhouses in Spain, they say, and I believe it. Gray and
I, during the next few days, were in and out of the water at all hours,
but could never persuade any one else to try the experiment of a swim in
the warm water of the Caribbean. At the house, or when out in boats, we
frequently invited some of the company to join us in a plunge, but none
ever accepted the invitation. We are told on good authority that "our
virtues depend on the interpretation of the times," and one might add
"on the interpretation of our nation." The Anglo-Saxon loves soap and
water and plenty of it; the Spaniard does not. But this contrast may
mean nothing in our favor; there may be a reason for it, racial
probably, but possibly climatic.

Supper came, and it was a treat. Gray and I noted that in suitability of
material to the purpose intended, and in cookery, it excelled anything
in our experience. Cafe Riche and Tortoni's were not in it. We were
curious to see the cook. She was ordered in for our inspection, a sober,
sad-faced negress, angular, bony, and, strangely enough, knew only a few
words of Spanish, her language being some African dialect, Africa being
her natal place, as it, indeed, was of most of the slaves.

What views of life, what views of the Christian world most of these
slaves must have! Torn from their homes, leaving their slaughtered
family on the ashes of their homes, and carried off to toil and wear out
the only life nature will ever give them--for what? To toil amid hunger
and abuse too foul to name in order that the Christian robber may have
gold to gratify his desire.

[Illustration: "ANOTHER SECOND WOULD HAVE ENDED MY LIFE."--Page 371.]

She was evidently alarmed over the summons--it might mean anything--she
was unused to the coin of compliment; but we gave it freely, however,
and the next morning each of us did better, and when departing placed a
sovereign in her hand and made Senor Andrez promise to be good to her.

Our host grew his own tobacco and made his own cigars. These were famous
even in Havana, and Gray and I enjoyed them that evening. A number of
grass-woven hammocks were swung under a roof in front of the house. It
was delightful lying there watching the phosphorescent waves rippling or
breaking on the beach under the light of a full moon and listening to
the chatter or the songs of the black fellows who swarmed around while
smoking cigars worth the smoking. The negro children, shrill-voiced and
loud, were very much in evidence.

The air was delightful, and following the custom of the country we slept
in the hammocks without undressing.

The next morning, under a sunrise sky, which in its glowing colors
looked like the New Jerusalem, Gray and I made a break for the glorious
water that rippled on the beach. What a swim we had! We were the only
humans visible. All other unfeathered bipeds were asleep, and we varied
our bath by wandering around the beach in a state of nature, viewing
things generally, but a turtle pond held us fascinated. Stakes had been
driven down inclosing a space, and upward of twenty great turtles were
prisoners, waiting apparently with the greatest of patience to be
devoured--that being, so far as I can see, the ultimate destination of
all life--that huge procession to the stomach. The rocks tell us that it
began a good while ago, and it has kept up with crowded ranks ever
since. When the missionary landing in Fiji anxiously inquired of the
boss cannibal gentleman where his predecessor might be sojourning, he
was promptly informed that he had "gone into the interior." To "go into
the interior" is the decree fate writes in her book of doom and copies
on the birth certificate of all the breathers of the world.

[Illustration: SUGAR LOAF MOUNTAIN, View from Rio de Janeiro.]




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE PHILISTINES ARE UPON THEE, SAMSON.


I was very fortunate in my servant Nunn, he being devoted to me, a
resolute fellow as well, and thoroughly trustworthy. He felt very badly
over my leaving him behind in Havana. Nor would I have done so under
ordinary circumstances.

The day before leaving on the trip, taking him aside, but not wishing to
actually disclose anything, I talked in a very impressive, grave way,
instructing him to leave Havana secretly after telling his mistress that
I had ordered him to go to Matanzas, a city forty miles east by rail. He
was to bring all the New York papers, meet me at Cajio and not let a
soul know his destination, but be there awaiting my arrival from the
Isle of Pines the following Sunday week. If in the mean time anything
unusual, no matter what, happened, then he was instantly to depart for
Cajio, there hire a boat and crew and come after me, not to mind expense
and not to lose a moment's time. Nunn was one of those wise men who know
how to obey orders without self-questionings as to the whys and
wherefores.

I had secured gun licenses from the authorities, and, giving them to
Nunn, ordered him to bring a breech-loader and a brace of revolvers with
him.

During my stay in the Isle of Pines I would be out of reach of the
outside world. If on meeting Nunn I found from the papers he brought
that there was any sign of danger I would not return to Havana, but
would secure a boat, provision it, set sail alone for some port in
Central America and send my servant back after my wife.

At 10 o'clock our party set out in an open-decked cargo boat from Cajio
for San Jose, seventy miles across the water and on the west coast of
the island. San Jose was one of the half-dozen plantations belonging to
our host, the chief product being coffee, and on this one there were 130
slaves.

We had a motley cargo. Twenty black fellows, dogs, turtles, fighting
cocks, two trained pigs, a good-sized snake that answered to the name of
Jacko and had the run of the ship. Ship, men, women and young darkies,
trained pigs and everything except we three guests were the absolute
property of our host.

We were passing through the gate of the Gulf of Matamano. The bottom was
so white and the water so clear that we could see distinctly all the
wondrous marine life beneath. Ashore in the thick forests all seemed to
be dead, but here in the water and beneath the surface all was teeming
with life. Flocks of sea fowl were in the air or whitened the rocks
which everywhere rose above the waters, and innumerable little islets
rested like lovely pictures in the blue setting of the sea.

At one of the loveliest, called Cayos de Tana, with a wide fringe of
white beach, we landed; that is, our boat ran toward it until the keel
stuck in the sand, when a dozen black fellows sprang over into the
water, and, taking us white trash on their shoulders, carried us ashore.
Once there we set out to find turtle eggs, and soon found heaps of sand
which, when scraped away, revealed the eggs in dozens. We took away
about a bushel, but they had a rancid flavor, so Gray and I backed out
of our promise to eat them, as did Senors Andrez and Mondago.

The man in charge of the boat was a skillful sailor, and, having a fine
breeze, we rushed through the water at a great rate. At last, after a
day of novel enjoyment, just as the short twilight of the tropics was
fading out, we ran alongside of the little pier of San Jose and were
welcomed with loud shouts and gun shots from about a hundred gaudily
attired slaves, who were excited and seemingly glad over the return of
their master, this being Sunday and a holiday.

Did any of my readers ever think what the rest of Sunday is to the
toilers of the earth? If Christ left no other legacy to the Christian
world but that happy day of rest, then must we still bless and praise
him as the Mighty Benefactor of the world, the Saviour and glorious hero
of the workingman. For nineteen years I toiled, exposed to every storm
that blew, and was sustained through all the six days' misery by the
blessed knowledge that Sunday, with its rest, was never far off. And
when the Sunday morning dawned and the happy consciousness filled my
mind that for one day at least I was free from toil, my heart filled
with gratitude to the Galilean carpenter, who, by his gracious deeds and
genius, had so impressed the hearts of men that for his sake they had
taken the seventh day of the Hebrew and bequeathed it as a day of rest
to all the toiling generations of the sons of men. The Roman Empire,
which overshadowed the world and held the nations in subjection, knew no
day of rest, and to-day the toiling millions of China never wake to say:
"This is a day of rest on which I can turn my thoughts to other things
than toil."

I must not here enter into details of that week of rare sport and keen
enjoyment in the Isle of Pines. We went shark fishing by day and tipping
turtles in the moonlight by night, when they came ashore to deposit
their eggs in the sand. One never-ending source of enjoyment to the
Cubans was the battles of the fighting cocks. I had got over some of my
repugnance to the sport, and enjoyed it almost as well as the cocks
themselves. How soon one learns to do in Rome as do the Romans!

The week had come to an end, and, although importuned by my host to
delay my departure, my anxiety as to the state of affairs in the outside
world was too great to postpone my return to the mainland. So, after a
rousing send-off from every one on the plantation, I departed. Just as
the sun was flinging its dyes over the clouds and waters, one week from
the Sunday of my arrival at San Jose, I was sailing into the little bay
of Cajio. Gray was to remain another week, and I was returning in a
small sloop manned by two of Senor Andrez's men. I found Nunn waiting
for me on the beach. He handed me a letter from my wife and said
everything was well at home. Opening the letter I found an earnest
appeal to return at once. Going to the hacienda near by I took the
bundle of New York and London papers Nunn had brought. I went to my
room, and, opening the Herald I was amazed to see the storm over the
Bank of England business and the great desire to discover the mysterious
Warren.

I felt that the time had come when it would no longer be prudent for me
to live under my right name. It was an easy matter to invent a name and
live under it, and I determined to do so, for a time at least, until
after I saw how matters developed. But I could not do this in Havana,
for in case of using an alias it would be necessary to take my wife into
my confidence. She was sure to discover the matter sooner or later, and
it was better for her to learn the miserable truth from my own lips than
to leave the discovery to come to her through the public press.

In Mexico I should really have nothing to fear, even if it was known I
was there. So, after some cogitation, I determined to return to Havana,
say good-bye to all our friends and embark as soon as possible for Vera
Cruz. I was impatient to set off at once, but it was both dangerous and
difficult work to go through the jungle by night, so telling Nunn to be
ready to start at sunrise I went to bed.

At dawn we set out and did not halt until we reached San Marcos, with
its gloomy memorial of human savagery. After an hour's halt we set out
and arrived at San Felipe in time to catch the train to Havana. On
arriving there at dusk I sent my servant to inform his mistress of my
safe arrival while I called on Don Fernando at the hotel. His frank and
hearty reception told me at once that he had heard nothing, and he knows
pretty well everything going on in the town. From the hotel I drove to
the police barracks and called on the colonel of police, with the same
result, which satisfied me beyond all doubt that however the storm blew
in London or New York there was not a single cloud on the horizon in
Havana. But it was soon to blow a hurricane. I had a very happy meeting
with my wife, and found her the picture of health and happiness.

As I looked in her face, beaming with confidence and faith, I realized
how hard it would be to tell her the terrible truth, and what a shock it
would be to her when she discovered the husband she believed the soul of
honor stood in danger of a prison. Yet I was tolerably certain she would
forgive me upon my promise never to do wrong again.

She had sent out invitations to dinner for Thursday to twenty friends.
There was then a steamer in the harbor advertised to sail in two days
for Mexico, and I had thought of going by her. Had we, this book would
never have been written.

As invitations were out for Thursday, I concluded to wait for Saturday's
steamer, but determined to sail on that day without fail.

Under our system of housekeeping a dinner party was a simple thing. We
merely had to notify our landlord how many guests we expected and the
thing was done, so far as we were concerned. Don Fernando would send his
hotel steward down to the house with reinforcements of cooks and
waiters, and my wife had simply to usher the guests into the dining room
and out again. Don Fernando's supernumeraries did the rest. On the day
of our dinner I was strongly tempted to give some hint to my wife that I
was in some way entangled in a web, but as she was so happy I could not
do it, but resolved to wait until we were settled in Mexico, and then to
tell her a little, but not all the truth.

My wife, all unconscious of the frightful calamity impending, entered
upon the last half day of happiness she was to know for many long years.
The same statement would be true of myself. As the guests were arriving
I was in a happy vein, and in the same happy frame of mind sat down to
dinner. Twenty happy mortals, but not one divined the termination of
that dinner party, least of all the proud and happy hostess. It was a
great success, and at 8 o'clock was drawing to a close. The long windows
were open, while the warm breeze from the nearby gulf was pouring
through the room. The clock had just chimed the quarter when there came
a sudden rush of feet over the veranda and through the hall. All eyes
were fixed on the open door leading to the hall, when an eager,
resolute-faced man, evidently an American, stepped with a firm pace into
the room, followed by a dozen civilians and soldiers. With a quick
glance over the company his eyes rested on me, and coming direct to my
chair, while my guests gazed in amazement, he bowed and said in a low
voice: "Mr. Bidwell, I am sorry to disturb your dinner party or to annoy
you in any way, but I am forced to tell you I have a warrant in my
pocket for your arrest upon a charge of forgery upon the Bank of
England. The warrant is signed by the Captain-General of Cuba,
everything is in due form, and you are my prisoner. I am William
Pinkerton."

[Illustration: BENEATH OLD BAILEY COURT ROOM--COURT ADJOURNED FOR
LUNCH.]

Every man who enters the arena and joins in the struggle of life has
more or fewer takedowns in his history. But my wish is that between
this hour and my last I may have no more takedowns so near the freezing
point as this was. I shall never forget the look on my wife's face.
First she gazed at the intruders with indignation, then turned to me
with a look of eager expectation, as much as to say: "Wait till my
husband raises his arm and you will all go down." But instead of seeing
me rise, indignant and angry, driving the intruders out, she saw me
talking quite calmly to Curtin. Then her face grew deadly white. None of
the guests heard Pinkerton's words, but, as will be easily imagined,
there was a painful silence, which I broke by standing up and saying
that there was some unhappy mistake, that I was arrested upon the charge
of furnishing arms to the insurrectionists in the eastern provinces. I
requested my friends to withdraw at once, and everything would be
explained on the morrow.

[Illustration: TRANSFERRED FROM DARTMOOR TO WOKING PRISON]

There were five soldiers present, Mr. Crawford, the English
Consul-General, Pinkerton and Captain John Curtin, my servant Nunn being
in custody of the latter. It was a strange and unhappy scene, and every
one felt extremely awkward and ill at ease, especially the writer. In
the rear of the dining room was a large sitting room, where I kept my
valuables in trunks and did my writing. I turned to Mr. P., and said:
"Will you come in the other room?" "Certainly," he replied, without the
slightest hesitation. The room was brilliantly lighted. Motioning him to
a seat, I said:

"Will you have a glass of wine?"

"Yes, but I never drink anything but Cliquot," replied Mr. Pinkerton,
pleasantly.

A servant brought in a bottle and glasses, and I turned the conversation
upon the subject of money. The captain, being a stranger to me, guided
by former experience with Irving & Co. I fancied he might be bribed.
Sometimes the police are susceptible to this form of temptation, and I
was at bay and desperate. I intended to offer him a fortune for a bribe.
If he refused to take it I resolved to shoot him and dash out of the
window, for at my elbow was an open drawer, with a loaded revolver ready
at my hand.

I said: "You know the power and value of money?"

"Yes, and I need and want plenty of it."

Pointing to a trunk I said: "I have a fortune there. Sit where you are
ten minutes, give no alarm, and I will give you $50,000."

Then a scene ensued that if put upon the stage would be deemed
farfetched, if not incredible. When I said this the captain never moved
a muscle, but looked at me seriously, earnestly, then dropped his eyes
to the bottle. As he did so I placed my hand on the revolver. He took
the bottle up, filled his glass, and, looking steadily at me, drank it
off, and, replacing the glass on the stand, coolly remarked:

"Why, sir, that is $5,000 a minute!"

"Yes, and good pay, too," I said.

"But I won't have it!" he interjected, and sprang to his feet as he saw
me make a movement; but I was too quick for him.

I fired point-blank, and down he went as if felled by lightning.

I rushed to the window, when the Venetians were torn violently down, and
one of Curtin's subordinates, revolver in hand, sprang from the outer
darkness through the window into the room, and the others came with the
soldiers. My wife, too, white faced, rushed in from the dining room. A
lively struggle followed, in which Curtin, having risen from the floor,
joined. The struggle was soon over, leaving me a prisoner under close
guard.

My bullet had struck the captain, breaking a rib and glancing off, but
he was game, and when we shortly after departed for the city he rode
with me in the same carriage. I tried to soothe my wife's fears, but it
was attempting the impossible, so we drove away to the city in three
carriages, Mr. P. assuring my wife that I would sleep at the hotel.

By the time we arrived the news had spread among the American colony,
and as the hotel was a sort of American club delegations of my
acquaintances speedily arrived. All were loud in the denunciation of the
outrage. Of course, they saw things on the surface only. Soon our
Consul-General Torbet arrived, and assured me he would see that I should
be treated with every consideration until such time as the unfortunate
mistake was corrected.

That night I slept at the hotel with Curtin and his two companions for
roommates. Mr. P. took his wound and close call very good naturedly, and
said he did not blame me at all, but felt taken down to think I had got
the drop on him. Early the next morning my friend, the chief of police,
Col. Moreno de Vascos, called on me, indignant and angry that I should
suffer such discourtesy. He was particularly indignant over the insult
to himself in not being consulted, so that he could have sent me a note
to call on him and explain. Then he turned to Pinkerton and told him to
liberate me, as he would be responsible for me whenever wanted. But the
captain knew what he was about, and knew his business too well and the
backing he had to pay any attention to Col. Vascos. I claimed the
protection of our Consul, but Torbet regretfully told me that on account
of the orders Pinkerton bore from the State Department at Washington he
was forced to consent to my detention, but he would not permit me to be
kept in the ordinary prison. So about 12 o'clock next day I was
transferred to the police barracks, and put into the lieutenant of
police's room and a guard of soldiers placed over me.

The New York Herald of the next day contained the following:

     (Editorial, New York Herald, Feb. 26, 1873.)

     "CUBAN AFFAIRS--BIDWELL'S IMPRISONMENT.

     "The special telegraphic advices which we publish to-day in
     reference to the arrest and imprisonment at Havana of Bidwell, one
     of the parties accused of the recent forgeries on the Bank of
     England, are very interesting, touching the jurisdiction of the
     Island authorities in this matter. It appears that Bidwell was
     arrested at the request of the British Government on the
     supposition that he was a British subject; but it is represented
     that he is a citizen of the United States of America, and that his
     arrest in Cuba is not justified by any extradition treaty with
     England, nor by any authority, except that of the Captain-General,
     whose will over the Island is the supreme law. If it can be
     established that Bidwell is a citizen of the United States his case
     certainly calls for the intervention of the Secretary of State. The
     prisoner, it seems, desires a transfer to New York, which is
     perfectly natural, but we suspect that the international
     difficulties suggested touching his detention in Cuba will not
     materially improve his chances of escape. Such proceedings could be
     carried out in no other country than Cuba, where the
     Captain-General does not always act in accordance with law.
     Distinguished lawyers and judges of that city, in conversation with
     the Herald correspondent, denounced the act as being utterly
     illegal and without precedent."


     (Cable dispatch to the London Times, March 3, 1873.)

                                         "Havana, Cuba, March 2, 1873.

     "Great efforts are being made by the lawyers and prominent citizens
     here to obtain the release of Bidwell, supposed to be Warren.
     To-morrow the American Consul will demand his release on the ground
     that he is an American citizen. The British Consul-General, E. H.
     Crawford, is doing everything in his power to counteract these
     efforts. There is great excitement here over Bidwell's arrest and
     the popular sympathy is with him."


     (By cable from Havana to New York Herald, March 31, 1873.)

     "Bidwell, the alleged Bank of England forger, whose arrest caused
     so much excitement here, escaped by jumping from the second story
     balcony of the police barracks late last night in the presence of
     his guards. He was partly dressed at the time. Bidwell and his wife
     are greatly liked here, and no doubt his Havana friends, seeing the
     impossibility of counteracting by legal means the efforts of the
     British Consul to secure his extradition, planned the affair.

     "It is the general opinion that John Bull has seen the last of
     Bidwell, there being dozens of planters in the district ready and
     willing to shelter him, which they can do effectually."

[Illustration: MAT-MAKING AT PENTONVILLE PRISON.]




CHAPTER XXXII.

NIGHTLY IN MY DUNGEON THE MAGICIAN MEMORY WOULD UNROLL THAT SCENE.


So at last justice had laid hold of me, but I thought it a very shaky
hold--so much so that I was confident that I could break away from her,
so that she could never weigh me in her balance.

I will not enter into the details of events in Havana for the next few
days--briefly told, I was nominally a prisoner; actually so, as regards
leaving the barracks. The commander, Col. Vascos, was a warm friend,
and, living in the barrack, he wanted me to dine at his table, but as I
was already planning an escape, I deemed it best not to accept.

My wife spent many hours with me daily. All my meals were brought from
the hotel. Nunn was kept a prisoner for two days, then liberated. I took
him into my confidence, telling him I was going to escape, and directed
him to make all outside arrangements for that event, and he was greatly
rejoiced when I told him he should accompany me in my flight.

Pinkerton, was awake to the danger of losing his man, and had lodged a
written protest with the English and American Consuls against my being
confined in the police barracks.

The only result was that Col. Vascos issued an order to keep him and his
men out of the barracks.

I had a great many visitors, including officers of the army and navy,
and all were loud in protestation and indignant at my arrest. None
seemed to care whether I was guilty or not, but all demanded my
liberation, as there was no extradition treaty and no law to surrender
me. Even my lawyer, the most influential in Cuba, assured me there was
not the slightest danger of my surrender, but I knew that the bankers
Rothschild would ask Spain to give me up, and to an impecunious
Government like that of Spain the word of a Rothschild was more potent
than that of a king.

Then I knew such bright men as William A. Pinkerton (who had arrived)
and his lieutenant, Capt. John Curtin, would never have made the mistake
of coming to Cuba without full powers; therefore, feeling confident that
my surrender would be only a question of time I resolved to escape.

At my request Col. Vascos had sent a guard of soldiers to my house and
brought to the barracks two of my trunks. I had $80,000 in cash and
bonds, besides many valuables as well, in them. I gave my wife $20,000
and my servant $1,000 in gold and $5,000 in Spanish bank notes. Curtin
had in vain tried to seize my luggage, but the Spanish law stood in his
way.

All this time the rebellion in the island was in full blast, the
insurgents--consisting of native Cubans, mulattoes and negroes
(ex-slaves)--held possession of the greater part of the Eastern
provinces--that is, the whole eastern end of the island, and the western
end, called Pinar del Rio. They had kept the flame of rebellion alive
for six years and were still making a desperate and fairly successful
fight to maintain themselves. The sympathies of the American people were
with them, and they looked to our country for arms and recruits. The
former were smuggled into the island as opportunity offered by a Cuban
committee in New York. Not many, but yet some, recruits went, for it was
death to be caught going or returning, and few ever returned. The civil
conflict was murderous, neither side giving quarter. The spirit of
adventure was strong upon me, and I resolved, if I escaped, to make my
way to the Western Province and join the insurgents for a year, then
make my escape by crossing the narrow body of water between Cape San
Antonio and the mainland of Central America.

Once among the rebels all pursuit of me was at an end, as army after
army had been sent from Spain to crush the rebellion, and each had in
turn melted away before the valor of the rebels or the deadly climate.

Nunn volunteered to accompany me, and I gave him $2,000 to send to his
wife in Paris, that his mind might be easy on that score. No one knew my
real destination save Nunn and my wife. It was hard to obtain her
consent, but at last it was given. I arranged with her that she was to
leave Havana as soon as she knew I was off, cross to Key West, wait one
month there, and, if she then heard nothing of me, she was to telegraph
my sister to meet her in New York, take the steamer to that city and
live with her until I rejoined her.

Among other things, Nunn, by my orders, procured good maps of the
country. A Spanish gentleman, a warm friend, but whose name I will not
mention, was my counselor in the plot. He advised me to go to the Isle
of Pines, as Senor Andrez had promised to keep me safely from all
pursuit. I let my friends think that was my destination. I proposed as
when on my visit to embark from Cajio, but to take a westward course
along the coast, and when well off Pinar del Rio and night fell to put
about and steer to shore under cover of the darkness. Once ashore, to
get as far inland as possible before dawn. Then to keep a lookout for
any body of rebels and join them as a volunteer in the cause of "free
Cuba." We were sure of a welcome, particularly as we would come well
armed.

[Illustration: BLACK MARIA CONVEYING THE FORGERS THROUGH LONDON IN
CHAINS.]

I had made it a practice to give the sentinels in the police barracks a
bottle of brandy every day and a box of cigars every second day during
my stay, besides what were to them valuable presents, so I was highly
popular in the barracks. We had fixed on the night of March 20 for the
venture.

My room was in the second story of the barracks, but I was allowed to go
freely through all the rooms on that floor, followed more or less by a
guard. None of the windows opened on the street. There was a room
leading to an open window, but the door was kept locked. It was arranged
to have it unlocked with the key on the inside at 10 o'clock that night.
I was to walk about as usual, and, when the hour came suddenly step
through the door, lock it behind me and then bolt through the window
into the street. Nunn and my friend were to await me outside of the
window with orders to shoot any man (not a native) who attempted to stop
me, as I feared Curtin or his men might be on guard in the street, and
once in the street I did not propose to go back again alive.

The guns and two extra revolvers had been made into a bundle and left at
the station. At a nearby room were disguises for Nunn and myself,
consisting simply of cloaks and whiskers. We intended to board the 10:30
train going South, and once well out of the station would dispense with
all disguise but the Spanish cloak each of us wore.

The day for the venture came. I had previously instructed my wife to
send word she was indisposed, and to remain at the hotel. She had very
bravely offered to be on hand and with me up to the moment I disappeared
through the door, but fearing that in the excitement some of the
soldiers might say or do something insulting, I forbade her being on the
scene. I had had an unusually large number of visitors during the day. I
felt but little anxiety over the result, save only on the side of
Pinkerton. I had a sort of suspicion or presentment that, once fairly
outside of the barracks, I would run against him. The day passed rapidly
away, and 6 o'clock came, and all the civil officials, with the horde of
hangers-on, departed, leaving the usual evening solitude in the
barracks. Soon Nunn came with my supper and cautiously produced a
revolver and belt. I strapped the belt around me under my vest, placing
the revolver under a pile of clothing. Nunn reported everything all
right. He had seen Curtin that day as usual around the hotel and
apparently unsuspicious of anything unusual going on.

The window I was to jump out of opened on the public street, and the
street would be jammed full of people at the hour I was going. Of course
there were a good many chances of failure, chiefly so because all the
police from top to bottom knew me by sight, and if one of them happened
to be one of the half hundred witnesses of my jump he might have wit
enough to seize me.

Nunn and my friend were to be under the window ready to act according to
circumstances. Above all, to be ready to seize hold of any one who
manifested any intention to detain me. Nunn was full of courage and
hope. At 7 o'clock he went away, not to see me again until we met
outside the barracks. I called the guard and three or four idle soldiers
into my room and served them out liberal doses of brandy. Unluckily
enough, however, the one on duty would drink but lightly. Soon after 8
Consul-General Torbet came in to smoke a cigar and have a chat. He
remained until nearly 10, and then departed. Then I felt the hour had
indeed come. I thrust the revolver inside my shirt, and rolled up a cap
and put it in the same place. Then calling the sentry, I gave him a
drink and a cigar, and stepping out into the hall, I began my usual
march around through the upper rooms of the barracks. I was to go out of
the window at precisely 10. It wanted ten minutes of that time. It was a
long ten minutes to me, but I marched around puffing my cigar
unconcernedly, with an eye on the door I was to slip through. At the
hour I had my watch in my hand, and was in the room farthest from the
door of exit into the room opening on the street. I walked swiftly
through the two intervening rooms and so was for a brief four or five
seconds out of sight of the slow following sentinel. I reached the door,
opened it, stepped through and instantly locked it. In a moment I was
through the open window into the little iron balcony outside. One swift
glance showed me the street thronged with people, but hesitation meant
failure and death. I climbed lightly over the railing and hung suspended
for an instant from the bottom; the crowd below made a circle from
under, and I dropped easily to the ground, bareheaded, of course. Nunn
was there, and instantly clapped a large straw hat on my head. The
strange incident did not seem to attract the least notice, for in a
moment we were lost in the crowd. I had my hand on my revolver, and had
so strong a belief I should every second be confronted by Curtin that I
was strangely surprised when I saw no sign of the gentleman. In less
time than it takes to tell it, I was down into an open hallway and then
into a room. I and Nunn, who were smooth-faced, were given bushy
whiskers and a cloak. In the mean time, I paid an agent in waiting
$10,000 in French and Spanish notes, then we hurried out of the rear
into a cab and were driven to the station, arriving just in time to
catch the 10:30 train.

The cab ride and train ride that night were happy rides. I had been a
captive and now was free. The sights and sounds all around me took on a
deeper purpose and a more significant meaning than they had ever borne
before.

I had for a few brief days been a captive, shut out from nature's sights
and sounds, and that brief deprivation awoke in me a feeling of
appreciation for the feast that is everywhere around us spread with a
lavish hand. My mind was in a tumult of delight, and I almost forgot I
was a fugitive; fortunately the Spaniard is not a suspicious animal, and
no notice was taken of us; and so we bumped slowly on southward through
the tropic night.

Seven o'clock on the morning of the 11th found us at Guisa, a small
station on the railroad about ninety miles from Havana and west from
Cajio some twenty miles. Our friend here procured us horses, and,
bidding him good-bye, Nunn and I started on our ride to Cajio. We were
both greatly elated over the success of our adventure. Our friends had
procured for us police passports and gun permits under the names of
Parish and Ellis.

I had a chronometer, several valuable diamonds, a revolver and gun. Nunn
carried a canvas bag containing, among other things, 250 capital cigars,
tobacco, matches and 300 cartridges. Then we had good maps of the island
and current charts of the Gulf of Mantabano, with its hundreds of rocky
inlets, spreading everywhere along the south coast. But, armed as we
were, it would never do to be picked up by any Spanish boat or patrol
anywhere near the rebel border. It probably meant death if we were
captured.

I think on the whole it would have been the wiser plan to have gone to
Senor Andrez's plantation at San Jose. The fear in that case was that if
an order arrived from Madrid to deliver me up I might not be safe even
in the Isle of Pines. At Cajio I resolved to lose myself so far as the
Spanish authorities were concerned, and only travel by night. If we
remained on land this would be necessary, as soldiers were everywhere
and our police passports would not hold good if we were found traveling
in the direction of the rebel lines.

I proposed going by sea, and then all our voyaging would necessarily be
by night, for there were Spanish gunboats everywhere patrolling around
the shores, but there were innumerable small inlets where we could draw
up our boat, lay perdu during the day and spy out the next island to
sail to at night.

[Illustration: CASTS OF THE HEADS OF NOTORIOUS CRIMINALS.]

We arrived in due time at Cajio, and here our passports were demanded by
a little yellow monkey of a sergeant. I did not quite like having
passports scrutinized and determined to try and avoid any more of it.

We found no boat at Cajio, nor could we buy, or, if we bought, could not
manage one alone. The only thing we could do was to charter one with a
crew of four men. During my stay in Cuba I had been studying Spanish. I
had become a tolerably proficient speaker, so I had no great difficulty
in associating with the natives.

I found my idea of joining the rebels by sea impracticable, and as to go
by land was perilous in the extreme, I made up my mind to send Nunn back
to Havana and to make the venture alone. I did not care to chance his
life, and I also felt that it was safer for one than for two.

Forty miles away was the last fortified post on the Rio Choerra, at the
small town of Voronjo. Once across that small stream I would be on
neutral ground, liable at any time to fall in with a rebel band.

Nunn was very plucky and most devoted. He by no means wanted to go back,
but at last consented.

I determined to chance traveling on the beach by night. So at 12 o'clock
the day after our arrival at Cajio we mounted our horses and announced
that we were returning to Havana. Two miles away, at the small hamlet of
Zoringa, we put our horses out and struck for the beach about four miles
west of Cajio. Then we went a few yards into the jungle and sat down for
our last talk and to wait for the darkness. We were no longer master and
servant, but friends. The hours went slowly by; we did not say much, but
felt strongly. We had good cigars and smoked almost incessantly.

I told him to see Curtin, to give him my regards and laugh at him in a
nice way, and to tell my wife that I would limit my stay with the rebels
to a year. I told Nunn to send for his wife to join him in New York, and
my wife would take her into service so that they could be together.

I did not dare to keep the gun we had, but retained the revolvers in a
belt around my waist. They were rather old-fashioned, and, as the sequel
proved, the ammunition was not waterproof or else was defective. I had
two bottles of water, a hundred cigars in my pocket, 300 cartridges,
four pounds of dried beef and a loaf of bread. I wore a soft hat and had
on a fine pair of English walking boots, an important article for the
tramp ahead of me. I wore my chronometer tied by a stout string. I sent
my wife all my valuables save three diamond studs, $700 in gold and
$5,000 in notes, mostly Spanish bank notes, and I kept $10,000 in bonds.

Nunn cut me a stout ironwood cudgel as a handy weapon.

At last the night came, and still we waited, loath to say good-bye. We
had come out of the jungle and were sitting in the still warm sand
talking in low tones and watching the stars. At last when my watch told
me it was 10 we rose, and, shaking hands warmly, parted, he going east
to Cajio, I west toward Pinar del Rio and the rebel camps.

Of course, my great danger lay in meeting soldiers who would stop me.
Indeed any one who met a stranger and a foreigner heading west would
either stop him or give an alarm, and if once arrested (passports so
near the enemy's camp were useless) it meant death, or what was quite as
bad, incarceration in a filthy prison until my case was reported on to
the Captain-General in Havana. That, of course, meant my return to
Havana and possibly to England.

Everything is very primitive in Cuba. The common people--that is, the
whites and free people--live in mere huts or cabins, and sleep in
hammocks under roofs open on two sides. All go to bed soon after sunset,
so there was no danger in night traveling, save only in meeting the
sentries or running on some detached post of soldiers.

In case of meeting these, I had resolved to plunge into the tropical
jungle which came close down to the beach.

Neither night traveling nor the situation had any terrors for me. I
felt my only danger lay in stumbling upon some outpost or sentry who
might perceive me before I saw him and so cover me with his rifle before
challenging, but I knew from observation since my arrival in Cuba that
the discipline among the Spanish soldiers was very slack, and I had a
pretty firm belief that isolated sentries usually took a nap while
waiting the relief.

After leaving Nunn I started out at a quick pace, alert and confident.
The moon had gone down, but the Caribbean Sea was lovely in the
starlight, and between watching the phosphorescent ripples of the waters
and listening to the night noises of the jungle I soon discovered I was
enjoying my jaunt and found myself anticipating the pleasure of the
free, open life ahead of me when once beyond the Spanish outposts and a
soldier of fortune. I thought what a story of adventure I would have to
relate when a year or two later I rejoined my wife and friends, and I
felt that a good record won in a fight for "free Cuba" would make men
willing to forget my past.

I found my westward march frequently interrupted by spooks--some rock,
stump or bush would, to my suspicious eye, take on the human form until
I thought it was a sentry on guard and meant danger. Once or twice I
sought the shelter of the jungle and spent a long time watching for some
sign of movement. On one occasion I painfully made a circuit of nearly a
mile to pass a projecting mass of bushes in the belief that there were
men behind it. The air was balmy as on a June night at home. I trudged
along with my two bottles of water slung across my shoulder tied to a
cord, and between them and my revolvers and cartridges I was pretty well
loaded down.

Nowhere during the night did I come across any fresh water, but was
fated to have a water adventure before daylight which I did not relish.
Soon after midnight I sat down on the sand well in the shadow of some
palmetto trees and had a very enjoyable lunch of bread and dried beef,
washed down by water from my bottle; then lighting a cigar and reclining
at full length on the dry sand I passed a pleasant half hour enjoying
the fine Havana. I looked forward to the hours of daylight to be spent
reclining at ease in the jungle with many anticipations of pleasure. I
had a supply of fine cigars, plenty to think about, and the
consciousness of having overcome serious difficulties gave me a feeling
of elation--then my surroundings were so novel and I was fond of outdoor
life.

At 4 o'clock the sky put on a ragged edge of gray in the east, and
feeling pretty well satisfied with my progress I began to think of
selecting a retreat for the hours of daylight. Suddenly I found myself
upon what was evidently the neck of a swamp extending far and wide into
the land. I had discovered during the night that there was a
well-traveled road skirting and following the beach at a distance of a
few hundred yards, but there was danger of my meeting some one there, so
I stuck to the beach.

In the middle of the swamp was a clear space of water with marshy banks.
As it was nearly daylight, and being in no hurry, my presence in the
country unknown, and in no immediate danger, I determined to halt and
not tackle the swamp until nightfall again. Then, if seen by any one, I
would have some hours of darkness to make myself scarce in the
neighborhood.

Turning to follow the edge of the swamp I saw before me on a little
lower level than where I stood in the sand what appeared a plot of vivid
green grass, and without any precaution stupidly stepped with my full
weight upon it, and instantly found myself floundering in four feet of
mud and water. I had fallen, and getting back on the solid ground I
found myself wet to the shoulders, my legs covered with mud and my
pistols, bread, etc., soaking with salt water. At once I ran across the
beach and sat down in the warm water of the sea, washing off the mud
as well as possible. Then I made my way into the jungle, crossing the
road, and going into the thicket a short distance sat down waiting for
daylight, purposing to remain concealed near enough to the road to see
all passers-by, so that I might judge what sort of people I was among.

[Illustration: DARTMOOR CONVICT ESTABLISHMENT.--ABOUT 2000 PRISONERS.]

As the ground where I stood was low and wet, and my clothes soaking, I
feared catching the fever, so made my way well back to where some fallen
trees had made a rift in the dense mass of trunks, creepers and foliage,
letting in the sunlight. There I pulled off my garments to dry, taking
great care not to let any of the poisonous leaves come into contact with
my flesh, and made myself comfortable, sitting down to lunch nearly in
the state of nature. I was more concerned over my damaged cigars than my
dampened cartridges. On examination I found the cigars but slightly wet,
so, spreading them out to dry along with the drapery, I lit one and
surveyed the position. As the moisture was already steaming out of my
garments I took matters cheerfully and considered the outlook good.

Having finished one of my bottles of water, I made up my mind to carry
only one, and to take my chance of replenishing that. So long as my
health continued perfect I did not require much water; what I feared was
that my exposure and change of diet might make me feverish; if so, I
would suffer from thirst unless I struck a hilly country.

How much company my watch was to me during those long days and nights! I
was never tired of examining it. About 10 o'clock I made my way to the
road and placed myself in a mass of foliage, where unseen by any one I
had quite a range of the road. Up to this hour I had not seen a soul. At
first I watched the little stretch of road with eagerness, but no one
appearing I turned my attention to watching the evolutions of a huge
yellow spider which was spreading its net near by. While absorbed, and
almost fascinated, I was suddenly roused by the sharp, quick beating of
hoofs on the sandy road. Giving a startled glance, I saw a man unarmed,
but evidently a soldier, gallop quickly by on a mule. Twenty minutes
later an old-fashioned cart containing four half-dressed negroes and
drawn by four wretched mules passed. The men were silent and downcast.
Before 1 o'clock thirty people had passed, several being soldiers of the
guardia civil (armed police).

Then starting to spy out the land from the bushes and vines bordering
the swamp I could see a bridge crossing the neck of the swamp, but,
worst of all, quite a collection of houses at the other side, reaching
down to the beach, and a wharf that ran out into the water quite fifty
yards, with, no doubt, a guardhouse and police station among them. I saw
my way blocked. It seemed certain there would be sentries on guard at
the bridge, or so near it as to make it impossible for me to cross
unobserved. The swamp extended inland apparently for three or four
miles, and the jungle grew so dense as to make it impossible to
penetrate it in an effort to go around, so I determined not to venture
crossing the bridge, but to swim for it.

The swamp spread on both sides of the lagoon, and there was no such
thing as wading in that almost liquid morass, so I tried to find by
daylight a place where the mud was covered with water enough at least to
make swimming possible, but no such place could I find.

Everywhere a black tangled mass of rotting leaves and creepers spread,
making such a horrible slime that I shrank from attempting to cross it
to the open water. Once over that there was the same ordeal to go
through on the other side, and I knew I could only do it at full
length--that is, to lie flat and pull myself along as well as possible.
The simplest way was to wade out into the sea, then to swim far enough
outside of the pier to escape observation from any one who might chance
to be on it.

But this involved the chance of a horrible death, the sea there swarming
with sharks, which at night come in shore. Therefore, after cogitating
the matter, I resolved to attempt the bridge, taking the risk of being
seen. It might prove fatal to be seen, as I would have to bolt back, and
once knowing a fugitive was in the jungle they might turn out and hedge
me in, unless I took the sea route. This I resolved to do, if the one by
the bridge proved impracticable.

So during the afternoon I gathered a small lot of dried limbs and broke
them off in sufficient quantity to make a raft capable of bearing about
twenty pounds. On this I intended to put my revolvers, cartridges,
cigars, etc., and also to rest lightly on it myself, pushing it before
me as I swam. After dark I crossed the road into the jungle skirting the
beach, carrying my raft, and deposited it on the sand. Lying down in the
hot sand near by smoking a cigar, I waited for the moon to go down. I
was doing more than watch the stars and moonlit water. I was saying to
myself, "What a jolly world is this!"

Then, beginning to argue of human destiny, at last I brought the
argument around to Ego, and decided that he was a pretty clever fellow,
and that the world meant to treat him well. So Ego, settling down into a
very comfortable frame of mind, lighting a fresh cigar and looking
across at the dark masses of the coral islets crowned with foliage set
in the mirrored waters, passed two delightful hours.

I watched the moon go down and was not impatient, for the beauty of the
scene more even than the novelty of the position cast a charm over the
spirit and soothed the eye and mind. I wondered how many were seeking me
and how many thousands were speculating over my identity and
whereabouts, yet not one in his wildest imagination could ever picture
the reality of my position in all its strange and magic surroundings.
Through all the coming twenty years, nightly in my dungeon, the
magician memory would unroll that scene from his pictured chambers. It
was all there--the physical that the eye took in and the thoughts evoked
and sent swarming to the brain, there to remain engraved until life and
memory end.

[Illustration: SCENE NEAR RIO JANEIRO.]




CHAPTER XXXIII.

SHARKS, SALT WATER ONES, AND OTHER THINGS.


The bridge had no protection along the side save a simple stringpiece of
timber. On the far side the houses rested nearly against the bridge
entrance, forming a street, which I had to pass through.

The moon went down at 10, but I could hear loud voices and occasional
bursts of laughter until 11. Then all grew still save the night noises
of the woods and swamps.

At midnight I carried my raft down to the edge of the water, then
leaving it there for use in case of a repulse, with my ironwood stick in
my left hand and my revolver in the right, I marched down to the bridge,
but fearing my upright figure might be seen, dark as it was, outlined
against the sky, I stooped and crawled along the stringpiece of timber
until within twenty feet of the large house at the end of the bridge.
Peering through the gloom I listened, but could not see or hear any
movement. Straightening myself up I took half a dozen paces, when, in
the stillness, I heard a sharp crackle that turned me to stone as the
flame of a wax match revealed two soldiers sitting on a bench within the
porch of the guardhouse not ten feet away. One had struck the match to
light a cigarette. The flame that betrayed them to me showed to them my
form outlined on the bridge.

There was a sudden exclamation, a hail, "Quien va!" then a sudden and
thrilling rattle of accoutrements, but I had turned and was flying back
across the bridge. Suddenly a rifle shot rang out sharply on the night;
a second followed, but I was unharmed. In ten seconds I was beside my
little raft, and, pushing it before me, waded out in the shallow water.
When up to my knees I halted, unstrapped my revolvers and placed them on
the raft. Then pulling off my shoes I put them and my load on the raft,
fastening all with a string put there for the purpose. Sticking my knife
through the lapel of my coat and resting my chin on the raft I began to
swim, keeping well out, so as to go outside the long wharf.

In the mean time everything was in commotion ashore. Two more shots were
fired, and flashes of the guns proved that a squad had turned out and
had crossed the bridge in hot pursuit. Then I blessed the wise
forethought that had led me to construct the raft. Certainly it had
saved me, for they would surely search the jungle.

During the fearful excitement I had forgotten all about the sharks. In
the darkness I had given all my attention to trying to get a glimpse of
the wharf. Suddenly, near me in the calm and awful stillness, there
sprang out of the dark waters a large fish which fell back with a
splash.

My heart stood still and my blood seemed to freeze, for to my horror I
fancied I saw the black fins of numberless sharks cutting the water. I
saw myself dragged down into the awful depths and torn limb from limb,
by the fierce and hungry monsters. I gave up hope and ceased my
swimming, expecting every minute to see the water churned into angry
foam by the furious sharks. Instinctively I placed my hand on the knife
I had thrust through the lapel of my coat for just such an emergency,
but strength and courage were all gone and my nerveless hand could not
draw it out. It seemed a long time that I waited, half dazed, for death,
which I hoped when it came would be swift.

Then I began swimming again, but in a hopeless way. My nerve was all
gone. I fancied I was ringed around with the black-finned devils, and
thought I could discern the currents from their waving tails; but I kept
on swimming, pushing my raft before me, until suddenly I was thrilled
through by my foot striking the bottom.

Making a rush for the shore, and once there, heedless of the fact that I
was in the rear of the houses, I fell down in the sand, weak and
panting, and there I lay until strength enough to walk came to me. Then,
taking my baggage from the raft, and cutting the cords that bound it
together, I started on. Courage and confidence soon came back, and I
kept steadily on for three hours, passing several small salt water
inlets, but no fresh water to fill my now empty bottle.

At the first sign of day I went just within the border of the jungle,
and lying down was soon asleep, and sleeping soundly, too, for waking I
found the sun high in the heavens, and, looking at my watch, saw it was
9 o'clock. At the same time I discovered that I was hungry, with no food
save a small piece of dried beef and not a drop of water in my bottle.

The salt water lagoon, or inlet, where I had my adventure of the
previous night was marked on my map as a river, but it was not. However,
I did not worry over the water question, as I knew I was near the hilly
country surrounding the town of Alguizor, an important military
headquarters, and I was confident of soon meeting some creek flowing
from the hills. As for food, there were to be found in the dense jungle,
where the soil was moist and wet, the holes of the nut crabs. They were
large and fat--that is, appeared to be fat--and I knew that with plenty
of them in the jungle I should not suffer from hunger.

Before starting inland for the day I turned to look at the blue waters
rippling under a light breeze, and glancing in the sun, only a few yards
away, I smiled to think of the phantoms my fears had conjured up, but
for all that I resolved that no more night swims in the sea should find
place in my programme.

I made my way with difficulty through the tangled woods, but had gone
nearly a mile before I came to the road. After a cautious survey from my
shelter, I stepped out on it, and looking away to the west I saw
cultivated hills with teams and people moving about; I also saw the road
became two--the right-hand one led away from the coast into the hills,
the one to the left continued to skirt the beach. Both roads were well
traveled, and I knew I was near the tobacco belt, which is cultivated
throughout its entire length, from the Gulf to the Caribbean Sea, for a
breadth of twenty miles, its western border touching the province of
Pinar del Rio. Forty miles beyond that border the rebels held the town
of San Cristoval, but I had made up my mind to follow the coast until I
reached the hamlet and harbor of Rio de San Diego, fifty miles south
from San Cristoval, then to strike north to the town of Passos, twenty
miles west of San Cristoval. Once past San Diego, I would be well within
the rebel lines, and could safely show myself, although I determined not
to do so voluntarily until I was at Passos.

The roundabout way I was traveling doubled the distance, but, aside from
getting outside the lines of the Spanish patrols, I was in no particular
hurry, and my mode of life was hardening and fitting me for the service
in which I was to embark. I counted upon taking ten days, or rather
nights, to reach San Diego, and five from there to Passos, where I would
make myself known to the rebel chiefs as an American volunteer in the
cause of Cuban liberty. And, I thought, what a change of scene for Mr.
F. A. Warren. From the Bank of England to a volunteer in a rebel camp in
Cuba!

[Illustration: MILITARY SUPPRESSING REVOLT OF CONVICTS AT CHATHAM.]

I crossed the road and entered the jungle to pass the day, but as the
ground was dry the trees and vines were not so closely matted, making it
easier to move about, and a far more agreeable place it was for a
daylight picnic than the jungle where I had passed the day before.
But no crabs showed themselves, and as there was no animal life to be
found, there was nothing but my piece of dried beef to be had "to go
into the interior," so I dined off that; then, lighting one of my
precious cigars, lay down in a sort of fairy bower to enjoy myself, and
succeeded. During the entire day no sight or sound of human form or
voice came to me, nor yet of animal life, save only a mateless bird,
garbed in green that flitted around. Of course, not a drop of water this
whole day long for me, and, though I was moderately thirsty, I did not
suffer, despite the fact that I smoked several cigars. But I felt that I
must have food and drink that night, whatever risk I incurred in
securing it. I determined, therefore, to start early on my journey and
get food before the country people were all in bed. As soon as night
fell I stepped out on the road and cautiously started westward. Knowing
there must be some town or hamlet near by, I purposed to enter, spy out
some shop and watch until the shopkeeper was alone, then enter and
purchase a supply of such food as he had, then march out and disappear
as quickly as possible.

Soon after starting I came to a small place such as the poor whites of
the country inhabit, and seeing two women in the doorway I walked in,
and with a salute and "Buenas noches, senoritas," I asked for water
(agua); they responded with alacrity and brought me some in a cocoanut
shell. I saw it was vile stuff, with an earthy taste, but thirsty as I
was it tasted like nectar. There was some food on a wooden dish inside,
and I suppose they saw me looking at it, for the older woman ran in and
returned bringing me two roasted plantains and a rice cake. Just then I
discovered a man inside and two others came up from the rear of the
house, or I would have purchased food of the women; but, seeing them, I
thanked the ladies, and, saying good night, disappeared in the darkness.
Picking up the empty bottle I had left in the road I walked on,
feasting as I went on my roasted plantains. How nice they tasted!

A mile ahead I came to a tumbledown roadhouse, with quite a crowd of
loud-voiced men standing around, who evidently had been indulging in the
fiery aguardiente sold there. Like the Levite and priest, I passed by on
the other side, giving the place a wide berth. Soon after I entered a
town or hamlet of a dozen houses. Two or three passed me in the darkness
with a "Buenas noches, senor," to which I mumbled some reply, they
doubtless taking me for a neighbor. Two uniformed men, evidently police
or soldiers, were lounging in the only shop, and I dared not enter until
they were gone. Planting myself in a deep shadow, I sat down waiting for
them to go out, but they showed no sign of moving until a shrill voice
from a female throat issued from a nearby house, bidding one of the
loungers to lounge no more just then, and he, hurriedly obeying the
summons, went; soon his companion followed; then, leaving my empty
bottle in the road, and with my hand on the revolver in my outside
pocket, I entered the shop. The easy-going Cuban shopkeeper paid no
particular attention to me, did not even stop rolling the cigarette he
was making. After deliberately lighting it, he lazily responded to my
"Buenas noches, senor," I saw bread, cakes and ham, and ordered of each;
then, seeing some Spanish wine, I took a bottle; also a bottle of
pickles. Producing a $10 Spanish bank note, I paid the bill, and emerged
into the night with the precious load, and so strong was the animal
instinct of hunger upon me that I would have fought to death sooner than
surrender the provisions I carried.

Picking up my empty bottle I looked out for a chance to fill it as I
walked through the town on the main road, which went straight west, but
intending to abandon it as soon as I came to the fields and found it was
safe to sit down for a feast, then make my way to the beach, now some
two miles away, and put in a good distance before daylight. But for two
mortal hours the road was bordered by impenetrable walls of cactus and
bayonet grass, and to make the matter worse the moon came out from
behind the clouds and poured a flood of light on the open road. Twice
men on horseback passed me, coming from the opposite direction, and both
times I sank down in the shadow of the cactus, both times with revolver
in hand, but dreading an encounter, as the noise of firing might wake a
hornets' nest about my ears.

At last I came to a road which entered a field. I was soon over the bars
and found myself in an old tobacco plantation, now partly planted in
Spanish beans. Crossing a couple of fields at the foot of the hills and
in going over a triangular piece of ground, I found the ruins of a
house, and nearby a small stream of water. I was in luck, and, taking a
good drink and filling my bottle, I sat down in a convenient shadow and
spread out my eatables. They were a goodly sight, and consisted of four
pounds of good ham, a dozen good-sized sweet cakes, two loaves of bread,
a bottle of pickles and one of wine, and one of water. I began with a
drink of wine, then followed ham and bread and cake for dessert, all
washed down with a fine long drink of water. Then lighting a cigar I
stretched myself at full length and spent a delightful hour star-gazing.

Then I arose, took another drink of wine, but as it was not particularly
select, threw the remainder away, and, filling both bottles from the
brook, I prepared to march.

How I wish the kodak fiend existed then and that one of them had
happened along just then to take a snap shot at me as I stood there in
full marching order, with my water bottles slung over my shoulders, my
eatables tied up in a large silk handkerchief, with my garments all in
tatters, the result of thorns and creepers snatching at them in my
jungle trampings; but, worst of all, my trusty and precious walking
boots were beginning to show signs of rough usage.

I struck the road leading to the beach and marched westward, but it was
an unknown land, and I was in constant fear of running against some
military post or patrol, being thus constantly delayed by long halts to
watch some suspicious object or by making long detours to avoid them.
Once I had a fright. Two men on horseback riding on the sandy road were
almost on me before I saw or heard them, and I only had time to sink
into the shadow as they passed almost within reach of my hand. Both were
smoking the everlasting cigarette, and were engaged in earnest talk.
Daylight came and found me not more than eight or ten miles further on
my journey, but I was very well content as I pitched my camp for the
day. I had a royal feast, then, after a cigar, lay down to sleep in
another fairy bower and slept until noon, and awoke to find myself
wondering how matters were going with Capt. Curtin in Havana, rather
amused over the state of chagrin I knew he must be in. I thought of a
possible future meeting some years ahead, when, all danger over, I would
see and chaff him over a bottle of Cliquot and the $50,000 he wouldn't
have, and how I went all the same and saved the money.

I realized I must be frugal or my provisions would never hold out; so,
after a light lunch, I began to make my way slowly to the beach through
the tangled maze of trees and vines. Coming in sight of the blue waters
I lay down to sleep again and awoke when the stars were out. The moon
would not go down till late, but as there was a deep, broad shadow cast
by the trees I walked in it.

Good food and the long day of rest restored my strength. All my
confidence returned, and I made good progress. At last the moon went
down, and then I pressed rapidly forward, always with revolver in hand,
ready for instant action. I think I made fully twenty-five miles this
night, but as the coast was indented my progress in a straight direction
was not more than half that distance. Just as it began to grow gray in
the east I came out on a wide inlet. It ran deep into the land. I
recognized it from my map as Puerto del Gato, and then I knew I was in
the province of Pinar del Rio and almost out of danger.

I went into the bush again and pitched camp, waiting for daylight to
come and reveal my surroundings. Pitching camp consisted in scraping a
few leaves together and lying down; but this morning I was too excited
to sleep. I felt that I was near my goal, after having safely gone
through many dangers. Once across the Puerto del Gato, two nights of
travel would place me outside of the farthest Spanish pickets and bring
me among friends, far beyond chance of pursuit, and I also knew that the
mere knowledge of my presence in the rebel camp would cause all thought
of pursuit to be dropped.

When daylight came I stood and looked around. Across the inlet, twenty
miles away, I could see only dark masses of green, with no sign of life.
To the north the land was hilly, with houses here and there in the
distance, and signs of animal life. I cautiously searched the shore for
a mile in the hope of finding a boat to cross to the other shore of the
inlet, but none was in sight.

About 9 o'clock I saw smoke off at sea, and soon I made out a small
Spanish gunboat coming rapidly up. Dropping anchor about a mile up the
inlet, she sent a boat ashore. I was feeling sleepy, and, going into the
woods again, I took a light lunch, and, emptying one bottle of water,
lay down to sleep, resolved to make my plans when I awoke. I did not
like the appearance of this gunboat; it seemed to promise the presence
of the enemy in force around me, besides being a visible manifestation
of the power of that enemy.

When I awoke from my nap I started on a cautious spying out of the land,
making my way toward the head of the inlet, but keeping always under the
protection of the woods. While going cautiously along I was startled by
the notes of a bugle ringing out some military call not far away, and a
moment later the gunboat replied with a gun, then steamed out to sea.
Continuing my progress through the woods I came to the road, and, hiding
securely in a thicket where I could see unseen, I watched. Soon I heard
the sound of voices, and then a detail of armed men passed, going
leisurely east, escorting an empty wagon drawn by four mules. It meant
much, these armed escorts, showing they were in the face of the enemy.
Several others passed during the hour of my watch. Then, with many
cautious glances up and down the road, I slipped quietly across and
crept for two hours through the jungle. Making my way to the side of the
bay, I saw that I had left the military post behind me. There were white
barracks and a wharf with people walking on it, and here the road and
beach were one. This much discovered, I went a safe distance into the
jungle and lay down to have a good sleep, feeling I would need all my
energy and strength for the coming night, as it promised to be a
critical one, especially as I could not afford to wait for the moon to
go down, and would not have the shelter of darkness, for the moonlight
was so powerful that one could easily read print by it.

I slept until dark, and awoke refreshed, then lunched and nearly
finished my last bottle of water. I had only sufficient food for two
more light meals. After lunch I smoked for an hour, star-gazing and
philosophizing. At 9 o'clock, emerging into the road, I started
cautiously out, walking in the shadow of the jungle as much as possible.
I thought the head of the inlet was about ten miles away, and expected
to find a military post or at least a picket stationed there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daylight once more. But it found me happy and content, for the
difficulties of the passage of the wide inlet, which had confronted me
the night before, had all been surmounted. I was now in a densely wooded
point on the western side of the bay. Between me and San Diego lay a
wild no man's land of fifty miles. That meant only two nights more of
peril and uncertainty, and it was all straight going. So far as the
coast line was concerned I was outside of the Spanish lines. Tired out
and very well contented, just as the sun rose fiery red above the
horizon, I lay down and was at once in dreamland. At noon, hungry and
with only a few ounces of food to satisfy my hunger, I woke. Finishing
my last bit of ham and bread, I lighted a cigar and set about planning.
Pulling out my little map, I began to scan it for the thousandth time.
About six miles to the north was the little town of San Miguel. Between
me and San Diego lay fifty miles of wild country swept by fire and
sword, without an inhabitant and without food. Hungry as I already was,
I felt it would not do to undertake a two days' journey through that
wilderness without eating. Of course I made a mistake. I was clear of
the toils, and I ought to have taken every and any chance rather than
enter the enemy's lines again.

I resolved, soon after night came, to set out for San Miguel, watch my
chance to enter a shop and purchase food, then, beating a hasty retreat,
strike out across the country straight for San Diego, there to find
myself among friends in the rebel camp.

I set out and without any particular adventure arrived about 9 o'clock
at San Miguel. It proved to be a hamlet with the houses ranged close
together on opposite sides of the streets. The moonlight cast a deep
shadow on one side, while the opposite side was almost like day. I stood
in the deep shadow watching. The first building was evidently a police
or military barrack. The door was wide open, but no one was visible
inside. About five doors off was a shop, but the door was closed, and
from where I stood there appeared no sign of life within. I waited about
ten minutes, and rashly concluding that there was no one save the
proprietor there, I stepped out of the shadow into the moonlight and
hurrying across the street, put my hand on the door, opened it and
stepping within found myself in the presence of twenty soldiers, all
gossiping, smoking or gambling. Belts and cartridge boxes along with
bayonets decorated the walls or were lying about on boxes and barrels.

All eyes were turned on me. I saw myself in a fearful trap and nothing
but consummate coolness could keep them from questioning me. My heart
beat fast, but with an affectation of indifference I saluted and said:
"Buenos noches, senores." They all returned my salutation, but looked at
each other eagerly, each waiting for the other to question me.

I stepped to the counter and asked for bread; two loaves were given me.
I picked up some cakes and paid for them. From the door I turned, and
putting all my dignity into a bow, I said: "Good night, gentlemen." They
all seemed held by a spell, but they looked and were dangerous as death.
I closed the door, fully realizing my peril, feeling the storm would
break the instant I was out of sight. Fortunately there was no one near,
and I ran swiftly across the street into the protecting shadow and
crouched down in a dark space between two houses. The cactus-like weeds
grew there and pricked me, but I heeded them not, for that instant the
soldiers poured out of the shop, an angry and excited mob, buckling on
their belts, cartridge boxes and bayonets as they ran. Some had their
muskets, others hastened to get them and all save two stragglers rushed
out of the town in the direction from which I had entered. I wondered at
this, but soon discovered the reason. Some few women, hearing the
tumult, came into the street, but seeing nothing, went in again; the
stragglers all disappeared and the street was quiet.

[Illustration: UNDERGROUND PASSAGE AND STAIRS LEADING TO OLD BAILEY
DOCK.]

I came out of my corner and hurried in the shadow down the road in the
opposite direction to the course followed by my pursuers. Arriving at
the last house at the foot of the street, I found myself confronted by a
small river, quiet and apparently deep, with all the space from the
last house to the river one impassable barrier of giant cactus, I had
either to swim the river or turn back, and I ought to have plunged in as
I was, revolver and all, the distance over being short; and, as I am an
expert swimmer, I could easily have got across, loaded down as I was.
But a contemptible trifle had weight enough to cause me to adopt the
suicidal course of turning back.

The fierce animal instinct of hunger was on me, the smell of the food
enraged me, and I thought if I swam the stream the cakes and bread I
carried would be soaked and probably lost, for I had them loose in my
arms; beside, I was overconfident of my ability to escape my pursuers.
They had marched by the road that led behind the village to the bridge
crossing the river some distance up; evidently, not seeing me, they took
it for granted I knew of the bridge, and had gone that way.

To appease at once my hanger, in a fatal moment I retraced my steps. As
I passed a house three women came out. They spoke to me, and in my
excitement, instead of saying good evening in Spanish (buenas noches), I
said good morning (buenas dias). They, of course, saw I was a stranger.

Just then four soldiers came hurriedly into the street from the road,
and I was forced to leave the women and crouch down in my former hiding
place. Then they did what women seldom do--betrayed the fugitive.
Calling to the soldiers, they pointed out the place I was in. All four
came running, and in a moment were almost on top of me. I presented my
revolver and snapped the trigger twice without exploding the cartridges;
they were too close or too excited to use their muskets, but all four
grappled with me, and naturally used me pretty roughly.

There was a terrific hullabaloo, as in response to their cries their
comrades came running in. By the time they had hustled me across the
street into the shop there was a mob of half a hundred around me. Soon
the commander, a captain, appeared. I wish I could say he was a
gentleman, but he was not. He was a little, peppery young fellow,
apparently with negro blood in his veins, and dictatorial and insulting
in manner.

Surely I was an object--a tramp in appearance--but with a diamond ring
on my finger (which I had taken from my pocket and slipped on), a
revolver strapped to my waist and a splendid chronometer in my pocket.
Such an object had never before loomed on their horizon. Was not one
glance enough to show that I must be a notable rebel, and there was but
one doom for such.

My desperate situation cast out all fear, and I was cold and haughty.
Flourishing my police passport, I informed him that I was Stanley W.
Parish of New York, a correspondent of the New York Herald, and he had
better look out what he was about.

But it was evident that police passports made out in Havana had no
currency in the face of the enemy; but at any rate it proved that
whatever my intentions might be, I had at least hailed last from Havana,
and not from the rebel camp, and this would prevent my peppery captain
from enjoying the pleasure of standing me up in the morning, to be
fusilladed, such being the law for all captives in the savage contest.

Down my gentleman sat on a barrel, pompous and important, and ordered me
to be searched. All this time a dozen hands were holding me fast. I told
my officer he was a fool and a clown, but my captors began to go through
my pockets, and speedily there was a heap of gold and paper money on the
barrel, and my little friend fingered it with a covetous eye. I had my
$10,000 in bonds pinned in the sleeve of my undershirt. This they
missed, but found all else I carried. In the mean time there was an
eager audience looking on, absorbed in the interest of the scene.

There was a collection indeed on that barrel. Beside my ring, there were
five other valuable diamonds, my chronometer, which with its regular
beat and stem-winding arrangement was a great curiosity. Then the heap
of money was a loadstone for all their hungry eyes. The captain was
making out an inventory and statement, while I stood white with rage to
see the half-breeds, blacks, browns and yellows, handle my property so
freely. I was especially in a rage with the impudent captain, who had
the nerve to put my watch in his pocket. Absorbed by the interest of the
scene, my captors had insensibly loosened their hold, and I determined
to have some satisfaction out of the captain. Suddenly seizing one of
the revolvers before I could be stopped I gave him a stinging blow with
it and sprang on him. We rolled on the floor, and there was a scene. I
was dragged off by fifty hands, every one trying to seize me, if only by
one hand. My captain got up with the blood running down his face, and,
rushing to a peg, he seized a sabre bayonet and flew at me like a mad
bull. I shouted at him in Spanish, calling him a cur and coward, bidding
him to come on. He was not unwilling, while my captors held me firmly
exposed to his assault. Another second would have ended my life, when a
woman spectator, who stood near nursing a child, threw her arms around
him; this, joined to my indifference, for I continued my jeers and
taunts, changed his purpose, to my disappointment, for I preferred death
to going back to Havana.

     "From Wall Street to Newgate" is replete with stirring incidents,
     marvelous adventures, hair-breadth escapes and remarkable
     experiences, such as few men have met with. They are narrated in
     any easy, picturesque style, evincing sincerity and candor, with no
     attempt at sensation or exaggeration. The truth told is stranger
     than fiction, and history may well be challenged to produce another
     life into which has come so many varied and bewildering events, or
     to disclose another character, trained in a religious home, having
     culture and an unusual business talent, whose deflection from the
     path of honor has stirred to its very depths the entire civilized
     world.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

ONE LOVELY JUNE MORNING INTO PLYMOUTH HARBOR WE SAIL.


Ten days after the events recorded in the last chapter I sailed once
more into Havana. This time a prisoner. Two days after my capture, by
order of the Captain-General of Cuba, I was put on board the little
gunboat Santa Rita, a wretched little tub that steamed four miles an
hour and took eight days going from Puerto Novo on the south to Havana.

I was taken by a guard of soldiers, not to the police barracks, but to
the common prison, where an entire corridor was cleared of its inmates
to make room for me and my guards. Pinkerton was the first man to call.
He, of course, was delighted to see me. While giving me credit for my
escape, he told me he did not purpose to have me leave him again, and
having permission from the authorities, he or some of his men intended
to keep me company night and day. Of course I respected him for his
honest determination to do his duty. He really was an altogether good
fellow, and showed me all possible courtesy and consideration; in fact,
on his first visit he brought me a letter from my wife, along with a box
of cigars and a bottle of wine on his own account.

One of his men, by the name of Perry, used to sleep in my little room
with me, and every morning Mr. P. would relieve him, remaining until
dinner time. We had many long talks on all sorts of subjects, and he
gave me many inside histories of famous criminal cases which he had been
engaged in. In time we became very good friends.

He also gave me full particulars of the really extraordinary way in
which he discovered my presence in the West Indies and the reason which
led him to conclude that F. A. Warren and I were one. William Pinkerton
ordered him to look up the New York end of the business and see if he
could discover the identity of Warren. He was one of the many working on
the case, but to him belongs the credit of establishing my identity,
also of locating my whereabouts and of effecting my arrest.

When ordered on the case he knew no more about me or the forgery than
what he read in the newspapers. He soon made up his mind that I was an
American, and that I was a resident either of New York or Chicago. This
because I was so young and evidently had a good knowledge of finance and
financial matters. So he determined to seek for a clue to F. A. Warren in
Wall street. He procured a list of the names of every banker and broker
in New York, and then spent some time in interviewing them, his one
question being "Now, who is he?" With their assistance he soon made out
a list of nearly twenty possible Warrens, and speedily narrowed it down
to four, my name being one of the four. He soon located my home, and
began making cautious inquiries on the spot from neighbors and others.
He discovered that I was believed to be in Europe, and had been there
before, and that when I last returned I had paid off debts and
apparently had plenty of money. He had become convinced of my identity,
but if I were Warren--where was I?

Without arousing suspicion, he heard from some of my acquaintances a
saying of mine that whenever I had a bank account, I should live in the
tropics. So he reported to his superiors that in his opinion F. A. Warren
and I were one, and he believed that, if in America at all, I might be
found at some fashionable resort in Florida.

He concluded to go to Florida, and visit the various resorts. Upon his
arrival at St. Augustine, he sent letters to several of the West India
islands, including Martinique, Jamaica and Cuba, inquiring for the names
and descriptions of all wealthy young Americans lately arrived. One
letter he sent to Dr. C. L. Houscomb, then the leading American doctor in
Havana, who, replying to his inquiry, gave my name among others. After
my arrest Dr. Houscomb told me how grieved he was to have betrayed me,
but that he thought that Pinkerton was a newspaper man, and wanted the
information as a matter of news.

With this letter in his hand, Pinkerton found a plain path before him.
To go ahead of my story a little, I will say here that eventually the
bank authorities made him a considerable present in cash, along with
their congratulations over his clever detective work. Capt. John Curtin
is to-day well and hearty, a prosperous man and very generally respected
by the citizens of San Francisco, where he lives.

About ten days after my arrival he brought me a New York Herald
containing these dispatches:

     (Special to New York Herald.)

                                            Madrid, April 12, 1873.

     The American Ambassador, Gen. Sickles, has formally notified Senor
     Castelar that the American Government will consent to the surrender
     to the British Government of Bidwell, now under arrest in Havana
     upon charge of being concerned in the Bank of England forgery.


     (Special to New York Herald.)

                                            London, April 12, 1873.

     To the great gratification of the authorities here, official
     confirmation is given to the rumor that the Spanish Government has
     concluded to grant the extradition of Bidwell, now under arrest in
     Havana. There seems to be no doubt that Bidwell is the mysterious
     Frederick Albert Warren, and there is a very general curiosity to
     see him. Many conflicting stories have been published of his
     extraordinary escape and equally extraordinary capture. The Times'
     report had it that he was mortally wounded, and that he had on his
     person when captured diamonds to an enormous value, which had
     disappeared soon after. Sergeants Hayden and Green of the Bow
     Street force and Mr. Good of the bank of England sail on the Java
     to-morrow to escort Bidwell to London.

So the web was closing in on me. Of my daily sad interviews with my wife
I will say nothing here. But could I have foreseen that this woman, on
whom I had settled a fortune, would have married another soon after my
sentence, I should not have felt so sorrowful on her account. In due
time Green, Hayden and Good arrived, and were introduced to me. I did
not give in, but made, by the aid of my friends, a hard fight to
persuade the Captain-General to suspend the order for my delivery, and
succeeded for a time.

At last, after many delays and many plans, early one May morning I was
taken to the mouth of the harbor. There the boat of the English warship
Vulture was in waiting, and I was formally transferred to the English
Government, and Curtin. Perry, Hayden and Green went on board with me.
Soon after she steamed out of the harbor. Later in the day the Moselle,
the regular passenger steamer to Plymouth and Southampton, came out, and
about ten miles out at sea was met by the Vulture's boat, and I and my
four guardians were transferred to her.

At last I was off for England, and it looked very much as if Justice
would weigh me in her balance after all, the more certainly because I
found my wife on the Moselle. I had secretly resolved never to be taken
back, but intended the first night out of Havana to jump overboard,
possibly with a cork jacket, or something to help to keep me afloat. The
waters of the gulf were warm, there were many passing ships, and I
would take my chance of surviving the night and being picked up. But,
very cleverly, Curtin decided to send my wife with me and treat me like
any other cabin passenger, rightly divining I would not kill her by
committing suicide or going over the side on chances.

I was well treated all the way over, but every night my prayer was that
we might run on an iceberg or go down, so that my wife might be spared
long years of agony and me from the misery and degradation of prison
life.

I had obtained a position in Havana for one of my servants, but Nunn was
returning with me, feeling very badly and most unhappy over the sure
prospect of my future misery. I was pleased to think he had held on to
the money I had given him. Altogether, he was quite $2,000 ahead, and I
wanted to make it $5,000. He certainly deserved it for his constancy and
affection.

One lovely June day we sailed into Plymouth, there to land mail and such
passengers as wanted to take the express to London. I instructed my wife
to go to Southampton while I went ashore with my guardians.

From the London Times, June 10, 1873:

     "Among the passengers who landed at Plymouth yesterday morning from
     the royal mail steamer Moselle was Bidwell, otherwise F. A. Warren,
     in charge of Detective Sergeant Michael Hayden and William Green,
     accompanied by Capt. John Curtin and Walter Perry of Mr.
     Pinkerton's staff. They were joined by Inspector Wallace and
     Detective Sergeant William Moss of the city police, who had come
     down from London the previous night to meet the steamer.

     [Illustration: CHATHAM--CONVICTS AT LABOR.]

     "It being known that Bidwell was expected from Havana in the
     Moselle, an enormous crowd assembled in Milbay pier to await the
     return of the steam tender with the mail, in order to get a sight
     of the prisoner, and so great was the crowd that it was with some
     difficulty that Bidwell and his escort managed to reach cabs, and
     were driven to the Duke of Cornwall Hotel adjoining the railway
     station. They left by the 12.45 train for London. A crowd of
     20,000 persons were present to see them off, and cheered Bidwell
     heartily.

     "Bidwell will be taken before the Lord Mayor in the justice room at
     the Mansion House this morning."

Accompanied by my escort of six, I arrived in London one bright Spring
morning, just as the mighty masses of that great Babylon were thronging
in their thousands toward Epsom Downs, where on that day the Derby, that
pivotal event in the English year, was to be run. All London was astir,
and had put on holiday attire, while I, now a poor weed drifting to rot
on Lethe's wharf, was on my way to Newgate.

Newgate! Then it had come to this! The Primrose Way wherein I had walked
and lived delicately at the expense of honor, ended here!

"Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap," was written by one
Paul. The wisdom of many was here and condensed in the wit of one, and
one with the shrewdest insight into things and a practical knowledge of
human history.

I was a prisoner in Newgate. Newgate! The very name casts a chill; so,
too, does a sight of that granite fortress rising there in the heart of
mighty London. Amid all the throbbing life of that great Babylon it
stands--chill and grim--and has stood a prison fortress for 500 years.
Through all those linked centuries how many thousands of the miserable
and heartbroken of every generation have been garnered within its cold
embrace! What sights and sounds those old walls have seen and heard! As
I paced its gloomy corridors that first night, pictures of its past rose
before me so grim and terrible that I turned shuddering from them, only
to remember that I, too, had joined the long unending procession ever
flowing through its gates, which had heaped its walls to the top with
one inky sea of misery.

In the cruel days of old many a savage sentence had fallen from the lips
of merciless judges, but none more terrible than the one which was to
fall on us from the lips of their ferocious imitator, Justice Archibald.

I found my three friends already prisoners there, and a sad party we
were. When we said good-bye that night on the wharf at Calais, where we
sat star-gazing and philosophizing, we little anticipated this reunion.

What a rude surprise it was to find how things were conducted in this
same Newgate. I took it for granted--since the law regarded us as
innocent until we were tried and convicted--that we could have any
reasonable favor granted us there which was consistent with our safe
keeping. But no. The system of the convict prison was enforced here, and
with the same iron rigor. Strict silence was the rule along with the
absolute exclusion of newspapers and all news of the outside world. The
rules forbid any delicacy or books being furnished by one's friends from
the outside. This iron system is as cruel as unphilosophical, for,
pending trial, the inmates are more or less living in a perfect agony of
mind, which drives many into insanity or to the verge of insanity, as it
did me. How can one, then, when the past is remorse--and the present and
future despair--find oblivion or raze out the written troubles of the
brain save in absorption in books.

When Claudo is doomed to die and go "he knew not where," peering into
the abyss, the fear strikes him that in the unknown he may be "prisoned
in the viewless winds" and blown with restless violence round about this
pendant world. A terrible figure! It filled at this time some corner of
my brain and would not out. It went with me up and down in all my walks
in Newgate.

[Illustration: PRINCIPAL WARDERS, WOKING PRISON. No. 1 Scott, No. 2.
Metherell.]

[Illustration: ASSISTANT WARDERS, DARTMOOR PRISON.]

If I had the pen of Victor Hugo, what a picture I would draw of a mind
consciously going down into the fearful abyss of insanity, making mighty
struggles against it, yet looking on the cold walls shutting one in and
weighing down the spirit, feeling that the struggle is ineffectual,
the fight all in vain, for the dead, blank walls are staring coldly on
you, without giving one reflex message, bearing on their gray surface no
thought, no response of mind. For they have been looked over with
anxious care to discover if any other mind had recorded there some
thought which would awake thought in one's own, and help to shake off
the fearful burden pressing one to earth. As a fact, a man so situated
does--aye, must--make an effort to leave some visible impress of his
mind as a message to his kind. It is a natural law, and the instinct is
part of one's being. It is a passion of the mind--a longing to be united
to the spiritual mass of minds from which the isolated soul is suffering
an unnatural divorce of hideous material walls.

It is this law which makes the savage place his totem on the rocks, and
it is, thanks to the same instinct, that this very day our savants are
finding beneath the foundations of the temples and palaces which once
decked the Phoenician plain, the baked tablets which tell us the family
histories, no less than the story of the empires of those days. When the
impress was made on the soft clay to be fire-hardened, each writer felt
or hoped in the long ages in the far-off unknown,

  "When time is old and hath forgot itself,
  When water drops have worn the streets of Troy
  And blind oblivion swallowed cities up,
  And mighty States, characterless, are grated
  To dusty nothing"----

then some thought, some message from their minds, there impressed on the
senseless clay, would be communicated to some other mind, and wake a
response there.

Many a time, with a brain reeling in agony, did I turn and stare blankly
at those walls, and, in a sort of dumb stupor, search them over in hope
to find some word, some message impressed there, some scratch of pen or
finger nail. It might be a message of misery, some outcry from a wounded
spirit, some expression of despair.

Had there been one such--had there been! Every one of my predecessors
had left a message on that smooth-painted wall, but the red-tape
official rogues--the stultified images sans reason, sans all
imagination--had, after the departure of each one, carefully painted
over all such legacies.

The hideous cruelty of it all! My blood, boils even now, when I think of
it. Even in the days of Elizabeth the keepers of the Tower of London had
enough human feeling to leave untouched the inscriptions made by Raleigh
and others, and there they are to-day, and to-day wake a response in the
heart of every visitor that looks on them.

[Illustration: A GANG IN BLOUSES MARCHING OUT.]




CHAPTER XXXV.

RUNNING THE GAUNTLET.


My life at Newgate was an ordeal such as I hope no reader of this will
ever undergo. Day by day I saw the world slipping from under my feet,
and the net drawing its deadly folds closer around me. Soon we all were
forced to realize there was no escape for any of us.

Of course, we were all guilty and deserved punishment--I need not say we
did not think so then--but the evidence was most weak, and had our trial
taken place in America under the too liberal construction of our laws,
undoubtedly we all would have escaped. But in England there is no court
of criminal appeal, as with us, and when once the jury gives a verdict,
that ends the matter. The result is that if judges are prejudiced, or
want a man convicted, as in our case, he never escapes. The jury is
always selected from the shopkeeping class, and they are horribly
subservient to the aristocratic classes. They don't care for
evidence--they simply watch the judge. If he smiles, the prisoner is
innocent. If he frowns, then, of course, guilty.

With us when a man is charged with an offense against the laws he
engages a lawyer--one is sufficient and quite costly enough. In England
they are divided into three classes, viz.: solicitors, barristers and
Queen's Counsels.

The solicitor takes the case and transacts all the business connected
with it. A barrister is the lawyer who is employed by the solicitor to
conduct the case in court and make the pleadings. He never comes in
contact with the client, but takes the brief and all instructions from
the solicitor. The Queen's Counsel is a lawyer of a higher rank, and
whenever his serene lordship takes a brief he must, to keep up his
dignity, "be supported" by a barrister. So my reader will perhaps
understand the raison d'etre of the proverb, "The lawyers own England."
As no solicitor can plead in court, so no Queen's Counsel will come in
direct contact with a client, and must be "supported" by a barrister.
Ergo, any unfortunate having a case in court must fee two, if not three
legal sharks to represent him, if represented at all.

We employed as solicitor a Mr. David Howell of 105 Cheapside, and a
thoroughgoing, unprincipled rascal he proved to be. He was a small,
spare, undersized man, with little beady eyes, light complexion, red
hair, and stubby beard, and when he spoke it was with a thin reedy
voice. From first to last he managed our case in exactly the way the
prosecution would have desired. He bled us freely, and altogether we
paid him nearly $10,000, and our defense by our eight lawyers--four
Queen's Counsels and four barristers--was about the lamest and most
idiotic possible.

We early came to the unanimous conclusion that in our country Howell
would have had to face a jury for robbing us, and that but one of our
eight lawyers had ability enough to appear in a police court here to
conduct a hearing before an ordinary magistrate.

I do not propose to enter into the details of our preliminary hearings
before the Lord Mayor at the Mansion House, or of the trial. Both the
hearings and trial were sensational in the highest degree, and attracted
universal attention all over the English-speaking world. Full-page
pictures of the trial appeared in all the illustrated journals of Europe
and America, and our portraits were on sale everywhere.

After many hearings before Sir Sidney Waterlaw, we were finally
committed for trial.

Editorial from the London Times of Aug. 13, 1873:

THE BANK FORGERIES.

     "Monday next has been fixed for the trial, and the depositions
     taken before the Lord Mayor at the Justice Room of the Mansion
     House by Mr. Oke, the chief clerk, have been printed for the
     convenience of the presiding judge and of the counsel on both
     sides. They extend over 242 folio pages, including the oral and
     documentary evidence, and make of themselves a thick volume,
     together with an elaborate index for ready reference. Within living
     memory there has been no such case for length and importance heard
     before any Lord Mayor of London in its preliminary stage, nor one
     which excited a greater amount of public interest from first to
     last. The Overend Gurney prosecution is the only one in late years
     which at all approaches it in those respects, but in that the
     printed depositions only extended over 164 folio pages, or much
     less than those in the Bank case, in which as many as 108 witnesses
     gave evidence before the Lord Mayor, and the preliminary
     examinations--twenty-three in number from first to last--lasted
     from the first of March until the 2d of July, exclusive of the time
     spent in remands."

From the London Times, Aug. 10, 1873:

     "On the opening of the August sessions of the Old Bailey Central
     Criminal Court. The court and streets were much crowded from the
     beginning, and continued so throughout the day. Alderman Sir Robert
     Carden, representing the Lord Mayor; Mr. Alderman Finis, Mr.
     Alderman Besley, Mr. Alderman Lawrence, M.P., Mr. Alderman Whetham
     and Mr. Alderman Ellis, as commissioners of the Court, occupied
     seats upon the bench, as did also Alderman Sheriff White.

     "Sheriff Sir Frederick Perkins, Mr. Under-Sheriff Hewitt and Mr.
     Under-Sheriff Crosley, Mr. R. B. Green, Mr. R. W. Crawford, M.P.,
     Governor of the Bank. Mr. Lyall, Deputy Governor, and Mr. Alfred de
     Rothschild were present. The members of the bar mustered in force,
     and the reserved seats were chiefly occupied by ladies. Mr.
     Hardinge Gifford, Q.C. (now Lord Chancellor of the British Empire),
     and Mr. Watkin Williams, Q.C. (instructed by Messrs. Freshfield,
     the solicitors of the bank), appeared as counsel for the
     prosecution."

For eight mortal days the final trial dragged on, and there we were
pilloried in that horrible dock--a spectacle for the staring throngs
that flocked to see the young Americans who had found a pregnable spot
in the impregnable Bank of England.

The misery of those eight days! No language can describe it, nor would I
undergo it again for the wealth of the world.

The court was filled with fashionables, ladies as well, who flocked to
stare at misery, while the corridors of the Old Bailey and the street
itself were packed with thousands eager to catch a glimpse of us. The
Judge, in scarlet, sat in solemn state, with members of the nobility or
gouty Aldermen in gold chains and robes on the bench beside him. The
body of the court was filled with bewigged lawyers--a tippling lot of
sharks and rogues, always after lunch half tipsy with the punch or dry
sherry which English lawyers drink, jesting and cracking jokes,
unmindful of the fate of their clients. Capt. Curtin and a score of
detectives were present.

No fewer than 213 witnesses were called by the prosecution. Of these
about fifty were from America, and by them they traced our lives for
many years before. As the forged bills were all sent by mail it was
necessary to convict us by circumstantial evidence. The evidence was all
very weak, save only in that remarkable matter of the blotting paper.
Our conviction was a foregone conclusion.

The jury retired to consider their verdict shortly after 7 o'clock, and
on returning into court after the lapse of about a quarter of an hour
they gave in a verdict of guilty against all of the four prisoners.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

"NOTHING LEFT US BUT A GRAVE, THAT SMALL MODEL OF THE BARREN EARTH," WITH
DISHONOR FOR AN EPITAPH.


Judge Archibald proceeded to pass sentence. He began with the
interesting and truthful remark: "I have anxiously considered whether
anything less than the maximum penalty of the law will be adequate to
meet the requirements of this case, and I think not." We had information
that a few days previously a meeting of judges had been held and that he
had been advised to pass a life sentence. What he really meant to say
was that he had anxiously considered whether anything less would be
adequate to satisfy the Bank of England. He went on to say that we had
not only inflicted great loss on the bank, but had also seriously
discredited that great institution in the eyes of the public. He
continued: "It is difficult to see the motives for this crime; it was
not want, for you were in possession of a large sum of money. You are
men of education, some of you speak the Continental languages, and you
have traveled considerably. I see no reason to make any distinction
between you, and let it be understood from the sentence which I am about
to pass upon you that men of education"--and he might have added, what
he undoubtedly thought, Americans--"who commit crimes which none but men
of education can commit must expect a terrible retribution, and that
sentence is penal servitude for life, and I further order that each one
of you pay one-fourth of the costs of prosecution--L49,000, or $245,000
in all."

And, after all, what aroused so greatly his indignation? It was simply
this--because we were youngsters and Americans, and had successfully
assaulted the fondly imagined impregnable Bank of England, and, worse
still, had held up to the laughter of the whole world its red-tape
idiotic management, for had the bank asked so common a thing as a
reference the fraud would have been made impossible.

Let my reader contrast this modern Jeffreys, his savage tirade, and, for
an offense against property, this most brutal sentence, with the
treatment of the Warwickshire bank wreckers. Greenaway, the manager of
this bank, and three of the directors by false balance sheets and
perjured reports for years had looted the bank, finally robbing the
depositors of L1,000,000, several of whom committed suicide and
thousands more of whom were ruined.

They were tried, convicted, and in being sentenced were told that, being
men of high social position, the disgrace in itself was a severe
punishment; therefore, he should take that fact into consideration, and
ended by sentencing two to eight months', one to twelve and one to
fourteen months' imprisonment.

We were sentenced late at night--nearly 10 o'clock--a smoky, foggy
London night. The court was packed, the corridors crowded, and when the
jury came in with their verdict the suppressed excitement found vent.
But when the vindictive and unheard-of sentence fell from the lips of
this villain Judge an exclamation of horror fell from that crowded
court.

We turned from the Judge and went down the stairs to the entrance to the
underground passage leading to Newgate. There we halted to say farewell.

[Illustration: BEFORE THE GOVERNOR--ASSISTANT WARDER REPORTING A
PRISONER FOR TALKING.]

To say farewell! Yes. The Primrose Way had come to an end, but we were
comrades and friends still, and in order that in the gloom of the
slow-moving days and the blackness and thick horror of the years to come
we might have some thought in common, we then and there promised--what
could we poor, broken bankrupts promise?

Where or to what in the thick horror enshrouding us could we turn? We
had

  "Nothing left us to call our own save death,
  And that small model of the barren earth
  Which serves as paste and cover to our bones;"

nothing but a grave, that

  "Small model of the barren earth,"

with dishonor and degradation for our epitaph!

But there, in the very instant of our overwhelming defeat, standing in
the dark mouth of the stone conduit leading from the Old Bailey to the
dungeons of Newgate, by virtue of the high resolve we made, we conquered
Fate at her worst, and by our act in establishing a secret bond of
sympathy in our separation dropped the bad, disastrous past, and
starting on new things planted our feet on the bottom round of the
ladder of success, feeling that, with plenty of faith and endurance,
Fortune, frown as she might now, must in some distant day turn her wheel
and smile again.

And what was this act? Why, it was a simple one, but bore in it the germ
of great things.

As we halted there in the gloom we swore never to give in, however they
might starve us, even grind us to powder, as we felt they would
certainly try to do. We knew that in their anxiety about our souls they
would be sure kindly to furnish each with a Bible, and we promised to
read one chapter every day consecutively, and, while reading the same
chapter at the same hour, think of the others. For twenty years we kept
the promise. Then, making the resolve mentioned in the beginning of this
book, I marched back to my cell. The door was opened and closed behind
me, leaving me in pitch darkness--a convict in my dungeon. Dressed as I
was I lay down on the little bed there, and through all that long and
terrible night, with a million dread images rushing through my brain, I
lay passive, with wide-open eyes, staring into the darkness, conscious
that sanity and insanity were struggling for mastery in my brain, while
I, like some interested spectator, watched the struggle; or, again, I
was struggling in the air with some powerful but viewless monster form,
that clutched my throat with iron fingers, but whose body was impalpable
to the grasp of my hands. A mighty space, an eternity of time and
daylight came. Then, like one in a dream, I rose mechanically, and,
finding the pin I had secreted, I stood on the little wooden bench, and,
impelled by some spiritual but irresistible force, I scratched on the
wall the message I had resolved to leave:

  "In the reproof of chance
  Lies the true proof of men."

Then I thought of my friends and my promise, and, like one in a dream, I
took the ill-smelling and dirty little Bible from the shelf, and,
turning to the first chapter, read:

    "And the spirit of God moved upon the waters." ...
  "And God said let there be light, and there was light."

Then the book fell from my hand, and I remembered no more. My mind had
gone whirling into the abyss.

I was sentenced on Wednesday. For three days, from Thursday to Sunday,
my mind was a blank. I have no recollection of my removal under escort
from Newgate to Pentonville.

On Sunday, the fourth day of my sentence, like one rousing from a
trance, I awoke to find myself shaven and shorn, dressed in a coarse
convict uniform, in a rough cell of white-washed brick. The small window
had heavy double bars set with thick fluted glass, which, while
admitting light, foiled any attempt of the eye to discern objects
without. In the corner there was a rusty iron shelf. A board let into
the brickwork served for bed, bench and table. A zinc jug and basin for
water, with a wooden plate, spoon and salt dish (no knife or fork for
twenty years!) completed the furnishings.

As I was looking around in a helpless way a key suddenly rattled in the
lock and, the door opening, a uniformed warder stepped in and, giving me
a searching look, said in a rough voice: "Come on; you'll do for chapel;
you have put on the balmy long enough." His kindly face belied his rough
tones, and I followed him out of the door and soon found myself in the
prison chapel. None was present, and I was ordered to sit on the front
bench at the far end. The benches were simply common flat boards ranged
in rows. Soon the prisoners came in singly, marching about two yards
apart, and sat on the benches with that interval between them--that is,
in the division of the chapel where I sat, it being separated from the
rest by a high partition. Soon a white-robed, surpliced clergyman came
in, and the service began; but I had no eye or ear, nor any
comprehension save in a dim manner, as to what was going on. My brain
was trying to connect the past and the present, feeling that something
terrible had befallen me, but what it was I could not understand. When
the services were over I returned under the escort of the warder, who,
when I arrived at my cell, ordered me to go in and close the door, which
I did, banging it behind me. It had a spring lock, and when I heard the
snap of the catch and looked at the narrow, barred window, with its
thick, fluted glass admitting only a dim light, I remembered everything.
Like a flash it all came to me, and I realized the full horror of my
position. Sitting down on the little board fastened to the wall, serving
as bed, seat and table, I buried my face in my hands and began to
ponder. Regrets came in floods, with remorse and despair, hand in hand,
when, realizing that it was madness to think, I sprang up, saying to
myself the hour and minute had come for me to decide--either for
madness and a convict's dishonored grave, or to keep the promise I had
made to my friends--never to give in, but to live and conquer fate.

I determined then and there to live in the future, and never to dwell on
the horrible present or past. Then I remembered the last scene in
Newgate and my promise to accompany my friends step by step, day by day,
in our readings. Finding a Bible on the little rusty iron shelf in the
corner, and this being the fourth day of our sentence, I turned to the
fourth chapter. It gives the story of Cain's crime and punishment, and I
read the graphic narrative with an intensity of interest difficult to
describe. When I read, "And Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment is
greater than I can bear. Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from
the face of the earth," I felt that the cry of Cain in all its intense
naturalness, in its remorse and despair, was my own, and I was overcome.
Laying the book down, I walked the floor for an hour in agony, until
fantastic images came thronging thick and fast to my brain. I realized
that my mind was going and felt I must do something to make me forget my
misery.

I opened the Bible at random and my eye caught the word "misery." I
looked closely at the verse and read:

"Thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass
away."

I threw the book down, crying with vehemence, "That's a lie! God never
gives something for nothing." Soon I opened the book again and looked at
the context. Those of my readers who care to do so can do the same. The
verse is Job xi., 16. The context begins at verse 13. From that hour I
never despaired again.

The same day I began committing the Book of Job to memory, and worked
for dear life and reason. I became interested, and my interest in that
wondrous poem deepened until the study became a passion. Thus I turned
the whole current of my thoughts into a new channel. Reason came back,
and with it resolution and courage and strength.

I was in Pentonville Prison, in the suburbs of London. All men convicted
in England are sent to this prison to undergo one year's solitary
confinement. At the completion of the year they are drafted away to the
public works' prisons, where, working in gangs, they complete their
sentences.

Of my experience in Pentonville during my year of solitude it suffices
to say that, passing through a great deal of mental conflict, I found I
had grown stronger and was eager for transfer to the other prison, where
I could for a few hours each day at least look on the sky and the faces
of my fellow men.

At last the day of transfer came, and, escorted by two uniformed and
armed warders, I was taken to the famous Chatham Prison, twenty-seven
miles from London on the river Medway....

"You were sent here to work, and you will have to do it or I will make
you suffer for it," was the friendly greeting that fell on my ears as I
stood before a pompous little fellow (an ex-major from the army) at
Chatham Prison one lovely morning in 1874.

I had arrived there under escort but an hour before, strong in the
resolve to obey the regulations if I could, and never to give in if I
had a fair chance; also with a desperate resolve never to submit to
persecution, come what might, and these resolutions saved me--but only
by a steady and dogged adherence to them on many occasions, through many
years and amid surroundings that might well make me--as it did and does
many good men--desperate and utterly reckless.

After a few more remarks of a very personal and pungent nature the
little fellow marched off with a delicious swagger and an heroical air.
I at once turned to the warder and asked, "Who is that little fellow?"
"The Governor!" he gasped out. "If he had only heard you!" and then
followed a pantomime that implied something very dreadful. Then I
marched off to the doctor, and next to the chaplain, who (knowing who I
was) asked me if I could read and write, to which I meekly replied,
"Yes, sir;" but apparently being doubtful upon the point he gave me a
book. Opening it and pretending to read, I said in a solemn tone of
voice: "When time and place adhere write me down an ass." He took the
book from me, looked at the open page, gazed solemnly in my face with a
funny wagging of his head, as much as to say, "you will come to no
good," and followed the little major.

Then my cicerone took me into the main building, filled up to the brim
with what seemed to be little brick and stone boxes, and, halting in
front of one, said, "This is your cell." Looking around to see if it was
safe to talk, he began to question me rapidly about my case, and getting
no satisfaction he wound up the questioning with the remark: "Well, you
tried to take all our money over to America." Then, becoming
confidential, he told me what wicked fellows the other prisoners were,
chiefly because they went to the Governor and reported the officers,
charging them with maltreatment and bullying particularly, and knocking
them about generally. Of course, the warders never did such things, but
were really of a very lamblike and gentle nature. In order to back up
their lies the prisoners would knock their own heads against the walls
and then swear by everything good that some one of the warders had done
it. I said, perhaps he had.

Well, he said, perhaps an officer might give a man "a little clip," but
never so as to hurt him, and "only in fun, you know." I felt at the time
that I would never learn to appreciate Chatham "fun," but on the very
next day I was convinced of it when a man named Farrier pulled out from
his waistband a piece of rag, and, unrolling it, produced two of his
front teeth with the information that a certain warder had struck him
with his fist in the mouth and knocked them out.

But to return to my narrative. After many "wise saws and modern
instances," he locked me up in the little brick and stone box and
departed, having first informed me that I "would go out to labor in the
morning."

I looked about my little box with a mixture of curiosity and
consternation, for the thought smote me with blinding force that for
long years that little box--eight feet six inches in length, seven feet
in height and five feet in width, with its floor and roof of
stone--would be my only home--would be! must be! and no power could
avert my fate.

On the small iron shelf I found a tin dish used by some previous
occupant, and smeared inside and out with gruel. There being no water in
my jug, when the men came in for dinner, I, in my innocence, asked one
of the officers for some water to wash the dish. He looked at me with
great contempt and said: "You are a precious flat; lick it off, man.
Before long you won't waste gruel by washing your tin dish. You won't be
here many days and want to use water to clean your pint."

After dinner I saw the men marched out to labor, and was amazed to see
their famished, wolfish looks--thin, gaunt and almost disguised out of
all human resemblance by their ill-fitting, mud-covered garments and
mud-splashed faces and hands. I myself was kept in, but the weary,
almost ghastly spectre march I had witnessed constantly haunted me, and
I said, "Will I ever resemble them?" And youthful spirit and pride
rushed to the front and cried, "Never!"

Night and supper (eight ounces of brown bread) came at length, and I
rose up from my meal cheerful and resolute to meet the worst, be it what
it might short of deliberate persecution, with a stout heart and faith
that at last all would be well.

In the morning I arose, had my breakfast (nine ounces of brown bread and
one pint of gruel), and was eager to learn what this "labor" meant. I
was prepared for much, but not for the grim reality. I had been ordered
to join eighty-two party--a brickmaking party, but working in the "mud
districts." So we, along with 1,200 others, marched out to our work, and
as soon as we were outside of the prison grounds I saw a sight that,
while it explained the mud-splashed appearance of my spectral array, was
enough to daunt any man doomed to join in the game. Mud, mud everywhere,
with groups of weary men with shovel, or shovel and barrow, working in
it. A sort of road had been made over the mud with ashes and cinders,
and our party of twenty-two men, with five other parties, moved steadily
on for about a mile until we came to the clay banks or pits. Fortunately
we had a very good officer by the name of James. He wanted the work
done, and used his tongue pretty freely; still he was a man who would
speak the truth, and treated his men as well as he dared to do under the
brutal regime ruling in Chatham. He speedily told me off to a barrow and
spade, and I was fully enlisted as barrow-and-spade man to Her Majesty.

A steam mill, or "pug," like a monster coffee mill, was used for mixing
the clay and sand and delivering it in form of bricks below, where
another party received them and laid them out to dry, preparatory to
burning. Our duty was "to keep the pug going"--keep it full of clay to
the top. The clay was in a high bank; we dug into it from the bottom
with our spades, and filled it as fast as possible into our barrows. In
front of each man was a "run," formed by a line of planks only eight
inches in width, and all converging toward and meeting near the "pug."
The distance we were wheeling was from thirty to forty yards, end the
incline was really very steep; but that in itself would not have been so
bad, but the labor of digging out the clay was severe, and that
everlasting "pug" was as hungry as if it were in the habit of taking
"Plantation Bitters" to give it an appetite.

One had no period of rest between the filling of one's barrow and the
start up the run. In an hour's time my poor hands were covered with
blood blisters, and my left knee was a lame duck indeed, made so by the
slight wrench given it each time I struck in my spade with my left foot;
but I made no complaint. About 10 o'clock the man next to me with an
oath threw down his spade and vowed he would do no more work. Putting on
his vest and packet, he walked up to the warder, and quite as a matter
of course turned his back to him and put both hands behind him. The
warder produced a pair of handcuffs, and without any comment handcuffed
his hands in that position, and then told him to stand with his back to
the work. No one took the slightest notice and the toil did not slacken
for an instant, but one man was out of the game, and we had to make his
side good.

Noon came at last. We dropped our spades, hastily slipped on our jackets
and at once set off at a quick march for the prison. I naturally looked
at the various gangs piloting their way through the mud and all steering
in a straight line for the Appian way whereon we were, for, as all roads
lead to Rome, so all the sticky ways "on the works" led to the prison.
Our laconic friend was trudging on behind the party, and to my surprise
I noticed that several of the other parties had un enfant perdu, hands
behind his back, marching in the rear, and as soon as we reached the
prison each poor sheep in the rear fell out quite as a matter of course.
When all the men were in, a warder came up and gave the order, "Right
turn! Forward!" and off the poor fellows marched to the punishment cells
for three days' bread and water each, and no bed, unless one designates
an oak plank as such. It was all very sad; 'twas pitiful to see the
matter-of-fact way in which every one concerned took it all.

So my first day in the mud and clay came to an end, and I found myself
once more in my little box with a night before me for rest and thought.
Although I had suffered, yet there were grounds for gratitude and hope,
and I felt that I might regard the future steadily and without despair.

[Illustration: VISITOR TRYING ON THE HANGMAN'S IR ON PINIONING BELT AT
NEWGATE.]




CHAPTER XXXVII.

HENCEFORTH A LIGHT WAS TO STREAM THROUGH THE FLUTED GLASS OF MY WINDOW.


The first day was over, but it seemed to me that something more must
come. That what I had gone through could mean the life of a day must
surely be impossible. Was there nothing before me but isolation so
complete that no whisper from the outside world could reach me, that
world which compared with the death into which I was being absorbed
seemed the only world of the living?

Had I actually nothing to look for but the most repulsive work under the
most repulsive conditions? I said there must be surely some change, that
wheeling mud forever was not the doom of any man and could certainly not
be mine.

I looked about my little cell, the stillness of the grave without, the
utter solitude within. The ration which formed my supper was on the
table, eight ounces of black bread. Try as I might to cheat myself with
hope, I knew that hope for many a long year there was none, that so far
as the most vindictive sentence could compass it, for many a long year
the earth with her bars was about me.

No "De Profundis" cry could ever ascend from the abyss to the bottom of
which I had fallen. What was outside of me had nothing but the hideous.

But although the visible seemed corruption, and the things which my
soul, and body, too, had refused to touch were become my sorrowful meat,
yet I could not but feel that the invisible, that part of me which no
bars could hold and no man deprive me of, was still my own, and that in
it I might and would find sufficient to support what I began to feel
was, after all, the only man.

To face the actualities of the position was the first thing; not to
cheat myself, the second. I had seen the sort of men I was to be with. I
set to work to study and to understand the kind of life we were to live
together.

At early dawn we rose, receiving immediately after the nine ounces of
bread and pint of oatmeal gruel which composed breakfast. At 6.30, to
chapel to hear one of the schoolmasters drone through the morning
prayers of the English Church service, and listen to some hymn shouted
out from throats never accustomed to such accents. Then the morning
hours would drag slowly on in the Summer's sun and Winter's blast until
the noon hour; then there was the long march back from the scene of my
toil to the prison for dinner. Arriving there, each man went to his
cell, closing his door, which snapped to, having a spring lock. Soon
after a dinner is given consisting of sixteen ounces of boiled potatoes
and five ounces of bread, varied on three days of the week with five
ounces of meat additional. At 1 o'clock the doors were unlocked and we
marched out to our work again. At night, returning to the prison, eight
ounces of black bread would be doled out for supper. Then came the hours
between supper and bedtime, when shut in between those narrow walls one
realized what it was to be a prisoner.

In the corner of the cell there was a board let into the stonework.
There was a thin pallet and two blankets rolled up together during the
day in a corner of the cell that served for bedding, but so thin and
hard was the pallet that one might almost as well have slept on the
board. For the first few weeks this bed made my bones ache. Most men
have little patience and small fortitude, and this bed kills many of
the prisoners. I mean breaks their hearts, simply because they have not
the wit to accept the matter philosophically and realize that they can
soon become used to any hardship. It took six months for my bones to
become used to the hard bed, but for the next nineteen years I used to
sleep as sweetly on that oak board as I ever did or now do in a bed of
down, only, like Jean Valjean, in "Les Miserables," I had become so used
to it that upon my liberation I found it impossible for a time to sleep
in a bed.

On a little rusty iron shelf, fixed in the corner, was our tinware.
Although called tinware, it really was zinc, and was susceptible,
through much hard work, of a high polish, but this "polishing tinware"
was a fearful curse to the poor prisoner. It consisted of a jug for
water and a bowl for washing in and a pint dish for gruel. There were
strict and imperative orders, rigidly enforced, that this tinware should
be kept polished, the result being that the men never washed themselves,
and never took water in their jugs, for if they did their tinware would
take a stain--"go off," as it was termed--the result being that if the
poor devil washed and kept himself clean he would be reported and
severely punished for having dirty tinware.

A prisoner is not permitted to receive anything from his friends or
communicate with them in any way, save only once in three months he is
permitted to write and receive a letter, provided he is a good character
and has not been reported for any infraction of the rules for three
months; for if reported for any cause, however trifling, the privilege
of writing is postponed for three months, and, as a matter of fact, more
than half of the men never get a chance to write during their
imprisonment.

A visit of half an hour once in three months is permitted, but this is a
favor that is only granted upon the same condition as the privilege of
letter writing.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

WHAT, THESE TEDIOUS DETAILS AGAIN.


It will be well to present here some account of those who were to rule
my life for so many years.

The Board of Prison Commissioners have their headquarters at the Home
Office in Parliament street, London, and are under the control of the
Home Secretary of State. One of these visits each of Her Majesty's
convict establishments once a month, in order to try any cases of
insubordination which are of too serious a nature for the governor of
the prison to adjudicate upon, he not being permitted to order any
penalty beyond a few days of bread and water and loss of a limited
number of remission marks.

The head authority at each prison is the governor, of whom the largest
establishments, like Chatham, have two. Next comes the deputy
governors--the medical officer and an assistant doctor; the chaplains
and schoolmasters, Protestant and Catholic. There are four grades of
prison warders, viz., the chief warder, principal warders, warders and
assistant warders. The chief warder, of course, stands first in the
list, and his duties, if honestly executed, render him the most
important, as he is the most responsible of the prison officials, save,
perhaps, the medical officer, who is the autocrat of the place. But, in
case anything goes wrong, he is the man who gets all the blame, and when
matters run smoothly and well, the governor gets all the thanks. During
the absence of the governor the deputy takes his place, and in turn the
chief warder performs the duties of the deputy governor's office. As all
business passes through the chief's hands, he must be a fair scholar,
though sometimes a principal warder who understands bookkeeping is
detailed to assist him. He must be of strict integrity, a thorough
disciplinarian, and of a character to make him respected both by his
superiors and inferiors in position. The warders of all grades are under
his command, and must fear him for his inflexibility in punishing any
breach of regulations, and have confidence in his disposition to act
justly toward them, he being the one on whom the governor relies for all
information regarding their conduct. It is on the reports of the chief
warder that the governor acts in all cases involving their promotion,
reprimands or fines, and their application for leave of absence must be
approved of and signed by him. It is clear that unless he is very
straight in the performance of his duties, he would soon place himself
in the power of some of the warders, who would not fail to take
advantage of any knowledge of his derelictions to benefit themselves,
and to the detriment of discipline and good order. Under the English
Government the salary of a man possessing these superior qualifications
is between $500 and $600 a year and his uniform. This is of blue cloth,
the sleeves and collar of his coat and his cap embroidered with gold
lace. On alternate days, at the prison where I was confined, he came on
duty at 5 a.m. in Summer and 5.30 in Winter, and left the prison at 4
p.m., leaving in charge a principal warder, coming on duty the following
morning at 7 a.m. At 6 o'clock p.m., after receiving the reports from
the ward officers, stating the number of prisoners each has just locked
up, and thus seeing that all are safe, he locks with his master key the
gates and outer doors of the main buildings, and before finally retiring
for the night he must lock the outer gate, so that no one but the
governor can get in or out--each watchman being locked into the ward
which he is set to guard. There are bells in his room connecting with
the various wards, and in case of sickness or any other emergency, he is
the man who is aroused. It is the chief warder who keeps everything
connected with the prison in running order, and whatever goes wrong the
cry is for the chief, and he is sent for, be it day or night.

In a large establishment there are a dozen or more principal warders.
These are the lieutenants of the chief, and have general supervision of
the working parties. Their pay is about $400 a year and uniforms. There
are of the other two grades, warders and assistant warders, from two to
three thousand employed in all Her Majesty's prisons in Great Britain
and Ireland. Warders and assistant warders are provided with a short,
heavy truncheon, which each carries in his hand or in a leather sheath
which hangs from his belt, to which is also attached a sort of cartouch
box in which he keeps the keys, which are fastened to a chain, the other
end to his belt. When about to leave the prison, on going off duty, he
must hang up the belt and attachments in the chief warder's office.
Their pay, besides uniforms, which are of blue cloth, is $350 a year for
warders and $300 for assistant warders. All promotions are by seniority.
In case of transfer by authorities to any other prison, they retain
their position in the line of promotion, but if they volunteer or make
application to be transferred they have to begin at the bottom in
reckoning the length of service for promotion. When the authorities wish
to transfer warders, it is usual for them to call for volunteers, of
whom they find a sufficient number anxious for a change, unless the
transfer is to an unpopular station, such as Dartmoor, which is among
the bogs, and a lonely, bleak place.

[Illustration: THEY DO IT DIFFERENTLY IN CHINA.]

[Illustration: THEY DON'T USE STRAIGHT-JACKETS IN PERSIA.]

Warders are exempted from doing night duty, which is all done by the
assistant warders, who are on that service one week out of three.
Although when on night duty they had the day for sleep and recreation,
I never saw one who did not detest it, because they must remain on duty
continuously for twelve hours, and must not read, sit down nor lean
against anything, nor have their hands behind them. These military
regulations apply as well to the whole time they are on duty in the
prison, day or night. A few years ago the time of daily duty was reduced
to twelve hours, with one hour at noon for dinner. Besides this, at
times they must do a good deal of extra duty. Each is allowed ten days
annual holiday, but is frequently obliged to take it piecemeal, a day or
two at a time, so that he cannot go far away from the scene of his
servitude. Their duties require unflagging attention and never-ceasing
vigilance, which must be a heavy tax on the brain, and the twelve hours
must be passed in standing or walking about. In fact, they are subjected
to military discipline, or rather despotism, and any known infraction of
the rules subjects them to penalties according to the nature of the
offense. Leaning against a wall, sitting down, etc., for a first
offense, they are mulcted in a small sum--12 to 60 cents, usually--and
are put back in the line of promotion. The fines go to the Officers'
Library fund. I knew one officer, Joseph Matthews, who had been
assistant warder twenty years, and, being frequently set back for doing
some small favor to prisoners, was discharged from the service in 1886,
without a pension, for some slight breach of regulations. He had a wife
and six children, and had worked twenty years for less than $7 per week.
For giving a convict a small bit of tobacco, a heavy fine, suspension,
and in case it was not the first offense, expulsion from the service
without a pension. For acting the go-between and facilitating
correspondence with the friends of convicts, expulsion--possibly
imprisonment. One of the assistant warders, who was convicted of having
received a bribe of L100 from one of us at Newgate, was expelled from
the service and imprisoned eighteen months. Another at Portsmouth
Prison underwent the same fate, save that his term was but six months,
for sending and receiving letters for a prisoner, and similar cases are
of frequent occurrence.

The warders and assistant warders are the ones who come in direct and
constant contact with prisoners, and when the eye of no superior
authority is on them, or nothing else to deter, they are "hail fellow
well met" with such of the convicts as are unprincipled enough to curry
favor with and assist them in covering up their peccadilloes from their
superiors. They naturally recoil at the hardness and parsimony of the
Government toward them, evading the performance of duties when they can,
and I have heard more than one say: "Why should we care what prisoners
do, so long as we don't get into trouble? The Government grinds us down
to twelve hours' daily duty on just pay enough to keep body and soul
together; then, if we complain, tells us that we can leave if we like,
as there are others ready to step into our places. Bah! what do we care
for the Government? It is of no benefit to us; the big guns get big pay,
and the higher up the office the more the pay and the less the work. To
be sure, we can go out of the prison to sleep, but otherwise we are
bound as closely as you are." Yet these very warders, the moment any
superior authority appears on the scene, are as obsequious and fawning
as whipped dogs, and recoup themselves for this forced humiliation by
taking it out of such of the convicts as fail to curry their favor, or
offend, or make them trouble. Surely their office is a very responsible
one, and it is blind, false economy to retain low-priced men in such a
position. The present English system of penal servitude is perfect on
paper, but the moral qualities of most of the warders and assistant
warders preclude all possibility of the reformation of those in their
charge.

Notwithstanding the expositions of the English delegates at the
international meetings, prison reform has never yet been tried in Great
Britain and Ireland. In other words, all efforts in that direction have
been defeated by placing convicts in the immediate charge of a class of
men who, by education and training, possess none of the qualifications
requisite for such a responsible position.

In so far as forms are concerned, the business of the prison is carried
on most systematically. There are blank forms which cover everything,
from provisioning the prison to bathing the men, and these must be
filled in and signed by the warder in charge of the particular work
being done. For example, every week he must fill in the proper form and
certify that every man in his ward has had a bath. I have known men to
go unbathed for many months, simply because they did not wish to bathe,
and it saved the warder trouble--nearly all others in the ward only
bathed about once a month, and yet at the stated times the officer
filled up and signed the form, certifying to the superior authorities
that those in his ward had been bathed at the regulation times.

A great majority of the officers are soldiers who have been invalided or
pensioned off after doing the full term for which they enlisted--twelve
years--and of sailors in the same condition. In order to encourage
enlistment into the army and navy, the Government gives discharged
soldiers and sailors the preference in the civil service, apparently
heedless as to their moral qualifications. Indeed, it would be
difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain about these, for the very
nature and present requirements of these services tend to harden and
make men conscienceless, subservient and fawning toward their superiors,
and tyrannical to those in their power.

As to those in the prison service, there are many who would be good men
in a situation suited to their acquirements, and there are but a few of
those who are brought into immediate contact with the men--who, in fact,
virtually hold the power of life and death over them--whose influence is
of an elevating or reforming kind. Indeed, I have heard many of them
telling or exchanging obscene stories with prisoners, and using the
vilest language and bandying thieves' slang, in which they become
proficient. I am bold to say that at least one-half of all I have known
are in morals on a level with the average prisoner, or, as I have heard
more than one assistant warder say, "Too much of a coward to steal,
ashamed to beg and too lazy to work"--therefore became a soldier, then a
warder. This may, at the moment, have been spoken in a jesting way, but
it is none the less true.

What can be expected in the way of refinement and good morals from a
class of men who entered the army or navy, coming, as they did in most
cases, from the untaught and mind-debased multitude with which that land
of drink and debauchery swarms?

It will be seen from the foregoing that very much is expected from them,
and in order to fulfill the very hard terms of their contract with the
Government, and keep their places, they are forced to resort to
trickery, deception and perjury, until these, in their attitude toward
their employer, the Government, become second nature, readily resorting
to lies to clear themselves from blame, even in trivial matters, to save
themselves from a sixpence fine. There are jealousies among themselves,
but when it is a question of deceiving or keeping any neglect of duties
or violences against prisoners from the superior authorities they all
unite as one man and affirm or swear to anything they think the position
requires.

A real pleasure was derived from those prisoners' friends, the rats and
mice, which I easily tamed and taught to be my companions.

[Illustration: "COME ON. YOU ARE FREE."--Page 480.]

Not long after my arrival a prisoner gave me a young rat which became
the solace of an otherwise miserable existence. Nothing could he cleaner
in its habits or more affectionate in disposition than this pet member
of a despised race of rodents. It passed all its leisure time in
preening its fur, and after eating always most scrupulously cleaned
its hands and face. It was easily taught, and in course of time it could
perform many surprising feats. I made a small trapeze, the bar being a
slate pencil about four inches long, which was wound with yarn and hung
from strings of the same; and on this the rat would perform like an
acrobat, appearing to enjoy the exercise as much as the performance
always delighted me. I made a long cord out of yarn, on which it would
climb exactly in the manner in which a sailor shins up a rope; and when
the cord was stretched horizontally it would let its body sway under and
travel along the cord, clinging by its hands and feet like a human
performer.

A rat's natural position when eating a piece of bread is to sit on its
haunches, but I had trained this rat to stand upright on its feet, with
its head up like a soldier. Placing it in front of me on the bed, I
would hand it a piece of bread, which it would hold up to its mouth with
its hands while standing erect. Keeping one sharp eye on me and the
other on its food, the moment it noticed that I was not looking it would
gradually settle down upon its haunches. When my eyes turned on it it
would instantly straighten itself up like a schoolboy caught in some
mischief. It always showed great jealousy of my tame mice, and I had to
be very careful not to let it get a chance to get at one. On one
occasion I was training one of the mice, and did not notice that the rat
was near. Suddenly, like a flash, it leaped nearly two feet, seizing the
mouse by the neck precisely as a tiger seizes its prey. Although I
instantly snatched it away, it was too late, the one fierce bite having
severed the jugular.

I have mentioned mice, and indeed they were most interesting pets,
easily trained and as scrupulously clean and neat as any creature of a
higher race could be. I at times had a half dozen of them, which I had
caught in the following simple way: I first stuck a small bit of bread
on the inside of my pint tin cup, about half way down; then turning it
bottom up on the floor, I raised one edge just high enough so that a
mouse could enter, and let the edge of the cup rest on a splinter. It
would not be long before one would enter, and as it could not reach the
bread otherwise it stood up, putting its hands against the sides of the
cup, thus over-balancing it, causing the cup to drop, and simple mousie
would find itself also a prisoner.

Although there was an order that no prisoner should be permitted to have
any kind of pets, especially rats and mice, and as the prison swarmed
with these, the warders had become tired of being obliged to turn over
the cells and prisoners daily in search of these contraband favorites,
the loss of which generally provoked the owners to insubordination; in
consequence of which there was a tacit understanding that they were not
to be interfered with, provided they were kept out of sight when the
governor made his rounds.

Nothing could overcome the jealousy of my otherwise gentle rat when it
saw me petting a mouse, and it would watch for an opportunity to spring
upon its diminutive rival and put a speedy end to its career.

I had one mouse which to its other accomplishments added the following:
It would lie in the palm of my open hand, with its four legs up in the
air, pretending to be dead, only the little creature kept its bright
eyes wide open, fixed on my face. As soon as I said, "Come to life!" it
would spring up, rush along my arm and disappear into my bosom like a
flash.

[Illustration: 1 Austin ----. 2 Geo. McDonald. 3 Officer. 4 Geo. Bidwell.
5 Officer. 6 Noyes. 7 Mr. Straight, Q.C. McDONALD SPEAKING TO MR.
STRAIGHT, Q.C., DURING THE TRIAL.]

I had a mouse trained the same as the one above described, and was in
dread lest a warder should see and destroy it. Therefore, in the hope of
getting a guarantee for its safety, one day when the medical officer on
his round came to my cell with his retinue I put my mouse through the
"dead dog" performance. The little fellow lay exposed in my hand with
one of its twinkling eyes fixed on me, and the other on these strangers.
Such was its confidence in me that it went through the performance
perfectly, and when I gave the signal in an instant it was in my (as the
poor thing believed) protecting bosom. The doctors laughed, and the
retinue of course followed suit--if they had frowned the latter would
have done likewise. The doctors appeared so pleased that I felt certain
they would order the warder, as was in their power, to let me keep my
harmless pet, the sole companion of my solitude and misery, unmolested.

They went outside the cell and lingered; in a moment then the warder
came in, and after a struggle got the mouse out of my bosom and put his
heel upon it. I am not ashamed to confess that I cried over the loss of
this poor little victim of overconfidence in human beings.

I once procured a beetle with red stripes across its wing-sheaths, and
trained it to show some degree of intelligence. This was for months the
sole companion of my solitude, but it was at last discovered in my
possession and taken away.

I made friends with the flies, and found that they displayed no small
degree of intelligence. I soon had a dozen tamed, and in the course of
my long observations I discovered, among other things, that the males
were very tyrannical over the fair sex, and tried to prevent them from
getting any of the food. In the Summer mornings at daylight they would
gather on the wall next my bed and wait patiently until I placed a
little chewed bread on the back of my hand, when instantly there was a
rush, and the first one who got possession, if a male, tried to prevent
the rest from alighting, and would dart at the nearest, chasing it in
zig-zags far away. In the mean time another would have attained
possession, and it went for the next corner, and for a long time there
would be a succession of fierce encounters, until at last all had made
good their footing and feasted harmoniously; for as fast as one
succeeded in alighting it was let alone. Sometimes a male would take
possession of my forehead, and, in case I left him unmolested, he would
keep off intruders on what he evidently considered his domain by darting
at them in a ferocious manner. On one occasion I noticed a fly that had
one of its hind legs turned up, apparently out of joint. As it was
feeding on my hand I tried to put my finger on the leg to press it down.
During three or four such attempts it moved away, after which it
appeared to recognize my kind intention and stood perfectly still while
I pressed on the leg. It may be unnecessary to add that I failed in
performing a successful surgical operation.

As the Winter approached the flies began to lose their legs and wings;
those that lost their wings would walk along the wall until they came to
the usual waiting spot, and as soon as I put a finger against the wall
the maimed creature would crawl to the usual place on my hand for
breakfast. Indeed, the long years of solitude had produced in me such an
unutterable longing for the companionship of something which had life
that I never destroyed any kind of insect which found its way into my
cell--even when mosquitoes lit on my face I always let them have their
fill undisturbed, and felt well repaid by getting a glimpse of them as
they flew and with the music of their buzzing.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE DAYS O' SUMMER MERRILY SPENT IN THE LAND OF THE HEATHER.


In the cell next to mine was a prison genius named Heep, who was one of
the most singular characters I ever met. As I shall have occasion to
speak of him frequently, I may as well give here a sketch of his life as
related to me by himself. He was born in the town of Macclesfield, near
Manchester, in 1852, of respectable mechanics, or tradespeople as they
are called in England. His father died when Heep was about 5 years of
age, and after a time his mother married a carpenter and joiner of the
place.

Young Heep was a lively child, up to all sorts of tricks, and does not
remember the time since he could walk that he was not in some mischief,
and, as he remarked, "took to all sorts of deviltry as naturally as a
duck to water." As long as his father lived there was not much check on
his mischievous propensities, but his stepfather proved to be a severe
and stern judge, and brought him to book for every irregularity,
thrashing him most unmercifully for each offense. His mother could not
have filled her maternal duty very judiciously, judging from the fact
that before he was 12 years old she set him to follow and watch his
stepfather to the house of a woman of whom she was jealous. The boy
possessed great natural abilities, and in good hands would have turned
out something different than a life-long prison drudge. He was handsome,
genteel in appearance, an apt scholar, though very self-willed and
headstrong, and as he grew up his naturally hot temper became
uncontrollable. At an early age he had discovered that by threats of
self-injury he could bend his parents to his wishes, but found in his
stepfather one who would put up with no nonsense; even when he cut
himself so as to bleed freely, instead of the coveted indulgence it only
procured him an additional thrashing.

At 15 he had become ungovernable at home, and his father had him put in
the county insane asylum, where he remained a year and a half. While
there he caused so much trouble that the attendants were only too glad
when he escaped and went to Liverpool. Here he succeeded in getting a
situation with a dealer in bric-a-brac, rare books and antiquities. In a
short time the proprietor placed so much confidence in his integrity
that he gave him the charge of his place during his own absences, and
young Heep was not long in taking advantage of his position to rob his
employer by taking a book or other article which he sold to some one of
his master's customers. This went on for some time until on one occasion
he took the book to a shop kept by a woman to whom he had previously
sold several articles and offered it for a sovereign. She examined it
and found that it was an ancient, illuminated Greek manuscript, worth
fifty times more than the price young Heep asked for it, and, suspecting
something wrong, she told him to come again for the money the next
evening. At the appointed time he entered the place and was confronted
by his master, who contented himself with upbraiding him for his perfidy
and discharging him from his service.

At this period of his career he had contracted vicious habits, the most
pernicious for him being that of drink, for when sober he was in his
right mind, but the moment the drink was in his common sense departed,
and he became a raving maniac, ready to fight or perpetrate any other
act of folly. Up to this time he had never been tempted to steal only in
order to supply means for improper indulgences.

Not long after being discharged from his situation he was found by the
police acting in so insane a manner under the influence of drink that
the magistrate before whom he was taken had him sent to the Raynell
lunatic asylum. Here, being perfectly reckless, he carried on all sorts
of games which made him obnoxious, although making himself very useful
in work which he liked, such as gardening, etc. He also took up fancy
painting and soon became a skillful copyist of prints of any
description, enlarging or reducing, and painting them in oil or water
colors. He also became a good decorator and scene painter, besides
devoting time to various studies, including music.

At last he found means to effect his escape and lay in hiding until
night; then as he had on the asylum clothes, which would betray him, he
went back and got in through the window of the tailors' shop, which was
in an isolated building, and exchanged the clothes he had on for a suit
belonging to one of the attendants. Thinking himself now safe from
recognition he started off across the country, but had not gone more
than twenty miles when, in passing through a small town, a policeman who
had just heard of the escape from Raynell arrested him on suspicion.

The Raynell authorities sent some one to identify him; he was taken
back, tried on the charge of stealing the attendant's suit of clothes,
which he still had on, was convicted by the usual intelligent jury and
sentenced to five years' penal servitude.

He finished his term of imprisonment at Chatham, and instead of being
set at liberty was sent under guard back to the asylum!

According to English law, if a person confined in a lunatic asylum
escapes and keeps away fourteen days he cannot after that be arrested,
unless he commits fresh acts of insanity.

After several futile attempts he at last made good his escape and
obtained work with a farmer, where he remained safe for thirteen days,
and was congratulating himself that in less than another day he would be
free, when his thoughts were broken off by the appearance of two
attendants who seized and carried him back to the asylum.

The events above narrated had driven him into a state of desperation at
what he felt to be gross injustice, and he carried on in such a way that
the doctor ordered his head to be shaved and blistered as a punishment,
the straitjacket and all other coercive measures having been of no
avail. The night watchman had orders to watch him closely, but he kept
so sharp an eye on the watchman that he caught him asleep, and, creeping
to the closet window, which he had previously tampered with, crept out,
and after climbing the low wall found himself on a raw November night,
with the rain falling in torrents, a stark-naked,
head-shaved-and-blistered but once more a free man. In this condition he
wandered on throughout the night, and just before daylight he entered a
cemetery to find that refuge among the dead of which he thought himself
so cruelly deprived by the living.

Beneath the entrance to the church there was a passage which led to some
family vaults in the basement, and he crept down the passage to seek
some shelter for his nude body from the driving rain, which had chilled
him through. While groping about in the dark his hand rested on
something soft, which, to his unbounded delight, proved to be an old
coat which had probably been left there by the sexton and forgotten. He
remained hidden all day, and traveled through the fields all night,
during which he found a scarecrow, from which he transferred to his own
person its old hat and trousers.

He said that although so hungry, he never had felt so happy as he did at
finding himself once more dressed up. After proceeding a few miles
farther, he ventured into a laborer's cottage in quest of food, which
was given him, and with it a pair of old boots. As dilapidated, ragged,
vagabond-looking, honest people are common in England, no questions were
asked, and he proceeded on his way rejoicing in that freedom of which he
had been deprived for ten years or more.

Amid all his pranks he had never been charged with idleness, and now
worked at odd jobs about the farms until he had procured a decent suit
of clothes, when he applied to a master house painter for work as a
journeyman, though he had never done anything of that kind. The master,
pleased with his appearance, gave him a trial, but the first job showed
such ignorance of the art of house painting that he was forthwith
discharged with half a day's wages. However, he had picked up some
valuable hints, and being very apt by the time he had been more or less
summarily discharged from half a dozen places he had become a good
workman, and henceforth had no trouble about retaining any situation as
long as he refrained from beer and restrained his temper; but at the
slightest fault-finding on the part of the master he would fly into a
passion and throw up the situation, and this, especially, if he
suspected that anything had leaked out about his imprisonment.

While at work with a companion at painting the interior of a gentleman's
residence near Bradford a word or two was dropped which made him believe
his fellow workman had become aware of his being an ex-convict. Quitting
work, he went to a public house, passing the rest of the day in
carousing. About midnight, while on his way to his boarding house, it
occurred to him that he had noticed a good many valuable things about
the gentleman's house which he could obtain. No sooner thought than
done; the entrance was in a moment gained; he had just consciousness
enough left to gather a few things, then lie down by the side of them
and fell into a drunkard's sleep, in which the servants found him when
they came down in the morning. A constable was sent for, he was given in
charge, tried, convicted of the crime of burglary and sentenced to seven
years' penal servitude.

His former term of five years had made him proficient in all the dodges
of prison life, and he felt justified in his own mind in using all his
craft in order to put in his seven years as easily as possible. As he
had been in Raynell asylum, he knew that by "putting on the balmy" so as
to be sent to the lunatic department he would not be subjected to the
prison rules and be as well off as he had been in the free asylum.
Persistent attempts at suicide by cutting himself in the arms and legs
with a piece of glass so as to bleed freely accomplished his purpose.
Being placed with the other convict lunatics, he made himself useful,
but on account of his bad temper and overbearing, quarrelsome
disposition, obnoxious to his fellow prisoners.

Eventually he was discharged with an eighteen months' ticket-of-leave
and $2.50 as capital for a new departure.

He went to Liverpool, procured a passage on board a freight steamer to
America, which he paid for by working at painting. Landing at New York,
he made his way to Norfolk, Va., where he procured work as a painter.
Owing to his infirmity of temper he did not keep his place long, and
after knocking about for a few months he took a freak to return to
England--the last place of all for any man who has once been a prisoner.

[Illustration: George Bidwell

AFTER IMPRISONMENT. (From Photo. by Stuart, Hartford.)]

Once more in his native land, he procured work without difficulty at
house painting, but, as usual, remained in one place but a very short
time. His earnings, like those of a great majority of the working
class in England, were squandered in the public house.

Soon after the events just recorded, Heep concluded to visit his old
home in Macclesfield. He accordingly threw up his situation, and arrived
at the railway station an hour before the train was due. In order to
while away the time he entered a public house and drank several glasses
of ale. The compartment which he entered happened to be empty, and as
usual whenever he indulged his appetite for anything containing alcohol,
he was soon quite out of his mind and fancied that some one on the train
was coming to murder him, and leaped headlong from the train, which was
going at the rate of forty miles an hour. This came to a standstill, he
was taken on board again, not seriously injured, and left at Wrexham in
Denbighshire, from which he was sent to the Denbigh Insane Asylum. This
being a Welsh institution, did not, according to Heep, possess those
facilities for enjoying life which were so liberally supplied to the
inmates of the Raynell asylum near Liverpool. Accordingly he behaved
himself with so much propriety that the doctor discharged him as cured.

Not long after his return he got work near Manchester at painting in a
block of new houses where the plumbers were at work putting in the gas
and water pipes. On a Saturday, when he left work at noon, he met a
young plumber who was out of a job. This man said he knew where he could
earn a sovereign if he had tools to do a job in a butcher shop, and told
Heep that if he would go to the houses where he had been painting and
borrow a few plumbers' tools and assist him he would divide the amount.
Heep went back, but finding that the master plumber and all his men had
gone (Saturday afternoon in England being a half-holiday for laborers),
he took the few tools required, went and finished the job by 7 p.m.;
then instead of taking the tools back, they went into a public house
where they caroused till midnight, when they separated, Heep taking the
tools to his boarding house. On Monday he started early, so as to get
the tools back before the other workmen arrived. On nearing the houses
he passed a policeman who walked a little lame. He turned his head to
look back, and the policeman happened to do the same thing, and seeing
Heep looking at him his suspicions were aroused. Turning back, he came
up and asked him what he had in the two bosses (tool baskets). Heep
informed him, and on further questioning showed him the key to the house
from which he had taken the tools, and asked him to accompany him there,
which he did. They entered, Heep putting back the tools, and showed the
policeman where he had been painting and wished him to stay until the
master came in half an hour. This the policeman declined to do, and took
the tools and told Heep to come to the police station.

Heep lost his temper and began cursing him. The policeman went to the
door, and seeing another just passing beckoned him in, and the two
marched him to the station. The plumber was sent for, and was induced to
make a charge against Heep and value the stolen goods at ten shillings.
Seeing that the police were bound to make a case against him, he seized
the plumber's knife and cut his throat, severing the windpipe. The
doctor was sent for, he was transferred to the jail hospital, and in the
course of two or three weeks was well enough to appear before the
magistrate, though he could not speak, and was bound over for trial.

In the mean time the police had discovered that he had served two penal
terms, on the strength of which, when convicted, the magistrate
sentenced him to ten years' penal servitude.

At the trial he had not yet recovered the use of his voice, nor did he
have any one to defend him, for at that time, unlike the present, the
Crown did not furnish a lawyer for the defense of those who were unable
to employ one at their own expense. When the magistrate was about to
pronounce the sentence, he said that as the prisoner had escaped from
ordinary asylums he should send him to a place from which he could not
escape--meaning a prison.

[Illustration: BANK OF ENGLAND SCENE.--VISITOR HOLDING L1,000,000
($5,000,000) BANK OF ENGLAND NOTES.]




CHAPTER XL.

WE WILL FERRY YOU OVER JORDAN THAT ROLLS BETWEEN.


Once convicted of a crime in England it is impossible, unless a man has
money or friends, for him to obtain an honest livelihood unless he is
the happy possessor of a trade. All the great corporations demand
references that will cover a series of years of the applicant's life,
and, above all, strict inquiry is made as to his last employer. This
cuts the ground out from under the feet of the unfortunate, and feeling
that England can no longer be a home to him he turns his eyes as a
matter of course to America.

A fair percentage of the prisoners are men who perhaps under great
temptation, or while under the influence of drink, have broken the laws,
but yet are honorably minded and resolved in future to lead an honest
life. Such are not undesirable citizens; but there is another class,
that of the professional criminal; with these the prisons swarm, and,
worse yet, the slums and saloons of the great cities are breeding
thousands more that will take the places of those now on the stage.

The conditions of society in England are such that the procession of
criminals is an unending one. The society that creates the criminal also
has established a system of police repression that makes the life
history of society's victim one of misery, until such time when the
criminal, growing wise by experience, shakes the dust of English soil
off from his feet and transfers himself, a moral ruin, to our country,
here to become a curse and a burden.

This flow of moral sewage to our shores is constant and unceasing. Our
Government has frequently protested against it, but with no success, for
the officials in England indignantly deny that the State either
encourages or assists the exodus of her criminal classes; but from my
personal knowledge I know this to be false. The officials over there
have found out an effectual way to rid themselves of their discharged
prisoners as fast as their sentences expire, and cast them on our
shores, and this is so ingenious a way that the wrong can never be
brought home to them.

During my twenty years' residence in Chatham I suppose nearly half as
many thousands asked me for information about America, and at least 95
per cent. assured me that when released they would "join the society"
and depart at once for that happy hunting ground--that Promised Land
which charms the imagination no less of the criminal than of the honest
poor of the Old World. In every English prison the walls are decorated
with placards, gorgeous in hue, of rival firms appealing to the readers
for patronage. "Join us," they all say; and every prisoner knows the
appeal "join us" means if you do we will ferry you over the Jordan that
rolls between this desert land and the plains flowing with milk and
honey on the other side. The "firms" I mention are those arch humbugs,
the Prisoners' Aid Societies of England.

Elizabeth Fry, who made "aid to prisoners" fashionable and a society fad
in England, has much to answer for. Prisoners' Aid Societies have sprung
up in every quarter of England, and having a rich soil, and under the
fostering care of the Government, have flourished with a rank and
luxuriant growth. These societies draw their nourishment from English
soil, but, unhappily for us, their tall branches hang over our wall and
their ripened fruit falls on our ground.

From the time a prisoner becomes accustomed to his surroundings until
the hour of his release the one thing ever uppermost in his thoughts,
the one distracting subject and cause of anxious solicitude, is the
question, "Which society shall I join?" It is a tolerably safe venture
to predict that he will "join" "The Royal Prisoners' Aid Society of
London," which society is happy in having Her Gracious Majesty and a
long list of illustrious lords and ladies for "governors." What that may
mean no one knows. Certainly no benefit from these people ever accrues
to the discharged prisoners, but who can describe the glory that falls
on the four or five reverend gentlemen, sons, nephews or brothers of
deans or bishops, high-salaried secretaries of this particular society,
who pose at the annual meeting in Exeter Hall, before a brilliant
audience, and after have the felicity of seeing their report in the
church and society journals and their names connected with such exalted
people.

The way the Government over there accomplishes its purpose of getting
rid of its criminal population at our expense and at the same time is
able to answer the charges of our Government with disavowal is this:

The Home Secretary alone possesses the pardoning power for the United
Kingdom, and directly controls every prison, his fiat being law in all
things to every official as well as to every inmate. He has officially
recognized and registered at the Home Office every prisoners' aid
society in England, Scotland and Wales, and in order to boom them he
gives to every discharged prisoner an extra gratuity of L3 provided he
"joins" a prisoners' aid society on his discharge, the result being that
all do so. England is a small and compact country, and the police have
practically one head, and that head is the Home Secretary. Under the
circumstances the system of police espionage is so perfect that whenever
a discharged prisoner is reconvicted for another crime he cannot escape
recognition, and in all such cases the Home Secretary notifies the
particular aid society who received the prisoner on his discharge of the
fact, very much to the vexation of the officials of the society, who are
all anxious for a good record in reforming men that come officially
under their auspices. They publish that all who are never reported as
reconvicted are reformed, and all love to make a big showing for the
money subscribed at the all-important annual meeting, the result being
that all the men hustled out of the country by the society count as
reformed men.

These societies are supported by subscriptions, which all go in salaries
and office rents. The assistance given to the discharged prisoner is
limited to the L3 extra gratuity given the society by the Government on
the prisoner's behalf. The London societies have an agreement with the
Netherlands Line and the Wilson Line of steamers to "take to sea" for L2
10s. all "workingmen" they send to them. I have talked to thousands of
men who "joined the society," most of whom intended to go to America,
and I have talked to scores who had "joined," but who, unluckily for
themselves, not leaving England, were reconvicted and sent back to
Chatham. Throughout twenty years I conversed with several thousand men
who joined the society avowing they were going to America, and were
never heard of again in England, and have also known some scores of men
who passed through the hands of the society agents, yet were afterward
reconvicted. Therefore I am in a position to speak with authority on the
important question of England dumping her criminal population on our
shores.




CHAPTER XLI.

"WELL MY MAN, WHAT DO YOU INTEND TO DO?" "I WANT TO GO TO AMERICA, SIR."
"TUT! TUT! YOU MEAN YOU WANT TO GO TO SEA!" "YES, SIR; I WANT TO GO TO
SEA."


The Royal Society and The Christian Aid Societies, presided over by a
Rev. Mr. Whitely, enjoy a bad pre-eminence in this respect. The year
before my release the latter stated at the annual meeting that six
thousand discharged prisoners had passed through his society, and I
venture to assert that five thousand of these found their way to this
country through the assistance of this society. These two societies have
been boomed to an incredible extent, and it would be a curious study if
any report could be had as to how the large subscriptions were actually
expended.

For the sake of making my narrative clear, I will here only speak of the
first-named society.

[Illustration: LEAVING LIVERPOOL.--GEORGE BIDWELL'S FAREWELL TO JOHN
BULL.]

Two months before release the prisoner must inform the warder that he
intends to join the Royal Society. He notifies the Home Office, which in
turn notifies the society and forwards a warrant for L3. The prisoner
upon discharge takes a certain train for London, and is met upon his
arrival at the station by an agent of the society. This agent ranks as a
servant, is usually an ex-prisoner and is always paid 21 shillings a
week. He pilots his man at a certain hour before the Reverend Secretary,
and here follows a verbatim report of the dialogue between the great
man and the poor, timid and dreadfully embarrassed ex-prisoner:

Great Man--Well, my man, what do you intend to do?

Ex-Prisoner--I want to go to America.

Great Man--Tut! tut! my man; you mean you want to go to sea.

Ex-Prisoner (taking the hint)--Yes, sir; I want to go to sea.

Great Man--Very well, my man. Go with this agent, who will fix it with
the ship captain so you can go to sea.

If a steamer of either line named is about to sail he is taken on board
at once goes to the steerage, and just before sailing the agent hands
him a ticket and the criminal is safely off for America. England is rid
of a bad subject, and the Royal Society has one more "reformed" man to
put in its report. In addition to the L3 gratuity the ex-prisoner has
been paid L1, L2 or L3 in addition, provided his sentence had been at
least five years. The society is not a cent out of pocket over him, and
forlorn and friendless he lands here with from $2 to $15 in his pocket.
He has got the cheap suit of clothes he wears, one handkerchief and one
pair of stockings extra. It is almost certain he will speedily drift
into crime, spending the remainder of his life in prison, and finally
dying there or in the poorhouse.

There is just one way this evil can be stopped--I might say two ways.
The first, and a method that would be effectual in stopping the influx
of criminals from all countries, is to let Congress put a tax of $30 or
$50 on the steamship companies for every passenger not an American
citizen whom they bring to America. Not one discharged criminal in a
thousand could meet the tax in addition to the fare. The only other way
possible would be for our Government to request the English Government
to furnish them with photographs, marks and measurements of all
discharged criminals. Then have them copied and sent to the
Immigration Commissioners of our ports. But that would involve a radical
change in these boards and their methods. Efficiency there under our
corrupt system is, I fear, hopeless.

I visited Ellis Island a few days ago and saw how they passed a shipload
of immigrants in a few minutes, and as I looked I felt it was hopeless
to expect any efficient measures to throw back the foul tide that is
polluting our shores.

Seldom as men of the criminal class once safe in America ever return to
England, yet they do now and then return. In the two or three cases that
came under my observation it was very much to their loss and grief, for
they only came back to undergo another term.

One day, in 1890, a man working in my party slipped a note into my hand
that had been given him for me in chapel that morning. As in similar
cases, I secreted the note, and when safe in my little room I read it.
The writer said he had lately come down from London, and was most
anxious to get into my party in order to have a chance to talk with me.
He said he had been living in Chicago and could give me all the news. He
ended the note by stating he was being murdered by hard work, and
implored me to try and get him into my party, where it was not so hard.
This I was most anxious to do, as in my party you could talk almost with
impunity. To have a man near me fresh and only a year before in Chicago
would be like a letter from home and also a newspaper. Therefore, I
determined to get Foster in my party if possible. At this time I had
been seventeen years a resident, and was, in fact, the oldest
inhabitant, and had some little influence in a quiet way. About eleven
years before I had been put in the party, and had a chance to learn
bricklaying, and having become an expert in the art was given charge of
the bricklaying. I was on the best of terms with our officer, so when, a
day or two later, one of our men was so fortunate (in the Chatham view
of it) as to meet with an accident and be admitted to that heaven, the
infirmary, I told my officer to ask for Foster to replace him. He did
so, and he, very much to his gratification, found himself by my side,
with a trowel instead of a shovel in his hand. We worked side by side,
Winter and Summer, storm and shine, for two years, and in spite of
myself I began soon to like the man. His chief and only virtues were
truthfulness and fair-mindedness toward his friends--rare and
incongruous virtues for a professional burglar; nevertheless, he
possessed them in a marked degree. This is a statement to make a cynic
smile, and is one of those cases where the result is justifiable; yet,
however the cynic may smile, there is plenty of all-around good faith in
the world, and there is no nation, race or color, no clique, religion
nor social strata, that has a monopoly of the article. Good faith and
truth grow in unlikely places, as I have found in my career, for I have
looked on life from both sides, and to look on it from the seamy side is
instructive, indeed, for then the mask is off and the true character is
revealed. I have been away down in the depths, and for years have toiled
cheek by jowl, through sunshine and storm, in blinding snows and pelting
rain, with my brother men under conditions too brutal and demoralizing
to be understood if described--conditions where the very worst side of
human character would naturally be thought to come to the front, and I
came out of the fierce struggle in that pit of death with conclusions as
to the human animal that are decidedly favorable, and I am inclined to
the view that man was born almost an angel, and that, in spite of the
fearful temptations of the world into which he has been thrust, much of
the angelic pottery abides.




CHAPTER XLII.

MANY A MAN MORE DANGEROUS WRITES ALDERMAN AFTER HIS NAME.


Foster's experience during his four years' residence in Chicago was
decidedly novel, and it had evidently brightened his wits--that is,
increased his cunning without adding to his honesty. And as I think it
will interest my reader to get a view of life from the actor's own
standpoint, I will relate one of the many stories he told me during the
years we worked together.

Upon Foster's release from his first term of imprisonment he joined the
Christian Aid Society of London, and Mr. Whitely, the secretary,
promptly "sent him to sea," as he has thousands of others. In due time
he arrived in New York, but as he had heard much of Chicago he
determined to go there. He arrived penniless, but within an hour ran
against an old friend in the person of a former partner in the art of
burglary who had been a fellow prisoner with him in London. This man's
name was Turtle, and Mr. Whitely had only "sent him to sea" two brief
years before. It was plain from his magnificent diamond ring, pin and
big bank roll, freely displayed, that the seafaring life of the former
protege of the London Prison Aid Society was a profitable occupation. He
was delighted to meet Foster, and took him to a tailor's at once and
fitted him out liberally, at the same time handing him $250, just for
pocket money. When, on the next day, Foster stated to his friend that
he was ready to undertake a burglary, Turtle was displeased, and said:
"No; we are on the honest game, which pays better." What that was will
appear. Turtle had a large private inquiry office, with two of the city
detectives for side partners, who turned over to him all business in
which there was a prospect of mutual profit. All imaginable schemes of
villainy were concocted and executed there, and with perfect impunity,
too. For Turtle had the ear of all the magistrates, and was in with all
the gangs that made the City Hall of Chicago the worst and vilest den of
robbers that encumbers this earth.

What cause the pessimist has for his boding views when in cities like
New York, Quaker Philadelphia, Chicago and San Francisco, the City
Halls, those centres of municipal life, hold and are ruled by the worst
and most dangerous gangs of criminals sheltered by any roof in any city!

Alas! that the centre which should be the purest stream within the city
should be a foul cesspool, sending out poisonous vapors to pollute the
life of the citizens!

Universal suffrage in our great centres is a corrupt tree and its fruits
must needs be poisonous.

Turtle gave his friend Foster a welcome at his office and at once
enrolled him on his staff, but virtually made him a member of the firm.
So, between the two Police Headquarters thieves and the two English
ones, they had a combination indeed.

Many stories Foster told me during the years of our intercourse that
were novel and strange, and gave me a view of the social world seldom
seen. Here is a specimen:

One day a countryman appeared at Police Headquarters in Chicago and
announced that he had been robbed of $20,000, and showed how his coat
pocket had been cut open and the money taken. This, he explained, had
been done in a crowd. It was a strange place for a man to carry so
large a sum, and, still stranger, the pocket was cut on the inside. Of
course, a pickpocket in the rare event of cutting the pocket of an
intended victim must of necessity cut the pocket from the outside. The
countryman had fallen at Headquarters to the tender mercies of the two
partners of Turtle. One glance at the pocket showed them there was a
colored gentleman in the woodpile, and as there was $20,000 in the deal
somewhere, they determined to have some share of it. They, of course,
pretended to believe the story of the countryman, but for fear some of
the other Headquarters men might hear and want a share, they hurried him
away from the office over to the Sherman House; then one went to
Turtle's office and posted him on the situation. The countryman was
anxious to leave town, but on various pretenses they held him for two
days, but as he stoutly affirmed that the lost money was his own they
were puzzled to solve the mystery; but their knowledge of human nature
was such that they felt certain that if they could only arrive at the
bottom the old gentleman would not be quite as white as he pretended to
be. He came from an obscure mountain town in East Tennessee, and while
they fancied a trip there might solve matters they feared to lose their
victim--for victim these human tigers determined the countryman should
be. The second day they resolved on decisive measures to get at the
truth, and at the same time secure some plunder, provided the
Tennesseean had any cash.

So far Turtle and Foster had not been seen by the victim. The detectives
asked the countryman to remain one more night to see if they could not
catch the men who had robbed him. That afternoon one of Turtle's staff
secured a room at the same hotel, and, seizing an opportunity, slipped
into the countryman's chamber and concealed some burglar tools under the
mattress of his bed and in his carpet bag. This once done, they marched
the "guy" along Clark street, and, as arranged, Turtle and one of his
staff met them, and shaking hands with the two detectives asked if they
were arresting their companion for a job. Upon their saying he was a
wealthy gentleman from the South, Turtle burst out laughing, and said he
knew him for an old-time burglar, and if they would search his house
they would find stolen goods, and ended by saying, "Bring him down to my
office and I will show you his picture." The detectives now changed
their tones and threatened to arrest him. He having, as the sequel will
show, a bad conscience, became frightened. Then they arrested him, and
announced that they were going to search his room at the hotel. This
they did, taking him along. Of course, they found what they had
previously hidden, very much to the terror of the countryman, who,
lashed by a bad conscience, began to think he was in a fix. The friends
of the hour before now became threatening bullies, promising to get him
ten years for the possession of burglar tools. They took him to Turtle's
office, and there stripping him they found to their disappointment that
he had no money, but found carefully folded up in an inner pocket a
postoffice receipt for a registered letter sent from Nashville to St.
Paul. They kept him a prisoner that night while Turtle left by the first
train for St. Paul with the receipt in his pocket. The next morning
found him in St. Paul, and a few minutes later he walked out of the
office with the registered letter, which proved to be a bulky one.
Tearing it open he found it full of United States bonds and greenbacks,
amounting in all to $20,000. The next day all save $1,000, reserved for
the victim, was divided among the four birds of prey. That day the
victim was taken before a friendly magistrate and fully committed to
await in jail the action of the Grand Jury. Twenty-four hours later a
tool called on him at the jail, and gave him the option of taking $1,000
and getting out of town by the first train or getting ten years for the
possession of burglar tools. The poor fool, with trembling eagerness,
accepted the first part of the ultimatum, and within an hour a bail
bond was filled up, and darkness found the baffled old man speeding
westward, never again to look on his own people.

But how was he a baffled old man? He had embarked in a scheme of
villainy, but had been beaten at his own game by sharper rascals. From
whom did he steal the money? Read:

In a small Tennessee town there lived a widow whose husband had been
killed in the Confederate army and who found herself, like so many more
Southern ladies at the close of the war, impoverished, and with a family
of children to be provided with bread. But it seems she was a brave
body, and with a head for business. She opened a small hotel in
Nashville, and by reason of her history, no less than her excellent
hostelry, she thrived apace, and, investing all her savings in newly
started industrial enterprises in Nashville, her small investments
brought in large returns, which were reinvested, until at 40, finding
herself mistress of a competency, she quit business and went to spend
the remainder of her days where she was born. The hero of the adventure
in Chicago was not only her neighbor, but had been the comrade of her
husband through the deadly fights of the war. She naturally turned to
him as a friend for advice. He first asked her to be his wife, and upon
her refusal he began to urge her to dispose of all her interests in
Nashville and reinvest her money in the nearby city of Knoxville. At
last she consented, and sent him to Nashville with authority to act as
her agent. He disposed of her property, except the old hotel. He was
paid $20,000 on her account, and once with the money in his possession
he determined to keep it. It was a cowardly deed, and dearly did he pay
for it. He wrote her he was going to Chicago, and would take the money
with him, as he would only remain for a day. To Chicago he came, and, as
related, robbed himself, sending off the money in a registered letter to
himself. Then he appeared at Police Headquarters with his cut pocket
and clumsy story, which appeared in the next morning's paper. He sent a
marked copy of the paper to the lady, and at the same time wrote a
hypocritical letter stating that he was so heartbroken over losing her
money that he did not have the courage to look her in the face, and
never should until such time as he could repay the money. He said he was
going to California to work, and when he had enough she would see him
again, but not before.

[Illustration: "I RESOLVED TO LEAVE A MESSAGE OF HOPE AND HIGH
RESOLVE."]

How easy it is for a man to become an unspeakable villain, and how
nicely this one was hoisted with his own petard!

Eventually this catastrophe proved a blessing to the widow. It drove her
back to her hotel again, and soon after she became the wife of one of
the bravest and best men Tennessee ever produced. I was so interested in
the fate of this lady that when in Nashville in 1893 I tried to hunt her
up. I found several who knew the whole story, and from them I heard her
after history and a full confirmation of Foster's narrative.

Foster remained four years in Chicago and flourished. He and Turtle
became very influential in politics and partners in a combine of
rascally Aldermen and police magistrates that robbed the city and the
citizens with impunity. But unluckily for him, he one day took it into
his head to pay a visit to his old haunts in England, there to display
his diamonds and bank roll to such of his former cronies as happened to
be at liberty. On arriving in London he began to play the role of a rich
American, but was recognized by the police, an old charge raked up
against him, arrested, promptly placed on trial, found guilty and
sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. Although the possessor of
considerable property, he is to-day toiling at Chatham like a slave and
probably if he lives he will come out a broken man. It is a certainty
that the very day he is liberated he will "go to sea," being sent by a
prisoners' aid society, and a few days later become an ornament to that
good city of Chicago. Once there, his ambition will not be satisfied
until he takes his seat as Alderman, becoming one of the City Fathers.
Many more immoral and dangerous than he write Alderman after their names
in that windy city.

[Illustration: BIDWELL PICKING OAKUM.]




CHAPTER XLIII.

A BATTERED HULK STRANDED ON A SHORE TO WHICH NO TIDE RETURNS.


I am glad to say that during the almost lifetime I passed at Chatham
there were only a scant half dozen Americans who came down to keep me
company. One, Stoneman by name, interested me. He was a man of great
nerve and quick apprehension, and very truthful, therefore I found his
stories of his adventures most interesting, besides the fact that his
history was another proof of the truth that wrongdoing never pays.
Stoneman was of good parentage, and had entered the army in 1861, making
a good record up to and including the battle of Gettysburg. There, owing
to a quarrel with his captain, he deserted, and became a bounty jumper,
making a large amount of money, but when the war ended, finding his
occupation gone, he entered upon a life of crime, starting out first as
a very successful express robber. The last robbery he engaged in in that
line was on the New Haven road near Norwalk. His share amounted to some
thousands, but he was literally bowled out, and by a singular
circumstance. One of his confederates by the name of Riley had been
arrested, and was confined at Norwalk. He engaged as counsel for his
chum a well-known criminal lawyer of New York by the name of Stuart, and
arranged with him to go up to Norwalk to see Riley the following day.
Although Stoneman had plenty of money, he told Stuart he had none, but
Riley had. Then he gave Riley's wife $2,500, and told her to be present
at the interview between the lawyer and her husband. At the interview
Riley told him he would give him $2,500 if he cleared him or $1,000 if
he got him off with a sentence of two years or less. Stuart was hungry
as a shark to finger the money, and writing out a receipt for the full
amount inserted the conditions agreed upon. Putting the money in his
pocket he started back to New York with Mrs. Riley. Stoneman was on the
train waiting for them, and as soon as they started he joined them. It
happened the train was crowded, and they had to stand. It seems some
pickpocket saw Stuart pull out the money, and determined to get it from
him. On the arrival of the train in New York he succeeded in doing so.
Stoneman had hurried out of the station, and, of course, knew nothing of
the loss. So soon as Stuart discovered his loss he blamed him for it,
and, being in a fury, he flew to Police Headquarters, secured the
services of a friendly detective, and, going to the hotel that he knew
Stoneman frequented, had him arrested on a charge of robbing him. The
end of it all was that Stuart and the detectives got all his money, and
then, knowing him to be a daring man, one that would neither forget nor
fear to avenge his wrong, to get him out of the way they betrayed him to
the Connecticut police as one of the express robbers. He was sent to
Norwalk to stand his trial, was convicted and sentenced to five years,
and sent to Weathersfield. Being a good mechanic, he was put in the
blacksmith shop, and there, with an eye to the future, he did what is
frequently done by professional gentlemen in our prisons, made a
complete and most finely tempered set of burglar tools. They were too
bulky to be smuggled out by friendly warders, so he secreted them in the
shop where he worked and ruled. Many of the prisoners in Weathersfield
are expert workmen, and from the machine shops there a high class of
work is turned out. Among other workshops, there is one for the
manufacture of silver-plated ware. Stoneman had made chums with one of
the prisoners who held a confidential position in the silverware
manufactory. As Stoneman's sentence was the first to expire, he gave him
points, and it was plotted between them that the prison itself should be
burglarized by Stoneman on a certain night after his release. The
confidential man was to leave the way clear to the safe where the silver
bars used in the business were stored. He in due time was liberated,
with the customary injunctions from the warden and officers "not to come
back any more." He did come back, but in a way entirely unanticipated by
them.

He, of course, knew the whole routine of the place, the stations of the
guards, and that the wall after 8 p.m. was left entirely unguarded. The
second night after his liberation found him beneath the wall with no
other implements than a light ladder of the right height. In a minute he
was on top, had pulled his ladder up and lowered it inside.

Once inside, every inch of the place was familiar to him, and he had a
clear field. The shops, although inside of the boundary walls, were
quite separate from the main building, where the men, closely guarded,
were confined. He entered the familiar room where he so long had worked,
and easily placed his hands on his (to him) precious kit of tools, and
carried his jimmies, wedges, sledges, bits, braces, drills, etc., to the
wall, and then landed them safe outside. Then he returned and entered
the room where the plunder he sought lay. Thanks to his friend, the way
was easy, and his art was not required to secure it. There were 600
ounces in silver bars, a pretty good load in avoirdupois, but he only
made one journey of it, mounted the wall and speedily was over.

Stoneman was a long-headed fellow. He had taken, without the owner's
leave, one of the many boats on the banks of the near-by river. He
carried his plunder and tools down to the boat, and pulled across the
river, two miles down, to where quite a stream empties into the
Connecticut. He pulled some distance up it; then putting everything into
bags he sank them in the creek. Then drifting back into the Connecticut
River again he threw his ladder over and turned the boat adrift. At 7
o'clock the next morning he was in New York.

In due time, in the idiom of the professionals, he "raised his plant,"
and the burglar's kit manufactured in the Connecticut State Prison did
what Stoneman considered yeoman service. With all his art and cunning,
justice would not be cajoled by him, but weighed him in her balance, to
a good purpose too. His success in his particular line was great, but he
paid dearly for it all. Many times he escaped detection, but not always.
Not to escape, but to be brought to the bar, means a fearful gap in the
life of a criminal. He was, as I say, famous in certain circles for his
success in his lawless course, yet in the twenty years between 1865 and
1886 he passed sixteen years in captivity. In that year he went to
England with a confederate, and a few hours later in London they
snatched a parcel of money from a bank messenger in Lombard street. Both
were caught in the act, and sentenced at the Old Bailey to twenty years
each. To-day Stoneman is toiling under brutal task-masters, and it is
all but certain he will perish at his task, friendless, alone, unpitied.
Better so even, for should he ever be freed it will not be until the
twentieth century is well on its way to the have beens of time, then
only to find himself a battered hulk stranded on a shore from which the
tide has ebbed forever.




CHAPTER XLIV.

I FIND THE FENIANS WITH ME IN THE TOILS.


I had, of course, for many years heard much of the Fenian prisoners in
the English prisons, particularly Sergeant McCarty and William O'Brien.
Soon after my arrival at Chatham I was placed in the same party with
them. We were all three strongly drawn together, but were shy of being
the first to speak. Of course, it was strictly against the rules to
talk, but as a matter of fact the prisoners find many opportunities for
talking, particularly if they do their work. The officers are reported
and fined if their men fall behind in their task, so if a man is any way
backward in working the officer keeps his weather eye open, and reports
him for any infraction of the rules.

One day, soon after they were put in my party, I gave O'Brien a hand in
fixing his run. We spoke a few words. The ice was broken; we soon became
fast friends, and our friendship remained unbroken until their happy
release some years after. They were fine, manly fellows, and I in time
came to have a warm affection for them.

McCarty had for nearly twenty years been a sergeant in the English army.
He had come out of the Indian mutiny with a splendid record, and had
been recommended for a commission. But while wearing the British
uniform, his heart was warm for Ireland and her cause, so when, in 1867,
his battery being then stationed in Dublin, he was informed many devoted
adherents to the Fenian cause had determined to try and seize Dublin,
with a view of starting a wide revolt against English domination,
perilous as it was, he cast his lot in with them, and speedily found
sufficient adherents in his own field battery to seize it and bring it
into action against the English. The plan miscarried. Sergeant McCarty,
along with many others, was arrested and tried for treason; as a matter
of course was speedily convicted, and sentenced to be hanged, drawn and
quartered. This sentence was commuted to penal servitude for life.

O'Brien was an enthusiastic youngster of 17, and an ardent patriot. He
had enlisted in a regiment then stationed in Ireland for no other reason
than to familiarize himself in military affairs, also to win over
recruits to the Fenian cause, and when the revolt began to be in a
position to seize arms. The result of it all, so far as my two friends
were concerned--they found themselves by my side in the great Chatham
ship basin loading trucks with mud and clay, and that upon a diet of
black bread and potatoes. The cars, or trucks, held four tons, there
were three men to a truck, and the task was nineteen trucks a day, and
between the urging of officers, frightened themselves for fear the task
might not be done, and the mud and starvation, it was despairing work.

The punishments were not only severe, but were dealt out with a liberal
hand. The men, as a rule, were willing to work, but between weakness,
brought on by perpetual hunger, and the misery of the incessant bullying
of the officers, some few suicided every year, but many more did worse
to themselves; that is, the poor fellows, seeing nothing but misery
before them, would when the trucks were being shifted on the rail
deliberately thrust an arm or leg under the wheels and have it taken
off. No less than twenty-two did this in 1874. Of course, the object was
to get out of the mud. When once a man's leg or arm was off he would no
longer be able to handle a shovel, and would necessarily be placed in
an inside or cripples party and set to work picking oakum or breaking
stones, with the result that, being free from severe toil and sheltered
from the storms, they would not be so hungry. Then, again, they could
more easily escape being reported, and that meant much.

[Illustration: CONDEMNED TO BE HANGED.]

[Illustration: WEIGHING OFFICE, BANK OF ENGLAND.]

There was never anything but black bread for breakfast and supper, save
only one pint of gruel with the bread for breakfast. For dinner every
day we got a pound of boiled potatoes and five ounces of black bread;
three days a week five ounces of meat--that is, fifteen ounces a week
for a man toiling hard in the keen sea air. We were always on the verge
of starvation; our sufferings were terrible. In our hunger there was no
vile refuse we would not devour greedily if opportunity occurred.

O'Brien was a slight, delicate fellow, quite unfitted for the hardships
and toil he was subjected to, but he was a high-spirited, brave
youngster, and his spirit carried him through, while many a man better
fitted physically to endure the toil gave in and died, or became utterly
broken down, and would be sent away to an invalid station a physical
wreck. McCarty and I used to do extra work so as to shield O'Brien, and
so long as our trucks were filled on time the officer made no complaint.
The prisoners were certainly very good to each other, and usually did
all in their power to help and cheer up the weaker men.

In 1877 my two friends were liberated. I was glad to see them go, but I
missed them sadly. But McCarty had suffered too much. He only survived
his liberation a few days, dying in Dublin, to the grief of all Ireland.
O'Brien started a tobacco store in Dublin, where he still is.

I knew all of the dynamiters--Curtin, Daily, Dr. Gallagher, Eagan, etc.
However misguided, yet they meant to serve their country, and dearly
have they paid for their zeal. I pitied poor Gallagher. The strain on
his spirit was too great. He soon broke down, and his dejected, forlorn
looks, his stooping shoulders and listless walk made me and all think
his days were numbered; but he had immense vitality and still lived when
I was liberated; but he was truly a pitiable object, and if he is ever
to live to breathe the air a free man then his friends must secure a
speedy release, for he is slowly sinking into his grave.

[Illustration: RETROSPECTIONS.]




CHAPTER XLV.

IN MOOD AS LONELY, IN PLIGHT AS DESPERATE AS HIS.


I have related how, the Sunday after my sentence, in my despair I took
the little Bible off the shelf. The other books I had at Chatham besides
the Bible were a dictionary and "The Life of the Prophet Jeremiah."
Once, soon after my arrival in Chatham, I took the Jeremiah down from
the shelf, but speedily put it back and made a vow never to take it down
again; and I never did. It remained in view on the little shelf for
nineteen years, while I sat there watching it rot away. The dictionary
is a good book, but grows tiresome at times. As for the Bible, there is
no discount on that. For fourteen years I was a careful student of its
sacred pages. Every Sunday of that fourteen years, from 12 o'clock until
2, I used to walk the stone floor of my cell preaching a sermon with no
audience but my dictionary and "The Life of the Prophet Jeremiah." I at
first began my Bible studies and my sermons as a means to occupy my
thoughts and keep my mind bright. It saved my life and reason. I need
hardly say that I became tolerably familiar with the book, and I had the
great advantage of studying the Bible without a commentary.

I thought in my enthusiasm I should never tire of the Bible, but after
ten or twelve years I began to grow weary of it, and grew very hungry
for other mental food. I wanted a Shakespeare, for with him to keep me
company I could no longer be in the desolation of solitude. At last I
determined to get my friends to try for me. I had learned the Bible
almost by heart; the smallest incidents in the life of the Prophet
Jeremiah were much more familiar to me than the history of the civil
war, and Anathoth took on proportions which made it as real as New York
and far more important. The desperate efforts I had made to keep myself
from falling into the condition of so many I had seen drooping to idiocy
and death were, I felt, successful, and any occupation which kept alive
the intellect could not but be beneficial. I was hungry, starving for
mental food. Never had books appeared so attractive, never was kingdom
so cheerfully offered for a horse as I would have offered mine for an
octavo. My friends had written for me to the Government, but with no
success. At last they had interested the American Minister in London,
who promised to write to the Home Secretary for me, but a year had
slipped by and I had heard nothing.

Jeremiah continued with me, and it seemed he was to remain with me to
the end. But a change was coming.

Can I ever forget the day it happened! Can I ever cease to remember the
delight, the incredulity, the astonishment of that happy day! I had come
in at night hungry, cold, wet and miserable. I made my way a little
depressed to my cell. As I was about to step across the threshold I saw
a book lying on my little wooden bed. Amazed and astonished, I hesitated
to enter. Small as such a circumstance appears, the very sight of the
book brought on a weakness. I feared to pick it up, a horrible dread
seized me that it might be a new Bible, and I was unwilling to risk
another disappointment. The footprint on the sand was not more
suggestive nor more awe-inspiring to Robinson Crusoe than the appearance
of that book was to me. In mood as lonely, in plight as desperate as
his, there lay before me a sight as unlooked for and, as it seemed, as
full of meaning as the footprint was to Robinson.

At last I pulled myself together, determined to end the suspense and
know what was before me. I picked up the book, and who can understand
the delight, the joy, the rapture even, with which I read on the title
page, "The Works of William Shakespeare." In an instant I became a new
man. If ever one human being felt gratitude to another I felt it at that
moment for the American Minister. To him I owed it that henceforth a new
light was to stream through the fluted glass of my window, that
henceforth a new world was opened up for me to live in, and the world
seemed lighter to me. Many a month and year afterward my cell was filled
and my heart cheered by the multitude of friends the divine William
provided for me.

About the time I received my Shakespeare another piece of happy fortune
befell me. A smallpox scare was existing outside, and all hands in the
prison were ordered to be vaccinated. When the doctor came around a few
days afterward to examine the effects of the operation he found my arm
so swollen that he directed me to be taken to the hospital.

For twenty-five days I had full opportunity to learn what the girl in
Dickens' "Little Dorritt" meant when she called the hospital an
"'eavenly" place. It was the first time I had ever been admitted, and
the change from the horrible mud hole to the rest and comfort of a cell
in the hospital was indeed almost "'eavenly." With nothing to do but to
read my Shakespeare, the cravings of hunger for the first time since my
imprisonment satisfied, I was tempted to believe--I did partly
believe--that the world had few positions pleasanter than mine.

Godliness with contentment is undoubtedly great gain. Contentment alone
without the godliness is no poor thing, and was I not content? Few,
indeed, of all the thousands who have toiled in that torturing prison
house have ever been or are likely ever to be so content as I was.

How true it is that happiness is altogether relative, and that it is
divided much more evenly among men than we are willing to believe! A
mere respite from an intolerable position, a single book to keep the
mind from cracking, transformed gloom and misery into light and at least
comparative happiness.

After a time I began to watch the effects of the unnatural life upon
others. They arrived full of resolution, buoyed often by hopes which
they were soon destined to find delusive. The short-time men, those with
seven or ten year sentences, could face the prospect hopefully. To them
the day would come when the prison gate must swing back and the path to
the world be open once more. But no such hope cheers the long-timers,
the men with twenty years and life, who quickly learn how great the
proportion is of their number who find relief only in the box smeared
with black which incloses what is left of them in the grave. Every day I
used to see the effects on them of hunger and torment of mind. The first
part visibly affected was the neck. The flesh shrinks, disappears and
leaves what look like two artificial props to support the head. As time
wears on the erect posture grows bent; instead of standing up straight
the knees bulge outward as though unable to support the body's weight,
and the man drags himself along in a kind of despondent shuffle. Another
year or two and his shoulders are bent forward. He carries his arms
habitually before him now, he has grown moody, seldom speaks to any one,
nor answers if spoken to. In the general deterioration of the body the
mind keeps equal step; and so unfailing is the effect that even warders
wait to see it, and remark to each other that so and so is "going off."
When the sufferer begins to carry his arms in front every one
understands that the end is coming. The projecting head, the sunken eye,
the fixed, expressionless features are merely the outward exponents of
the hopeless, sullen brooding within. Sometimes the man merely keeps on
in that way, wasting more and more, body and mind, every day, until at
last he drops and is carried into the infirmary to come out no more.

Truly I was looking on life from the seamy side.

Before my own experience had taught me I used to think at times when
such a subject ever came into my mind at all: "What must be the thoughts
and anticipations of a man condemned to separation from other men, to
lead an unnatural life under the strained and artificial conditions of
prison?" The change is so violent, it comes so suddenly, the unknown
possibilities are so terrible, the sufferings naturally implied are so
inevitable, that had any one gifted with a knowledge of futurity shown
me that such experience was to be mine I would have thought it utterly
impossible that such horrors could be withstood by ordinary strength.

The delights of pleasure are seldom equal to the anticipation of them,
and it is probable that the pain of suffering is more unbearable in the
shrinking expectation than when affliction actually opens her furnace
door and commands us to enter. Perhaps there is a compensation of some
kind in nature, a provision to deaden feeling when a death stroke
falls--some merciful dispensation by which we fail to realize or to
understand in its exactness the meaning of the stroke which is crushing
us.

The man rescued from drowning or from asphyxiation has felt no pain. The
animal that falls beneath the rush and the murderous claws of a beast of
prey seems to fall into a torpor-like indifference, under the influence
of which he meets with no great suffering the death his captor brings
him. Probably all great suffering comes accompanied with a reserve of
strength or with a power of resistance which may even spring from
weakness, but which invests the sufferer with courage, and perhaps, too,
with hope, to meet it. [Transcriber's note: words are missing here on
the original] but the pitiless application of a discipline designed with
consummate skill to find out all the weak points of a man's inner armor
and to inflict the utmost possible suffering upon him, I used to ask
myself if it could be possible that I was really the man upon whom so
hideous a fate had fallen.

The blackness of darkness was round about me. Infinite despair stood
ready to seize me. It seemed an amazement that life should be forced to
remain with him who longs for death, who would rejoice exceedingly and
be glad could he find the grave. But when the first horrible numbness of
the shock was disappearing, when the first glimmering perception came to
me that "as a man's day so shall his strength be," I began to suspect,
and soon to know, that in many ways the reality was not so terrible as
imagination pictured it.

However ample the provision be which men may make to inflict suffering
upon other men, however well and successfully they may apply the
provision, they cannot alter men's nature. That will assert itself under
all circumstances. The fact that a man is restrained of his liberty by
no means alters his nature. The things he liked or disliked when he was
at liberty he will like or dislike when a prisoner, and he is not long
in finding that "whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap" is
just as certainly true of the seed he plants in inclosed ground as it is
of what he scatters in the open field.




CHAPTER XLVI.

IF PAIN IS NOT AN EVIL, IT CERTAINLY IS A VERY GOOD IMITATION.


The world inside of the walls has a public opinion of its own, and it is
at least quite as often just as the public opinion whose sphere is not
circumscribed by stone walls and iron bars. The man who accepts the
situation, resolved to get his hand as easily as possible out of the
tiger's mouth, soon becomes known as a sensible fellow, willing to give
others no trouble and anxious to have no trouble given him. Such a man
will rarely be molested.

Patient, uncomplaining endurance always excites pity and sympathy. The
most ignorant, the most brutal warder will scarcely oppress the man who
goes quietly and unresistingly along the thorny road stretched out
before him; who, not taking the thorns for roses, is not disappointed at
finding few roses among the thorns.

Those, however, who are determined to see the rough side of prison life
may easily do so; the appliances are there and they will certainly be
accommodated. An English prison is a vast machine in which a man counts
for just nothing at all. He is to the establishment what a bale of
merchandise is to a merchant's warehouse. The prison does not look upon
him as a man at all. He is merely an object which must move in a certain
rut and occupy a certain niche provided for it. There is no room for the
smallest sentiment. The vast machine of which he is an item keeps
undisturbed upon its course.

Move with it, and all is well. Resist, and you will be crushed as
inevitably as the man who plants himself on the railroad track when the
express is coming. Without passion, without prejudice, but also without
pity and without remorse, the machine crushes and passes on. The dead
man is carried to his grave and in ten minutes is as much forgotten as
though he had never existed.

The plank bed, the crank, the bread-and-water diet, unauthorized but
none the less effectual clubbing at the hands of warders, the cold in
the punishment cells penetrating to the very marrow of the bones,
weakness, sickness and unpitied death are the certain portion of the
rebel.

Some are found idiotic enough to invite such a fate, though fewer now
than formerly. The progress of education in England during the last
twenty years, and the philanthropic efforts of many societies and
private persons, but above all the covert but successful efforts of the
authorities to deport them to this country instantly after their
release, have had an immense effect in thinning the ranks of prison
inmates. The Judges, too, have been forced by public opinion to be much
less severe than they used to be, and that counts for much even in the
inside of prisons.

Nothing can be more capricious than the sentences they pass. In very few
cases does the law set any limit. "Life or any term not less than five
years" is the usual reading of the statute books, and the consequence
naturally is that one Judge will give his man five years, while another
will condemn his to twenty years for precisely the same crime committed
under precisely the same circumstances as the first one.

Another great blot on the English judicial system is that no court of
appeal exists to which a sentence might be referred for review, so that
the most unjust and unequal sentences are constantly passed from which
there is no appeal but in the forlorn hope--rather, entire
hopelessness--of a petition to the Home Secretary. I have often seen a
man who had been sentenced to five years for murder working by the side
of another whose sentence was twenty years for some crime against
property. Such contrasts, of course, excite great discontent, and in
some cases are the reason why men set up a hopeless resistance to what
they feel to be persecution and injustice.

It always seemed to me that the standpoint of the Board of Directors,
established in 1864, and which continued without change until very
recently, was altogether wrong. They appeared to think that in their
dealings with other men the only course was to be the application of
"force, iron force," as one of the governors expressed it. The very
great majority require no such application, and the few difficult ones
could easily be managed in another way. Certainly it is necessary that
all prison discipline be penal, but it is not necessary that it be
ferocious and inhuman, as certainly is the English. Starvation, the
crank, the plank bed, the fearful cold of the cells are not measures
necessary in dealing with any man.

Whatever they could think of to harden, to degrade, to insult, to
inflict every form of suffering, both physical and mental, which a man
could undergo and live, was embodied in the rules they made. Their
prisons were to be places of suffering and of nothing but suffering.

So far as the directors were concerned the regulations were carried out
to the letter, but each prison is under the control of a resident
governor, with a deputy governor to assist him. These gentlemen are
always men of good social position, retired officers of the army, who
have seen the world and have experience in controlling men. They are
rarely inclined to unnecessary severity, but are generally willing to
apply the rules with as much consideration as such rules admit. The
governor's discretion, however, is limited, but daily contact more or
less with men whom he sees to differ very little from free men, and whom
he sometimes finds to be even better than many he knows who are not, but
who perhaps ought to be, on the wrong side of the bars, makes him
unwilling to throw too many sharp points on the path which has to be
trodden by men for whom he often cannot help feeling considerable
sympathy.

I have more than once heard governors express their disapproval of the
starvation system and of the ferocity of treatment toward men who some
day or other must go back to society.

Under such governors the new arrival speedily finds out that to a
certain extent his comfort depends upon himself. No man can make a bad
thing good or trick himself into believing that suffering is pleasure.
If pain be not an evil, it is an exceedingly good imitation, and the
wisest philosopher is just as restless under the toothache as the most
perfect idiot.

[Illustration: PENTONVILLE PRISON.]




CHAPTER XLVII.

HIS ROW BECOMES FILLED WITH VERY SHARP-EDGED STONES INDEED.


The inhabitant of a cell has a very rough row to hoe under any
circumstance, and it has to be hoed, but there is no necessity for him
to fill his row with stones and to plant roots in it himself. He soon
finds his level, and the impression he makes on his arrival is the one
which, as a rule, clings to him to the end.

When prison air and prison influence have succeeded in incasing a man
with the sort of moral hardbake that renders him callous to those
feelings which at first so gall the raw spots, he finds himself watching
with curiosity the shapings of newcomers. Some announce immediately on
arrival that they cannot possibly be there more than a month or two;
their arrest was a mistake, and their uncle, the member of Parliament,
is now busily engaged making representations to the Home Secretary. One
of the very few amusements prisoners have is in watching the important
fellows, the men whose friends could do so much for them if they would
only let them know where they are. Sometimes a chap who has perhaps been
a body servant or something of the kind, who has picked up the kind of
veneer he could catch by aping his master, will furnish food for smiles
to every one he comes in contact with during his stay. He never receives
a letter without explaining confidentially to every one that another
aunt whose favorite he was has just died, leaving him L10,000 in cash,
not to speak of a trifle or two in the shape of half a dozen houses.
These gentlemen are immediately furnished with a name which becomes much
better known than their own, and whenever they have delivered themselves
of their periodical brooding of lies the news goes smiling round that
Billy Treacle's aunt has died again and left him another fortune.

So long as their inventions do no more harm than make them ridiculous,
they are only laughed at and let alone, but when one of them develops a
talent for invention which molests or injures others, especially when it
takes the form of confidential communication to the governor of what he
sees, and still more of what he does not see, such retribution as both
prisoners and officers can inflict is not long in falling. His row
becomes filled with very sharp-edged stones indeed, and roots which tear
his hands painfully. Nearly always these boastings are fathered by an
absurd vanity--a desire ever to appear what they are not, and while they
think they are deceiving others they deceive no one but themselves.

One case I remember, though, was an exception. One young fellow made
such use of his invention, and the story is so interesting and
instructive as showing with what lofty respect English gentlemen are
educated for the rights of property, that I shall relate it.

Four or five years after I went to Chatham a young fellow named
Frederick Barton arrived with a ten years' sentence for forgery. His
appearance and manners were very much in his favor, and his conduct so
confirmed the good first impression that he speedily became a favorite
with everybody from the governor down.

Some three years had slipped by when one day he asked me if I would
prepare a petition which he might send to the Home Secretary in the hope
of obtaining a commutation of sentence. I liked the youngster very well
and readily consented, but told him that I doubted very much if he
would get anything. The petition was sent, and in a few days the usual
answer was returned, "No grounds." He told me of his ill luck, and I
said to him: "Look here, so long as you send up whining petitions asking
for mercy both you and they will be treated with contempt. If you wish
to get that English gentleman in the Home Office to do anything for you,
make him believe you are a millionaire; you will see whether he will do
anything then for you or not." He laughed merrily at that. "A
millionaire! Why, I haven't a sixpence. My father is only a private
coachman at Tunbridge Wells." "That is nothing at all," I said; "if you
will be guided by me, and let me manage things for you, I will have a
petition sent in for you from the outside, and I feel sure we can get
you out." An idea had just flashed into my mind, and I was eager to try
it.

At first he was a little timid about the venture, fearing that I might
get him into trouble, but when he became convinced that I would do
nothing of the kind he consented. I had a warder in the prison who in
consideration of an occasional tip used to act as my postman, sending my
letters to my friends and bringing in theirs to me. This was a deadly
offense against the rules, but as the permitted correspondence was
outrageously limited I saw no reason why I should deprive myself of
letters when I had the chance to have them, and as I took good care that
the great men in London should get no inkling of my misdeeds I dare say
their hearts did not grieve after what their eyes did not see.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

HE TELEGRAPHED THE NEWS TO MY WARDER, AND BARTON WENT ON HIS WAY
REJOICING.


My warder friend supplied me with writing materials. I prepared one
letter, which I had him copy, and another in my own handwriting. Both
were directed to Barton, and informed him that his rich uncle had lately
died and had left him one hundred and sixty thousand pounds in money and
sixteen thousand acres of cotton land in India. He was also informed
that his father had gone to India to look after the property, and that
upon his return a petition would be presented to the Home Secretary, who
it was hoped would grant his release. These two letters my warder sent
to a friend of mine in London with a note from me requesting him to post
them immediately. I told Barton what I had done, at the same time
cautioning him to guard the closest secrecy. Two days afterward the
letters arrived, and I directed my protege to spread the news as much as
possible, to tell all the warders he saw and to show them his letters.
We had at that time in the prison a wideawake but tricky fellow named
George Smith. He had been clerk to an important firm of auctioneers in
London, and had been sentenced by probably the most savage judge on the
bench, Commissioner Ker, to fourteen years' imprisonment for receiving a
quantity of stolen silverware, which he had his employers sell for him.
He was about to be released, and I determined to make use of him, but
without letting him know the truth, for I knew that if he suspected he
was merely doing a good turn for the chum he left behind him, he, like
the Home Secretary himself, without the right kind of inducement would
have left his friend to stop where he was until the bottomless pit was
frozen over hard enough to hold a barbecue on it. Barton, by my
directions, told Smith of his good fortune, and that he hoped on his
father's return to be liberated. Smith then did exactly what I expected
and wanted him to do. He said there was no need to wait until then; he
was going to be released in a few days, and "if you like I will send in
a petition for you; it can't do you any harm, and it may get you
released immediately." Barton at once accepted the offer, and told him
that if successful the post of manager on the Indian estate would be at
his disposal. He also suggested to ask me to write the petition. Smith
managed to see me in the course of the day, and, supposing me to have no
knowledge of the matter, explained the situation and asked me to write
the petition. Needless to say, I promised everything asked for, and
added that I would make it my business to have the petition in London at
some place where he could find it the day of his discharge.

[Illustration: BANK-NOTE STORE-ROOM, BANK OF ENGLAND.]

[Illustration: VISITORS AT NEWGATE STANDING OVER THE BURYING-VAULT DOOR
LEADING TO THE BLACK-MARIA.]

The petition was prepared, setting forth all the interesting facts for
the edification of the right honorable gentleman in the Home Office, and
after being submitted to Barton and Smith, sent to the latter's address
in London.

Millbank is a gigantic prison in the heart of London every one of the
thousand cells of which cost the Government L300 to build. This is the
establishment where David Copperfield visited Mr. Uriah Heep when that
gentleman was under a cloud, and heard him express the wish that
"everybody might get 'took up' so that they could learn the error of
their ways." For many years all London men whose sentences had expired
were brought here for release, and here Smith came a few days after the
petition was posted. On the morning of his discharge and within an
hour after passing through the gates of Millbank he left the petition
personally at the Home Office. Two days afterward one of the clerks
acknowledged its receipt, accompanied with the gratifying assurance that
it was under consideration. A week later Mr. Smith was notified that the
release would be granted. He immediately telegraphed the news to my
warder, who told me, and I told Barton. Two days more and the release
came down, Barton went on his way rejoicing and every one was glad at
his happy fortune. The only one who felt much disappointment was very
likely poor Smith, who never heard of his friend again.

[Illustration: SCHOOL AND A TRADE, OR JAIL.]




CHAPTER XLIX.

I FLUSTER THE GREAT JUPITER OF MY LITTLE WORLD.


The successful issue of this little enterprise gave me great
satisfaction. There was, of course, nothing in it for me, nor did I want
anything, but it furnished me with an excellent standpoint from which to
address the Home Secretary should the occasion ever arise.

The occasion did arise some time after, and I utilized it in this way: A
friend of mine had come over from America to see me and to try if it
were not possible to obtain some reduction in the sentence. My postman
warder was away at the moment, so letter-carrier facilities were cut
off. I wanted very much indeed to communicate with my friend, and
applied to the Home Secretary explaining the position and asking him to
let me write two letters immediately. At the end of eight weeks an
answer came back that the Home Secretary had carefully considered the
application and could find no sufficient grounds for advising Her
Majesty to grant the prayer thereof. The next day I obtained a petition
sheet from the governor and wrote the following petition:

"To the Right Hon. Sir William V. Harcourt, Secretary of State for the
Home Department:

"The petition of, etc., humbly showeth: That two months ago I petitioned
the Home Secretary for permission to write two letters, explaining the
urgency of the occasion and pointing out that the request was by no
means unusual. Yesterday the answer arrived telling me, with as much
truth, I have no doubt, as kindness, the anxiety with which the right
honorable gentleman has been for eight weeks considering the petition.

"I hasten to express to the Home Secretary the regret I cannot but feel
at the thought of causing him so much concern, which I sincerely trust
has had no prejudicial effect upon his health. I regret this the more as
there was really no necessity for requiring eight whole weeks of his
time to the inevitable great neglect of the public business, for no man
who owns or who is known to be able to get a half sovereign ever has the
slightest difficulty in sending out as many clandestine letters as he
chooses. This, of course, is an infraction of the rules, and any
reasonable man would rather get along in a friendly spirit with the
prison authorities than be at war with them, but when trifling favors
which it requires but to stretch out the hand to take are refused,
rules, prison authorities and the Home Secretary himself are
contemptuously set aside and the forbidden favor taken.

"I trust that this knowledge will save the Home Secretary any repetition
of the anxiety he has suffered on this occasion, but while regretting my
want of success in petitions for myself I desire to thank the right
honorable gentleman for the kind attention he pays to my petitions for
others.

"The Home Secretary will perhaps remember his merciful consideration of
the case of Mr. Frederick Barton, whom he released some short time ago,
but it will perhaps be news to him to hear that it was I who invented
Mr. Barton's fortune and wrote the petition which furnished the grounds
for advising Her Most Gracious Majesty to extend her royal clemency to
the deserving young man. The result of my petition by no means surprised
me, for I was always confident that an English gentleman could never be
guilty of the solecism against English customs implied by keeping in
prison a young gentleman who could perform so meritorious an act as to
fall heir to many bags of gold and sixteen thousand acres of cotton land
in India.

"Mr. Barton had previously petitioned for mercy pointing out that he was
but 17 years old at the time of his arrest, and asking that his extreme
youth might plead for him. This petition the Home Secretary treated with
very proper contempt, but it was really delightful to contrast that
contempt with the respectful and instant attention shown to the
petition of the young heir.

"I have a difficulty in expressing the comfort with which I saw an
English Home Secretary, with all the power of the Empire in his hands to
protect him against imposition, releasing a criminal after reading a
sheet of foolscap covered with lies, which had been left at the Home
Office by a released convict within half an hour after passing through
the gates of Millbank. It is but the merest justice, however, to add
that poor Mr. Smith, the presenter of the petition, was as badly
humbugged as the Home Secretary himself. The glitter of gold was flashed
before his eyes as it was before the eyes of Sir William Vernon
Harcourt, and with equal effect.

"To me this effect was certain, as not the slightest doubt existed in my
mind that the moment it became a question of great sums of money all
distinctions would vanish and pickpocket and Home Secretary would
scramble on to the same foothold.

"The result, it is unnecessary to add, perfectly justified me. As I
watched the lucky Frederick set out to return to the stable he came from
it occurred to me that had he understood German, which he did not, nor
English either, for that matter, he might have whispered joyfully to
himself, in the words of another dealer in ways that are dark and tricks
which are vain:

  "'Es ist gar hubsch von einem grossen Herrn,
  So menschlich mit dem Teufel selbst zu sprechen.'

     "Doubtless, however, the Home Secretary will feel, as I do myself,
     that he acted in this matter in accordance with the commonest
     dictates of duty, and I beg to assure him that, having every
     facility for sending out as many letters as I please, I shall never
     again cause him weeks of anxious consideration. Respectfully
     submitted,

                                                  "AUSTIN BIDWELL."

Whatever Sir William Vernon Harcourt may have thought about the
petition, he said nothing, but I dare say he did not feel flattered. It
required no small daring to send it, but as I knew I had nothing to hope
from him I could look with perfect equanimity upon any consequences
likely to follow.

The governor of the prison did not dare to violate the regulations by
refusing to send my petition, written as it was on an official form and
duly entered on the books of the establishment, but he sent for me in
hot haste. Assuming a threatening air, he demanded how I dared to play
such monkey tricks. Officially the governor was a hot member and
enforced an iron discipline both with wardens and the men, but
personally he was not a bad fellow, so I merely laughed and asked him if
he was a critic and reviser of petitions; therefore, a local Home
Secretary. He saw I was not to be intimidated, and almost begged of me
not to do so any more. As he was a pretty good fellow, and I had no wish
to cause him any embarrassment, I readily promised, provided I was
permitted now and then to write a special letter. This permission he
intimated would not be withheld, and there, so far as the governor was
concerned, the incident ended. But so unheard-of a document emanating
from a prisoner created a sensation among the officers, who all came to
know of the matter, and added several degrees to whatever respect they
were inclined to have for me.

As there is no attempt at humor in this book, and since I am on the
subject of petitions, I will give here a copy of one sent by a fellow
prisoner who was somewhat of a character and whose name was Niblo Clark.

To some of the prisoners the art of reading and writing is an all but
insoluble mystery. Every man is allowed a small slate, and many of the
prisoners spend an incredible amount of painful toil and mental
wrestling in preparing a petition, which, by the way, never does any
good. Poor Niblo for a whole year, through all the Summer's warmth and
Winter's frost, spent his spare hours producing this petition, and I
think my reader will agree with me that it is a masterpiece of its
kind.

       PETITION.

       Register No. Y 19.  Name, Niblo Clark,
       Present Age, 40. Confined in Chatham Prison.
       Date of Petition, January 15, 1890.

           CONVICTED.          CRIME.        SENTENCE.     REMARKS.
       When.   Where.
       1880. Old Bailey,      Burglary.       15 Years.    In Hospital.
                London.                                    Troublesome.

     To the Right Honorable Henry Mathews, Her Majesty's Principal
     Secretary of State for the Home Department:

     The Petition of Niblo Clark Humbly Sheweth--

     The Right Honorable Secretary the great benefit your humble
     petitioner would derive by a speedy removal from this damp and
     foggy inhospitable Climate to a milder one; the atmostphere here
     his thoroughly prejudicial to your petitioners health and causes me
     to be a great Sufferer i am Suffering from asthma accompanied with
     bad attacks of Chronic bronchitis and have been now 3 long years
     Confined to a bed of Sickness in a Sad and pitable Condition and
     upon those Clear grounds and physical proofs your petitioner humbly
     prays that it may please the Right Honorable Secretary to order my
     removal to a warmer and milder Climate necessity also compels me to
     complain of repeated acts of injustice and Cruely committed again
     me, and which in some respects Might Justly undergo the imputation
     of ferocity there are numbers and frivolous and false charges
     conspired against me and every time i am discharged from here the
     Governor takes them Seperate one each and trys to murder me: i have
     been No less then Six weeks at one time on bread and Water
     accompanied with a little penal Class and all the officers are
     incouraged to practise all kinds of barbarious maltreatment against
     me and other sick men--theres is one officer here place here for
     the express purpose of tantelizing me and other his Name is Warder
     Newcombe this officer sir has barbariously struck and assaulted
     patients on there Sick bed and Several has complained of it to the
     Governor--But i am Sorry to say its greatly fostered and incouraged
     especially upon me it is quite useless to complain of anything to
     the Governor.

  Right Honourable Sir i humbly beg that you will listen to my woe
  for what i Suffer in Chatham prison the one half you do not Know
  From repeated attacks of this frightful disease i am getting worse
   each day
  So i humbly trust you will have me removed without the least delay

  In making my request in poetry Sir i hope you wont think i am Joking
  for the greatest favour you can bestowe upon me is to Send me back to
    Woking
  For in this damp and foggy Climate its impossible to ever get better
  So i humbly trust in addition to this you will grant me a Special letter

  Another little case i wish to State if you Sir will Kindly listen
  has it would Cause a Vast amount of talk all round and about the prison
  I mean if Niblo Clark Should be sent upon some public Works
  it would cause more talk then the late dispute between the russians and
   the turks

  in foggy wheather with my disease it would be impossible to larst one
    hour
  and if you doubt the accuracy of what i say i refere to doctor Power
  or any other naval doctor or one from the army garrison
  they one and all would say the Same and likewise Doctor Harrison

  Since my reception in this here prison i have been a most unfortunate man
  and i will tell you the why and wherefore as well as i possibly Can
  for every time i been in this hospital its the whole truth what i Say
  for my medical treatment i assure Sir i have dearly had to pay

  A regular marked man i have been for them all its well known to Captain
   Harris
  for the list of reports against me would reach from this place to paris
  So i humbly beg Right Honourable Sir you will grant this humble petition
  for i am sorry to State i have nothing to pay having lost both health
   and remission

  Such Cruel injustice to poor Sick men is far from being just and right
  but to report Sick patients in hospital is the officers Chief delight
  But perhaps kind Sir you might imagine that they only do this to a dodger
  But its done to all--Austin Bidwell as well and likewise to poor Sir
   Roger (Tichborne).

  like Savage lions in this infirmary the Officers about are walking
  to Catch and report a dying poor man for the frivolous Charge of talking
  and when we go out from hospital our poor bodies they try to Slaughter
  by taking these reports one at the time and Killing us on bread and water

  I am suffering a Chest and throat disease a frightful Chronic disorder
  and to go out from hospital is attempting Suicide to get heaps of bread
   and Water
  for it is such cruel treatment made me as i am and brought me to the
   Verge of the grave
  So in conclusion Right Honourable Sir a removal i humbly Crave

if this petition should not be sent prisoners abstain from further
writting who will explain his case more Clearly to the Visiting director
and i wish to have this petition Submitted to the director by your truly
humble servant Niblo Clark.




CHAPTER L.

IT WAS NIGHT; SILENCE AND GLOOM HAD SETTLED DOWN ON THE INMATES.


By a refinement of cruelty we had been separated and sent to prison wide
apart; for twenty years I had not seen the face of one of my friends.
But there was an invisible bond between us that no tyranny could break.
How blessed the happy forethought that made us, in that dark hour, amid
our despair, make that promise!

Ten years had slowly dragged by, 1883 came, and my devoted family felt
that I, and my comrades, too, had paid, as was right, our due to
justice, and we ought to be liberated. They determined that it would not
be their fault if I remained in captivity. So that year my sister came
to England and remained permanently there. She worked bravely and well,
but year after year passed without result. None of us was prepared for
the vindictive fury of the Bank of England--its power was all-potent
with the Government. George had been bedridden for years, and was slowly
dying. At length, in 1887, the medical officer of the prison certified
his speedy death was certain, and the Government released him to die;
but he resolved that he would not die until we were free. With liberty
and hope health came slowly back, and he devoted every hour to working
for our liberation; but for a time devoted in vain. More than once had I
seen the prison emptied and filled again. Of all the life prisoners I
had met there on my arrival, or who for years after had joined me, I was
the sole survivor.

One by one sickness or insanity, born of despair, had laid them in the
prison graveyard or buried them in the asylum. Out of more than seventy
life prisoners none had lived to be liberated, and determined appeared
the Bank of England directors that I should not form an exception; but
that if ever the prison doors were opened to me it should be only when
so near death that I might join the many who had gone before.

My fate seemed inevitable, but never for a moment did I cease to believe
that Fortune's frowns would one day disappear and that I should yet
again feel the warmth and sunshine of her smile. From his sick bed, and
in his health, our comrade never ceased his efforts. He succeeded in
interesting James Russell Lowell and many others in my behalf. The
President asked the English Government officially to grant my release.
Mr. Blaine, the Secretary of State, sent a very strong letter through
Minister Lincoln in London, and I thought when told of it that my day to
go was not far away.

It will interest Americans, perhaps, to hear that the representations of
the President and of the Secretary of State of the United States met the
same courtesy as was shown to all the previous ones. Still, George was
not discouraged. He sent agents to England, who managed to interest the
newspapers in the matter, and never did he cease, until by the
statements of the press upon the ferocity of my treatment, the
reproaches of my friends and the representations of many I had never
seen, including Lady Henry Somerset, Mrs. Helen Densmore (then residing
in London) and the Duke of Norfolk, at last the Home Secretary felt the
pressure, and all unwillingly--"much against his will," as he termed
it--was forced to order my release.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thou shalt forget thy misery and remember it as waters that pass
away."

Twenty years had passed away since I had bade my friends good-bye under
the Old Bailey, and now 1893 had come. It was a frosty February night,
and I was alone in that little room with its arched roof and stone
floor. It was past 7 o'clock, and the prison gloom and stillness had
settled down on all the inmates, when suddenly there came the noise of
hurrying feet that echoed strangely from the arched roof as the warders
tramped loudly on the stone floor of the long hall. A rush of feet, or,
indeed, anything that broke the horrible stillness at that hour, was
startling. They were the feet of the reserve guard, which was never
called in save when the patrol who glided around the corridors in
slippered feet discovered some suicide. Many a heartbroken man had I
known in that twenty years who in his despair ended his misery thus.

While wondering who the unfortunate could be I heard their steps
mounting the stairway leading to my landing, and then a sudden thrill
shot through me as they turned down the corridor toward my cell. My
heart stood still as I thought, could they be coming for me? I had a
sudden frenzy of fear that they might pass my door, but no, they came
straight on, halted, and Ross, a principal officer--I had known him
twenty years--gave a thundering rap on my door and shouted, "I want
you!" Then a key rattled in the lock, the door was thrown open and three
friendly faces looked in. Faint, deadly white, trembling like a
frightened child, I started to my feet trying to speak, but no sound
came from my lips for a moment. At last I stammered, "What's the
matter?" Ross thrust his form through the door, and with face close to
mine said the thrilling words, "You're free!" I cried, "I don't believe
you!" and Ross said: "Come on, my boy; it's all right."

Like one in a dream I passed out through the door of that little cell
whose grim, narrow walls had frowned on me for a score of years and had
in vain tried to crush my spirit.

Still like one in a dream I went down that long hall listening only to
the strange sound of my own footsteps and saying to myself: "It is all a
dream. I will awake, as I have from thousands of like dreams, and find
myself again in my dungeon."

I was led into the outer office, where some papers were read to me, and
then others given me to sign, but I listened or signed like one in a
maze. Suddenly I saw Ross thrust the key into the outer door. That
roused me, and the thought flashed into my mind, now I will see a star.

The heavy door rolled on its hinges, the ponderous gate was flung back.
Stepping out, I intuitively looked up, and a sudden awe fell upon me,
for there, like a revelation, shone the Milky Way, with its millioned
arch of radiant suns. At the sight of that miracle of glory, my heart
beat fast. I realized that I was free, with health and strength, with
courage to begin again the battle of life, and in my irrepressible
emotion I cried aloud, and my cry was like a prayer--"God is good."

[Illustration: A FIVE-POUND NOTE.

The counterfeit plate.]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIDWELL'S TRAVELS, FROM WALL STREET TO LONDON PRISON: FIFTEEN YEARS IN SOLITUDE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Green Mummy
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Green Mummy

Author: Fergus Hume


        
Release date: October 1, 2001 [eBook #2868]
                Most recently updated: July 11, 2026

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2868

Credits: Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN MUMMY ***




THE GREEN MUMMY

By Fergus Hume




CONTENTS



CHAPTER



    I    THE LOVERS

   II    PROFESSOR BRADDOCK

  III    A MYSTERIOUS TOMB

   IV    THE UNEXPECTED

    V    MYSTERY

   VI    THE INQUEST

  VII    THE CAPTAIN OF “THE DIVER”

 VIII    THE BARONET

   IX    MRS. JASHER'S LUCK

    X    THE DON AND HIS DAUGHTER

   XI    THE MANUSCRIPT

  XII    A DISCOVERY

 XIII    MORE MYSTERY

  XIV    THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS

   XV    AN ACCUSATION

  XVI    THE MANUSCRIPT AGAIN

 XVII    CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

XVIII RECOGNITION

  XIX    NEARER THE TRUTH

   XX    THE LETTER

  XXI    A STORY OF THE PAST

 XXII    A WEDDING PRESENT

XXIII JUST IN TIME

 XXIV    A CONFESSION

  XXV    THE MILLS OF GOD

 XXVI    THE APPOINTMENT

XXVII BY THE RIVER





THE GREEN MUMMY




CHAPTER I. THE LOVERS


“I am very angry,” pouted the maid.

“In heaven's name, why?” questioned the bachelor.

“You have, so to speak, bought me.”

“Impossible: your price is prohibitive.”

“Indeed, when a thousand pounds--”

“You are worth fifty and a hundred times as much. Pooh!”

“That interjection doesn't answer my question.”

“I don't think it is one which needs answering,” said the young man
lightly; “there are more important things to talk about than pounds,
shillings, and sordid pence.”

“Oh, indeed! Such as--”

“Love, on a day such as this is. Look at the sky, blue as your eyes; at
the sunshine, golden as your hair.”

“Warm as your affection, you should say.”

“Affection! So cold a word, when I love you.”

“To the extent of one thousand pounds.”

“Lucy, you are a--woman. That money did not buy your love, but the
consent of your step-father to our marriage. Had I not humored his whim,
he would have insisted upon your marrying Random.”

Lucy pouted again and in scorn.

“As if I ever would,” said she.

“Well, I don't know. Random is a soldier and a baronet; handsome and
agreeable, with a certain amount of talent. What objection can you find
to such a match?”

“One insuperable objection; he isn't you, Archie--darling.”

“H'm, the adjective appears to be an afterthought,” grumbled the
bachelor; then, when she merely laughed teasingly after the manner of
women, he added moodily:

“No, by Jove, Random isn't me, by any manner of means. I am but a poor
artist without fame or position, struggling on three hundred a year for
a grudging recognition.”

“Quite enough for one, you greedy creature.”

“And for two?” he inquired softly.

“More than enough.”

“Oh, nonsense, nonsense, nonsense!”

“What! when I am engaged to you? Actions speak much louder than remarks,
Mr. Archibald Hope. I love you more than I do money.”

“Angel! angel!”

“You said that I was a woman just now. What do, you mean?”

“This,” and he kissed her willing lips in the lane, which was empty save
for blackbirds and beetles. “Is any explanation a clear one?”

“Not to an angel, who requires adoration, but to a woman who--Let us
walk on, Archie, or we shall be late for dinner.”

The young man smiled and frowned and sighed and laughed in the space of
thirty seconds--something of a feat in the way of emotional gymnastics.
The freakish feminine nature perplexed him as it had perplexed Adam,
and he could not understand this rapid change from poetry to prose. How
could it be otherwise, when he was but five-and-twenty, and engaged
for the first time? Threescore years and ten is all too short a time to
learn what woman really is, and every student leaves this world with the
conviction that of the thousand sides which the female of man presents
to the male of woman, not one reveals the being he desires to know.
There is always a deep below a deep; a veil behind a veil, a sphere
within a sphere.

“It's most remarkable,” said the puzzled man in this instance.

“What is?” asked the enigma promptly.

To avoid an argument which he could not sustain, Archie switched his on
to the weather.

“This day in September; one could well believe that it is still the
month of roses.”

“What! With those wilted hedges and falling leaves and reaped fields and
golden haystacks, and--and--”

She glanced around for further illustrations in the way of
contradiction.

“I can see all those things, dear, and the misplaced day also!”

“Misplaced?”

“July day slipped into September. It comes into the landscape of this
autumn month, as does love into the hearts of an elderly couple who feel
too late the supreme passion.”

Lucy's eyes swept the prospect, and the spring-like sunshine,
revealing all too clearly the wrinkles of aging Nature, assisted her
comprehension.

“I understand. Yet youth has its wisdom.”

“And old age its experience. The law of compensation, my dearest. But I
don't see,” he added reflectively, “what your remark and my answer have
to do with the view,” whereat Lucy declared that his wits wandered.

Within the last five minutes they had emerged from a sunken lane where
the hedges were white with dust and dry with heat to a vast open space,
apparently at the World's-End. Here the saltings spread raggedly towards
the stately stream of the Thames, intersected by dykes and ditches,
by earthen ramparts, crooked fences, sod walls, and irregular lines of
stunted trees following the water-courses. The marshes were shaggy with
reeds and rushes, and brown with coarse, fading herbage, although here
and there gleamed emerald-hued patches of water-soaked soil, fit for
fairy-rings. Beyond a moderately high embankment of turf and timber, the
lovers could see the broad river, sweeping eastward to the Nore, with
homeward-bound and outward-faring ships afloat on its golden tide.
Across the gleaming waters, from where they lipped their banks to the
foot of low domestic Kentish hills, stretched alluvial lands, sparsely
timbered, and in the clear sunshine clusters of houses, great and small,
factories with tall, smoky chimneys, clumps of trees and rigid railway
lines could be discerned. The landscape was not beautiful, in spite of
the sun's profuse gildings, but to the lovers it appeared a Paradise.
Cupid, lord of gods and men, had bestowed on them the usual rose-colored
spectacles which form an important part of his stock-in-trade, and they
looked abroad on a fairy world. Was not SHE there: was not HE there:
could Romeo or Juliet desire more?

From their feet ran the slim, straight causeway, which was the
King's highway of the district--a trim, prim line of white above the
picturesque disorder of the marshes. It skirted the low-lying fields at
the foot of the uplands and slipped through an iron gate to end in
the far distance at the gigantic portal of The Fort. This was a
squat, ungainly pile of rugged gray stone, symmetrically built, but
aggressively ugly in its very regularity, since it insulted the graceful
curves of Nature everywhere discernible. It stood nakedly amidst the
bare, bleak meadows glittering with pools of still water, with not even
the leaf of a creeper to soften its menacing walls, although above them
appeared the full-foliaged tops of trees planted in the barrack-yard. It
looked as though the grim walls belted a secret orchard. What with
the frowning battlements, the very few windows diminutive and closely
barred, the sullen entrance and the absence of any gracious greenery,
Gartley Fort resembled the Castle of Giant Despair. On the hither side,
but invisible to the lovers, great cannons scowled on the river they
protected, and, when they spoke, received answer from smaller guns
across the stream. There less extensive forts were concealed amidst
trees and masked by turf embankments, to watch and guard the golden
argosies of London commerce.

Lucy, always impressionable, shivered with her hand in that of Archie's,
as she stared at the landscape, melancholy even in the brilliant
sunshine.

“I should hate to live in Gartley Fort,” said she abruptly. “One might
as well be in jail.”

“If you marry Random you will have to live there, or on a baggage wagon.
He is R.G.A. captain, remember, and has to go where glory calls him,
like a good soldier.”

“Glory can call until glory is hoarse for me,” retorted the girl
candidly. “I prefer an artist's studio to a camp.”

“Why?” asked Hope, laughing at her vehemence.

“The reason is obvious. I love the artist.”

“And if you loved the soldier?”

“I should mount the baggage wagon and make him Bovril when he was
wounded. But for you, dear, I shall cook and sew and bake and--”

“Stop! stop! I want a wife, not a housekeeper.”

“Every sensible man wants the two in one.”

“But you should be a queen, darling.”

“Not with my own consent, Archie: the work is much too hard. Existence
on six pounds a week with you will be more amusing. We can take a
cottage, you know, and live, the simple life in Gartley village, until
you become the P.R.A., and I can be Lady Hope, to walk in silk attire.”

“You shall be Queen of the Earth, darling, and walk alone.”

“How dull! I would much rather walk with you. And that reminds me that
dinner is waiting. Let us take the short cut home through the village.
On the way you can tell me exactly how you bought me from my step-father
for one thousand pounds.”

Archie Hope frowned at the incurable obstinacy of the sex. “I didn't buy
you, dearest: how many times do you wish me to deny a sale which never
took place? I merely obtained your step-father's consent to our marriage
in the near future.”

“As if he had anything to do with my marriage, being only my
step-father, and having, in my eyes, no authority. In what way did you
get his consent--his unnecessary consent,” she repeated with emphasis.

Of course it was waste of breath to argue with a woman who had made up
her mind. The two began to walk towards the village along the causeway,
and Hope cleared his throat to explain--patiently as to a child.

“You know that your step-father--Professor Braddock--is crazy on the
subject of mummies?”

Lucy nodded in her pretty wilful way. “He is an Egyptologist.”

“Quite so, but less famous and rich than he should be, considering his
knowledge of dry-as-dust antiquities. Well, then, to make a long story
short, he told me that he greatly desired to examine into the difference
between the Egyptians and the Peruvians, with regard to the embalming of
the dead.”

“I always thought that he was too fond of Egypt to bother about any
other country,” said Lucy sapiently.

“My dear, it isn't the country he cares about, but the civilization of
the past. The Incas embalmed their dead, as did the Egyptians, and
in some way the Professor heard of a Royal Mummy, swathed in green
bandages--so he described it to me.”

“It should be called an Irish mummy,” said Lucy flippantly. “Well?”

“This mummy is in possession of a man at Malta, and Professor Braddock,
hearing that it was for sale for one thousand pounds--”

“Oh!” interrupted the girl vivaciously, “so this was why father sent
Sidney Bolton away six weeks ago?”

“Yes. As you know, Bolton is your step-father's assistant, and is as
crazy as the Professor on the subject of Egypt. I asked the Professor if
he would allow me to marry you--”

“Quite unnecessary,” interpolated Lucy briskly.

Archie passed over the remark to evade an argument.

“When I asked him, he said that he wished you to marry Random, who is
rich. I pointed out that you loved me and not Random, and that Random
was on a yachting cruise, while I was on the spot. He then said that he
could not wait for the return of Random, and would give me a chance.”

“What did he mean by that?”

“Well, it seems that he was in a hurry to get this Green Mummy from
Malta, as he feared lest some other person should snap it up. This was
two months ago, remember, and Professor Braddock wanted the cash at
once. Had Random been here he could have supplied it, but as Random was
away he told me that if I handed over one thousand pounds to purchase
the mummy, that he would permit our engagement now, and our marriage in
six months. I saw my chance and took it, for your step-father has always
been an obstacle in our path, Lucy, dear. In a week Professor Braddock
had the money, as I sold out some of my investments to get it. He then
sent Bolton to Malta in a tramp steamer for the sake of cheapness, and
now expects him back with the Green Mummy.”

“Has Sidney bought it?”

“Yes. He got it for nine hundred pounds, the Professor told me, and is
bringing it back in The Diver--that's the same tramp steamer in which
he went to Malta. So that's the whole story, and you can see there is
no question of you being bought. The thousand pounds went to get your
father's consent.”

“He is not my father,” snapped Lucy, finding nothing else to say.

“You call him so.”

“That is only from habit. I can't call him Mr. Braddock, or Professor
Braddock, when I live with him, so `father' is the sole mode of address
left to me. And after all,” she added, taking her lover's arm, “I
like the Professor; he is very kind and good, although extremely
absent-minded. And I am glad he has consented, for he worried me a lot
to marry Sir Frank Random. I am glad you bought me.”

“But I didn't,” cried the exasperated lover.

“I think you did, and you shouldn't have diminished your income by
buying what you could have had for nothing.”

Archie shrugged his shoulders. It was vain to combat her fixed idea.

“I have still three hundred a year left. And you were worth buying.”

“You have no right to talk of me as though I had been bought.”

The young man gasped. “But you said--”

“Oh, what does it matter what I said. I am going to marry you on three
hundred a year, so there it is. I suppose when Bolton returns, my father
will be glad to see the back of me, and then will go to Egypt with
Sidney to explore this secret tomb he is always talking about.”

“That expedition will require more than a thousand pounds,” said Archie
dryly. “The Professor explained the obstacles to me. However, his doings
have nothing to do with us, darling. Let Professor Braddock fumble
amongst the dead if he likes. We live!”

“Apart,” sighed Lucy.

“Only for the next six months; then we can get our cottage and live on
love, my dearest.”

“Plus three hundred a year,” said the girl sensibly then she added, “Oh,
poor Frank Random!”

“Lucy,” cried her lover indignantly.

“Well, I was only pitying him. He's a nice man, and you can't expect him
to be pleased at our marriage.”

“Perhaps,” said Hope in an icy tone, “you would like him to be the
bridegroom. If so, there is still time.”

“Silly boy!” She took his arm. “As I have been bought, you know that I
can't run away from my purchaser.”

“You denied being bought just now. It seems to me, Lucy, that I am to
marry a weather-cock.”

“That is only an impolite name for a woman, dear. You have no sense of
humor, Frank, or you would call me an April lady.”

“Because you change every five minutes. H'm! It's puzzling.”

“Is it? Perhaps you would like me to resemble Widow Anne, who is always
funereal. Here she is, looking like Niobe.”

They were strolling through Gartley village by this time, and the
cottagers came to their doors and front gates to look at the handsome
young couple. Everyone knew of the engagement, and approved of the same,
although some hinted that Lucy Kendal would have been wiser to marry
the soldier-baronet. Amongst these was Widow Anne, who really was Mrs.
Bolton, the mother of Sidney, a dismal female invariably arrayed in
rusty, stuffy, aggressive mourning, although her husband had been dead
for over twenty years. Because of this same mourning, and because she
was always talking of the dead, she was called “Widow Anne,” and looked
on the appellation as a compliment to her fidelity. At the present
moment she stood at the gate of her tiny garden, mopping her red eyes
with a dingy handkerchief.

“Ah, young love, young love, my lady,” she groaned, when the couple
passed, for she always gave Lucy a title as though she really and truly
had become the wife of Sir Frank, “but who knows how long it may last?”

“As long as we do,” retorted Lucy, annoyed by this prophetic speech.

Widow Anne groaned with relish. “So me and Aaron, as is dead and gone,
thought, my lady. But in six months he was knocking the head off me.”

“The man who would lay his hand on a woman save in the way of--”

“Oh, Archie, what nonsense, you talk!” cried Miss Kendal pettishly.

“Ah!” sighed the woman of experience, “I called it nonsense too, my
lady, afore Aaron, who now lies with the worms, laid me out with a
flat-iron. Men's fit for jails only, as I allays says.”

“A nice opinion you have of our sex,” remarked Archie dryly.

“I have, sir. I could tell you things as would make your head waggle
with horror on there shoulders of yours.”

“What about your son Sidney? Is he also wicked?”

“He would be if he had the strength, which he hasn't,” exclaimed the
widow with uncomplimentary fervor. “He's Aaron's son, and Aaron hadn't
much to learn from them as is where he's gone too,” and she looked
downward significantly.

“Sidney is a decent young fellow,” said Lucy sharply. “How dare you
miscall your own flesh and blood, Widow Anne? My father thinks a great
deal of Sidney, else he would not have sent him to Malta. Do try and be
cheerful, there's a good soul. Sidney will tell you plenty to make you
laugh, when he comes home.”

“If he ever does come home,” sighed the old woman.

“What do you mean by that?”

“Oh, it's all very well asking questions as can't be answered nohow, my
lady, but I be all of a mubble-fubble, that I be.”

“What is a mubble-fubble?” asked Hope, staring.

“It's a queer-like feeling of death and sorrow and tears of blood and
not lifting your head for groans,” said Widow Anne incoherently, “and
there's meanings in mubble-fumbles, as we're told in Scripture. Not but
what the Perfesser's been a kind gentleman to Sid in taking him
from going round with the laundry cart, and eddicating him to watch
camphorated corpses: not as what I'd like to keep an eye on them things
myself. But there's no more watching for my boy Sid, as I dreamed.”

“What did you dream?” asked Lucy curiously.

Widow Anne threw up two gnarled hands, wrinkled with age and laundry
work, screwing up her face meanwhile.

“I dreamed of battle and murder and sudden death, my lady, with Sid in
his cold grave playing on a harp, angel-like. Yes!” she folded her rusty
shawl tightly round her spare form and nodded, “there was Sid, looking
beautiful in his coffin, and cut into a hash, as you might say, with--”

“Ugh! ugh!” shuddered Lucy, and Archie strove to draw her away.

“With murder written all over his poor face,” pursued the widow. “And
I woke up screeching with cramp in my legs and pains in my lungs, and
beatings in my heart, and stiffness in my--”

“Oh, hang it, shut up!” shouted Archie, seeing that Lucy was growing
pale at this ghoulish recital, “don't be fool, woman. Professor Braddock
says that Bolton'll be back in three days with the mummy he has been
sent to fetch from Malta. You have been having nightmare! Don't you see
how you are frightening Miss Kendal?”

“'The Witch' of Endor, sir--”

“Deuce take the Witch of Endor and you also. There's a shilling. Go and
drink yourself into a more cheery frame of mind.”

Widow Anne bit the shilling with one of her two remaining teeth, and
dropped a curtsey.

“You're a good, kind gentleman,” she smirked, cheered at the idea of
unlimited gin. “And when my boy Sid do come home a corpse, I hope you'll
come to the funeral, sir.”

“What a raven!” said Lucy, as Widow Anne toddled away in the direction
of the one public-house in Gartley village.

“I don't wonder that the late Mr. Bolton laid her out with a flat-iron.
To slay such a woman would be meritorious.”

“I wonder how she came to be the mother of Sidney,” said Miss Kendal
reflectively, as they resumed their walk, “he's such a clever, smart,
and handsome young man.”

“I think Bolton owes everything to the Professor's teaching and example,
Lucy,” replied her lover. “He was an uncouth lad, I understand, when
your step-father took him into the house six years ago. Now he is quite
presentable. I shouldn't wonder if he married Mrs. Jasher.”

“H'm! I rather think Mrs. Jasher admires the Professor.”

“Oh, he'll never marry her. If she were a mummy there might be a chance,
of course, but as a human being the Professor will never look at her.”

“I don't know so much about that, Archie. Mrs. Jasher is attractive.”

Hope laughed. “In a mutton-dressed-as-lamb way, no doubt.”

“And she has money. My father is poor and so--”

“You make up a match at once, as every woman will do. Well, let us get
back to the Pyramids, and see how the flirtation is progressing.”

Lucy walked on for a few steps in silence. “Do you believe in Mrs.
Bolton's dream, Archie?”

“No! I believe she eats heavy suppers. Bolton will return quite safe; he
is a clever fellow, not easily taken advantage of. Don't bother any more
about Widow Anne and her dismal prophecies.”

“I'll try not to,” replied Lucy dutifully. “All the same, I wish she had
not told me her dream,” and she shivered.




CHAPTER II. PROFESSOR BRADDOCK


There was only one really palatial mansion in Gartley, and that was the
ancient Georgian house known as the Pyramids. Lucy's step-father had
given the place this eccentric name on taking up his abode there some
ten years previously. Before that time the dwelling had been occupied by
the Lord of the Manor and his family. But now the old squire was dead,
and his impecunious children were scattered to the four quarters of the
globe in search of money with which to rebuild their ruined fortunes. As
the village was somewhat isolated and rather unhealthily situated in a
marshy country, the huge, roomy old Grange had not been easy to let,
and had proved quite impossible to sell. Under these disastrous
circumstances, Professor Braddock--who described himself humorously as
a scientific pauper--had obtained the tenancy at a ridiculously low
rental, much to his satisfaction.

Many people would have paid money to avoid exile in these damp waste
lands, which, as it were, fringed civilization, but their loneliness and
desolation suited the Professor exactly. He required ample room for his
Egyptian collection, with plenty of time to decipher hieroglyphics and
study perished dynasties of the Nile Valley. The world of the present
day did not interest Braddock in the least. He lived almost continuously
on that portion of the mental plane which had to do with the far-distant
past, and only concerned himself with physical existence, when it
consisted of mummies and mystic beetles, sepulchral ornaments,
pictured documents, hawk-headed deities and suchlike things of almost
inconceivable antiquity. He rarely walked abroad and was invariably
late for meals, save when he missed any particular one altogether, which
happened frequently. Absent-minded in conversation, untidy in dress,
unpractical in business, dreamy in manner, Professor Braddock lived
solely for archaeology. That such a man should have taken to himself a
wife was mystery.

Yet he had been married fifteen years before to a widow, who possessed
a limited income and one small child. It was the opportunity of
securing the use of a steady income which had decoyed Braddock into the
matrimonial snare of Mrs. Kendal. To put it plainly, he had married the
agreeable widow for her money, although he could scarcely be called a
fortune-hunter. Like Eugene Aram, he desired cash to assist learning,
and as that scholar had committed murder to secure what he wanted, so
did the Professor marry to obtain his ends. These were to have someone
to manage the house, and to be set free from the necessity of earning
his bread, so that he might indulge in pursuits more pleasurable than
money-making. Mrs. Kendal was a placid, phlegmatic lady, who liked
rather than loved the Professor, and who desired him more as a companion
than as a husband. With Braddock she did not arrange a romantic marriage
so much as enter into a congenial partnership. She wanted a man in the
house, and he desired freedom from pecuniary embarrassment. On these
lines the prosaic bargain was struck, and Mrs. Kendal became the
Professor's wife with entirely successful results. She gave her
husband a home, and her child a father, who became fond of Lucy, and
who--considering he was merely an amateur parent--acted admirably.

But this sensible partnership lasted only for five years. Mrs. Braddock
died of a chill on the liver and left her five hundred a year to the
Professor for life, with remainder to Lucy, then a small girl of ten. It
was at this critical moment that Braddock became a practical man for
the first and last time in his dreamy life. He buried his wife with
unfeigned regret--for he had been sincerely attached to her in his
absent-minded way--and sent Lucy to a Hampstead boarding school. After
an interview with his late wife's lawyer to see that the income was
safe, he sought for a house in the country, and quickly discovered
Gartley Grange, which no one would take because of its isolation. Within
three months from the burial of Mrs. Braddock, the widower had removed
himself and his collection to Gartley, and had renamed his new abode
the Pyramids. Here he dwelt quietly and enjoyably--from his dry-as-dust
point of view--for ten years, and here Lucy Kendal had come when her
education was completed. The arrival of a marriageable young lady made
no difference in the Professor's habits, and he hailed her thankfully as
the successor to her mother in managing the small establishment. It is
to be feared that Braddock was somewhat selfish in his views, but the
fixed idea of archaeological research made him egotistical.

The mansion was three-story, flat-roofed, extremely ugly and
unexpectedly comfortable. Built of mellow red brick with dingy white
stone facings, it stood a few yards back from the roadway which ran from
Gartley Fort through the village, and, at the precise point where the
Pyramids was situated, curved abruptly through woodlands to terminate a
mile away, at Jessum, the local station of the Thames Railway Line. An
iron railing, embedded in moldering stone work, divided the narrow front
garden from the road, and on either side of the door--which could be
reached by five shallow steps--grew two small yew trees, smartly clipped
and trimmed into cones of dull green. These yews possessed some magical
significance, which Professor Braddock would occasionally explain to
chance visitors interested in occult matters; for, amongst other things
Egyptian, the archaeologist searched into the magic of the Sons of
Khem, and insisted that there was more truth than superstition in their
enchantments.

Braddock used all the vast rooms of the ground floor to house his
collection of antiquities, which he had acquired through many laborious
years. He dwelt entirely in this museum, as his bedroom adjoined
his study, and he frequently devoured his hurried meals amongst the
brilliantly tinted mummy cases. The embalmed dead populated his world,
and only now and then, when Lucy insisted, did he ascend to the first
floor, which was her particular abode. Here was the drawing-room,
the dining-room and Lucy's boudoir; here also were sundry bedrooms,
furnished and unfurnished, in one of which Miss Kendal slept, while
the others remained vacant for chance visitors, principally from
the scientific world. The third story was devoted to the cook, her
husband--who acted as gardener--and to the house parlor maid, a
composite domestic, who worked from morning until night in keeping
the great house clean. During the day these servants attended to their
business in a comfortable basement, where the cook ruled supreme. At the
back of the mansion stretched a fairly large kitchen garden, to which
the cook's husband devoted his attention. This was the entire domain
belonging to the tenant, as, of course, the Professor did not rent
the arable acres and comfortable farms which had belonged to the
dispossessed family.

Everything in the house went smoothly, as Lucy was a methodical young
person, who went by the clock and the almanac. Braddock little knew how
much of his undeniable comfort he owed to her fostering care; for,
prior to her return from school, he had been robbed right and left by
unscrupulous domestics. When his step-daughter arrived he simply handed
over the keys and the housekeeping money--a fixed sum--and gave her
strict instructions not to bother him. Miss Kendal faithfully observed
this injunction, as she enjoyed being undisputed mistress, and knew
that, so long as her step-father had his meals, his bed, his bath
and his clothes, he required nothing save the constant society of his
beloved mummies, of which no one wished to deprive him. These he dusted
and cleansed and rearranged himself. Not even Lucy dared to invade the
museum, and the mere mention of spring cleaning drove the Professor into
displaying frantic rage, in which he used bad language.

On returning from her walk with Archie, the girl had lured her
step-father into assuming a rusty dress suit, which had done service for
many years, and had coaxed him into a promise to be present at dinner.
Mrs. Jasher, the lively widow of the district, was coming, and Braddock
approved of a woman who looked up to him as the one wise man in the
world. Even science is susceptible to judicious flattery, and Mrs.
Jasher was never backward in putting her admiration into words.
Female gossip declared that the widow wished to become the second Mrs.
Braddock, but if this was really the case, she had but small chance of
gaining her end. The Professor had once sacrificed his liberty to secure
a competence, and, having acquired five hundred a year, was not inclined
for a second matrimonial venture. Had the widow been a dollar heiress
with a million at her back he would not have troubled to place a ring
on her finger. And certainly Mrs. Jasher had little to gain from such a
dreary marriage, beyond a collection of rubbish--as she said--and a
dull country house situated in a district inhabited solely by peasants
belonging to Saxon times.

Archie Hope left Lucy at the door of the Pyramids and repaired to his
village lodgings, for the purpose of assuming evening dress. Lucy, being
her own housekeeper, assisted the overworked parlor maid to lay and
decorate the table before receiving the guests. Thus Mrs. Jasher found
no one in the drawing-room to welcome her, and, taking the privilege of
old friendship, descended to beard Braddock in his den. The Professor
raised his eyes from a newly bought scarabeus to behold a stout little
lady smiling on him from the doorway. He did not appear to be grateful
for the interruption, but Mrs. Jasher was not at all dismayed, being
a man-hunter by profession. Besides, she saw that Braddock was in the
clouds as usual, and would have received the King himself in the same
absent-minded manner.

“Pouf! what an abominal smell!” exclaimed the widow, holding a
flimsy lace handkerchief to her nose. “Kind of camphor-sandal-wood
charnel-house smell. I wonder you are not asphyxiated. Pouf! Ugh!
Bur-r-r

The Professor stared at her with cold, fishy eyes. “Did you speak?”

“Oh, dear me, yes, and you don't even ask me to take a chair. If I were
a nasty stuffy mummy, now, you would be embracing me by, this time.
Don't you know that I have come to dinner, you silly man?” and she
tapped him playfully with her closed fan.

“I have had dinner,” said Braddock, egotistic as usual.

“No, you have not.” Mrs. Jasher spoke positively, and pointed to a
small tray of untouched food on the side table. “You have not even had
luncheon. You must live on air, like a chameleon--or on love, perhaps,”
 she ended in a significantly tender tone.

But she might as well have spoken to the granite image of Horus in the
corner. Braddock merely rubbed his chin and stared harder than ever at
the glittering visitor.

“Dear me!” he said innocently. “I must have forgotten to eat.
Lamplight!” he looked round vaguely. “Of course, I remember lighting the
lamps. Time has gone by very rapidly. I am really hungry.” He paused to
make sure, then repeated his remark in a more positive manner. “Yes, I
am very hungry, Mrs. Jasher.” He looked at her as though she had just
entered. “Of course, Mrs. Jasher. Do you wish to see me about anything
particular?”

The widow frowned at his inattention, and then laughed. It was
impossible to be angry with this dreamer.

“I have come to dinner, Professor. Do try and wake up; you are half
asleep and half starved, too, I expect.”

“I certainly feel unaccountably hungry,” admitted Braddock cautiously.

“Unaccountably, when you have eaten nothing since breakfast. You weird
man, I believe you are a mummy yourself.”

But the Professor had again returned to examine the scarabeus, this time
with a powerful magnifying glass.

“It certainly belongs to the twentieth dynasty,” he murmured, wrinkling
his brows.

Mrs. Jasher stamped and flirted her fan pettishly. The creature's soul,
she decided, was certainly not in his body, and until it came back he
would continue to ignore her. With the annoyance of a woman who is
not getting her own way, she leaned back in Braddock's one comfortable
chair--which she had unerringly selected--and examined him intently.
Perhaps the gossips were correct, and she was trying to imagine what
kind of a husband he would make. But whatever might be her thoughts, she
eyed Braddock as earnestly as Braddock eyed the scarabeus.

Outwardly the Professor did not appear like the savant he was reported
to be. He was small of stature, plump of body, rosy as a little Cupid,
and extraordinarily youthful, considering his fifty-odd years of
scientific wear and tear. With a smooth, clean-shaven face, plentiful
white hair like spun silk, and neat feet and hands, he did not look his
age. The dreamy look in his small blue eyes was rather belied by the
hardness of his thin-lipped mouth, and by the pugnacious push of his
jaw. The eyes and the dome-like forehead hinted that brain without much
originality; but the lower part of this contradictory countenance might
have belonged to a prize-fighter. Nevertheless, Braddock's plumpness did
away to a considerable extent with his aggressive look. It was certainly
latent, but only came to the surface when he fought with a brother
savant over some tomb-dweller from Thebes. In the soft lamplight he
looked like a fighting cherub, and it was a pity--in the interests of
art--that the hairless pink and white face did not surmount a pair of
wings rather than a rusty and ill-fitting dress suit.

“He's nane sa dafty as he looks,” thought Mrs. Jasher, who was Scotch,
although she claimed to be cosmopolitan. “With his mummies he is all
right, but outside those he might be difficult to manage. And these
things,” she glanced round the shadowy room, crowded with the dead
and their earthly belongings. “I don't think I would care to marry the
British Museum. Too much like hard work, and I am not so young as I
was.”

The near mirror--a polished silver one, which had belonged, ages ago, to
some coquette of Memphis--denied this uncomplimentary thought, for Mrs.
Jasher did not look a day over thirty, although her birth certificate
set her down as forty-five. In the lamplight she might have passed for
even younger, so carefully had she preserved what remained to her of
youth. She assuredly was somewhat stout, and never had been so tall
as she desired to be. But the lines of her plump figure were still
discernible in the cunningly cut gown, and she carried her little self
with such mighty dignity that people overlooked the mortifying height of
a trifle over five feet. Her features were small and neat, but her large
blue eyes were so noticeable and melting that those on whom she turned
them ignored the lack of boldness in chin and nose. Her hair was brown
and arranged in the latest fashion, while her complexion was so fresh
and pink that, if she did paint--as jealous women averred--she must
have been quite an artist with the hare's foot and the rouge pot and the
necessary powder puff.

Mrs. Jasher's clothes repaid the thought she expended upon them, and
she was artistic in this as in other things. Dressed in a crocus-yellow
gown, with short sleeves to reveal her beautiful arms, and cut low to
display her splendid bust, she looked perfectly dressed. A woman would
have declared the wide-netted black lace with which the dress was draped
to be cheap, and would have hinted that the widow wore too many jewels
in her hair, on her corsage, round her arms, and ridiculously gaudy
rings on her fingers. This might have been true, for Mrs. Jasher
sparkled like the Milky Way at every movement; but the gleam of gold
and the flash of gems seemed to suit her opulent beauty. Her slightest
movement wafted around her a strange Chinese perfume, which she
obtained--so she said--from a friend of her late husband's who was in
the British Embassy at Pekin. No one possessed this especial perfume but
Mrs. Jasher, and anyone who had previously met her, meeting her in the
darkness, could have guessed at her identity. With a smile to show
her white teeth, with her golden-hued dress and glittering jewels, the
pretty widow glowed in that glimmering room like a tropical bird.

The Professor raised his dreamy eyes and laid the beetle on one side,
when his brain fully grasped that this charming vision was waiting to
be entertained. She was better to look upon even than the beloved
scarabeus, and he advanced to shake hands as though she had just entered
the room. Mrs. Jasher--knowing his ways--rose to extend her hand, and
the two small, stout figures looked absurdly like a pair of chubby
Dresden ornaments which had stepped from the mantelshelf.

“Dear lady, I am glad to see you. You have--you have”--the Professor
reflected, and then came back with a rush to the present century--“you
have come to dinner, if I mistake not.”

“Lucy asked me a week ago,” she replied tartly, for no woman likes to be
neglected for a mere beetle, however ancient.

“Then you will certainly get a good dinner,” said Braddock, waving his
plump white hands. “Lucy is an excellent housekeeper. I have no fault
to find with her--no fault at all. But she is obstinate--oh, very
obstinate, as her mother was. Do you know, dear lady, that in a papyrus
scroll which I lately acquired I found the recipe for a genuine Egyptian
dish, which Amenemha--the last Pharaoh of the eleventh dynasty, you
know--might have eaten, and probably did eat. I desired Lucy to serve it
to-night, but she refused, much to my annoyance. The ingredients, which
had to do with roasted gazelle, were oil and coriander seed and--if my
memory serves me--asafoetida.”

“Ugh!” Mrs. Jasher's handkerchief went again to her mouth. “Say no
more, Professor; your dish sounds horrid. I don't wish to eat it, and be
turned into a mummy before my time.”

“You would make a really beautiful mummy,” said Braddock, paying what
he conceived was a compliment; “and, should you die, I shall certainly
attend to your embalming, if you prefer that to cremation.”

“You dreadful man!” cried the widow, turning pale and shrinking. “Why, I
really believe that you would like to see me packed away in one of those
disgusting coffins.”

“Disgusting!” cried the outraged Professor, striking one of the
brilliantly tinted cases. “Can you call so beautiful a specimen of
sepulchral art disgusting? Look at the colors, at the regularity of
the hieroglyphics--why, the history of the dead is set out in this
magnificent series of pictures.” He adjusted his pince-nez and began
to read, “The Osirian, Scemiophis that is a female name, Mrs.
Jasher--who--”

“I don't want to have my history written on my coffin,” interrupted the
widow hysterically, for this funereal talk frightened her. “It would
take much more space than a mummy case upon which to write it. My life
has been volcanic, I can tell you. By the way,” she added hurriedly,
seeing that Braddock was on the eve of resuming the reading, “tell me
about your Inca mummy. Has it arrived?”

The Professor immediately followed the false trail. “Not yet,” he said
briskly, rubbing his smooth hands, “but in three days I expect The Diver
will be at Pierside, and Sidney will bring the mummy on here. I shall
unpack it at once and learn exactly how the ancient Peruvians embalmed
their dead. Doubtless they learned the art from--”

“The Egyptians,” ventured Mrs. Jasher rashly.

Braddock glared. “Nothing of the sort, dear lady,” he snorted angrily.
“Absurd, ridiculous! I am inclined to believe that Egypt was merely a
colony of that vast island of Atlantis mentioned by Plato. There--if
my theory is correct--civilization begun, and the kings of
Atlantis--doubtless the gods of historical tribes--governed the whole
world, including that portion which we now term South America.”

“Do you mean to say that there were Yankees in those days?” inquired
Mrs. Jasher frivolously.

The Professor tucked his hands under his shabby coattails and strode
up and down the room warming his rage, which was provoked by such
ignorance.

“Good heavens, madam, where have you lived?” he exclaimed
explosively--“are you a fool, or merely an ignorant woman? I am talking
of prehistoric times, thousands of years ago, when you were probably a
stray atom embedded in the slime.”

“Oh, you horrid creature!” cried Mrs. Jasher indignantly, and was about
to give Braddock her opinion, if only to show him that she could hold
her own, when the door opened.

“How are you, Mrs. Jasher?” said Lucy, advancing.

“Here am I and here is Archie. Dinner is ready. And you--”

“I am very hungry,” said Mrs. Jasher. “I have been called an atom of the
slime,” then she laughed and took possession of young Hope.

Lucy wrinkled her brow; she did not approve of the widow's man-annexing
instinct.




CHAPTER III. A MYSTERIOUS TOMB


One member of the Braddock household was not included in the general
staff, being a mere appendage of the Professor himself. This was a
dwarfish, misshapen Kanaka, a pigmy in height, but a giant in breadth,
with short, thick legs, and long, powerful arms. He had a large head,
and a somewhat handsome face, with melancholy black eyes and a fine set
of white teeth. Like most Polynesians, his skin was of a pale bronze and
elaborately tattooed, even the cheeks and chin being scored with curves
and straight lines of mystical import. But the most noticeable thing
about him was his huge mop of frizzled hair, which, by some process,
known only to himself, he usually dyed a vivid yellow. The flaring locks
streaming from his head made him resemble a Peruvian image of the sun,
and it was this peculiar coiffure which had procured for him the odd
name of Cockatoo. The fact that this grotesque creature invariably wore
a white drill suit, emphasized still more the suggestion of his likeness
to an Australian parrot.

Cockatoo had come from the Solomon Islands in his teens to the colony
of Queensland, to work on the plantations, and there the Professor had
picked him up as his body servant. When Braddock returned to marry Mrs.
Kendal, the boy had refused to leave him, although it was represented
to the young savage that he was somewhat too barbaric for sober England.
Finally, the Professor had consented to bring him over seas, and had
never regretted doing so, for Cockatoo, finding his scientific master a
true friend, worshipped him as a visible god. Having been captured when
young by Pacific black-birders, he talked excellent English, and from
contact with the necessary restraints of civilization was, on the whole,
extremely well behaved. Occasionally, when teased by the villagers and
his fellow-servants, he would break into childish rages, which bordered
on the dangerous. But a word from Braddock always quieted him, and when
penitent he would crawl like a whipped dog to the feet of his divinity.
For the most part he lived entirely in the museum, looking after the
collection and guarding it from harm. Lucy--who had a horror of the
creature's uncanny looks--objected to Cockatoo waiting at the table,
and it was only on rare occasions that he was permitted to assist the
harassed parlormaid. On this night the Kanaka acted excellently as a
butler, and crept softly round the table, attending to the needs of the
diners. He was an admirable servant, deft and handy, but his blue-lined
face and squat figure together with the obtrusively golden halo, rather
worried Mrs. Jasher. And, indeed, in spite of custom, Lucy also felt
uncomfortable when this gnome hovered at her elbow. It looked as though
one of the fantastical idols from the museum below had come to haunt the
living.

“I do not like that Golliwog,” breathed Mrs. Jasher to her host, when
Cockatoo was at the sideboard. “He gives me the creeps.”

“Imagination, my dear lady, pure imagination. Why should we not have a
picturesque animal to wait upon us?”

“He would wait picturesquely enough at a cannibal feast,” suggested
Archie, with a laugh.

“Don't!” murmured Lucy, with a shiver. “I shall not be able to eat my
dinner if you talk so.”

“Odd that Hope should say what he has said,” observed Braddock
confidently to the widow. “Cockatoo comes from a cannibal island, and
doubtless has seen the consumption of human flesh. No, no, my dear lady,
do not look so alarmed. I don't think he has eaten any, as he was taken
to Queensland long before he could participate in such banquets. He is a
very decent animal.”

“A very dangerous one, I fancy,” retorted Mrs. Jasher, who looked pale.

“Only when he loses his temper, and I'm always able to suppress that
when it is at its worst. You are not eating your meat, my dear lady.”

“Can you wonder at it, and you talk of cannibals?”

“Let us change the conversation to cereals,” suggested Hope, whose
appetite was of the best--“wheat, for instance. In this queer little
village I notice the houses are divided by a field of wheat. It seems
wrong somehow for corn to be bunched up with houses.”

“That's old Farmer Jenkins,” said Lucy vivaciously; “he owns three or
four acres near the public-house and will not allow them to be built
over, although he has been offered a lot of money. I noticed myself,
Archie, the oddity of finding a cornfield surrounded by cottages. It's
like Alice in Wonderland.”

“But fancy any one offering money for land here,” observed Hope, toying
with his claret glass, which had just been refilled, by the attentive
Cockatoo, “at the Back-of-Beyond, as it were. I shouldn't care to live
here--the neighborhood is so desolate.”

“All the same you do live here!” interposed Mrs. Jasher smartly, and
with a roguish glance at Lucy.

Archie caught the glance and saw the blush on Miss Kendal's face.

“You have answered your question yourself, Mrs. Jasher,” he--said,
smiling. “I have the inducement you hint at to remain here, and
certainly, as a landscape painter, I admire the marshes and sunsets. As
an artist and an engaged man I stop in Gartley, otherwise I should clear
out. But I fail to see why a lady of your attractions should--”

“I may have a sentimental reason also,” interrupted the widow, with a
sly glance at the absent-minded Professor, who was drawing hieroglyphics
on the table-cloth with a fork; “also, my cottage is cheap and very
comfortable. The late Mr. Jasher did not leave me sufficient money to
live in London. He was a consul in China, you know, and consuls are
never very well paid. I will come in for a large income, however.”

“Indeed,” said Lucy politely, and wondering why Mrs. Jasher was so
communicative. “Soon I hope.”

“It may be very soon. My brother, you know--a merchant in Pekin. He
has come home to die, and is unmarried. When he does die, I shall go to
London. But,” added the widow, meditatively and glancing again at the
Professor, “I shall be sorry to leave dear Gartley. Still, the memory
of happy hours spent in this house will always remain with me. Ah me! ah
me!” and she put her handkerchief to her eyes.

Lucy telegraphed to Archie that the widow was a humbug, and Archie
telegraphed back that he quite agreed with her. But the Professor, whom
the momentary silence had brought back to the present century, looked up
and asked Lucy if the dinner was finished.

“I have to do some work this evening,” said the Professor.

“Oh, father, when you said that you would take a holiday,” said Lucy
reproachfully.

“I am doing so now. Look at the precious minutes I am wasting in
eating, my dear. Life is short and much remains to be done in the way
of Egyptian exploration. There is the sepulchre of Queen Tahoser. If I
could only enter that,” and he sighed, while helping himself to cream.

“Why don't you?” asked Mrs. Jasher, who was beginning to give up her
pursuit of Braddock, for it was no use wooing a man whose interests
centered entirely in Egyptian tombs.

“I have yet to discover it,” said the Professor simply; then, warming to
the congenial theme, he glanced around and delivered a short historical
lecture. “Tahoser was the chief wife and queen of a famous Pharaoh--the
Pharaoh of the Exodus, in fact.”

“The one who was drowned in the Red Sea?” asked Archie idly.

“Why, yes--but that happened later. Before pursuing the Hebrews,--if
the Mosaic account is to be believed,--this Pharaoh marched far into
the interior of Africa,--the Libya of the ancients,--and conquered the
natives of Upper Ethiopia. Being deeply in love with his queen, he
took her with him on this expedition, and she died before the Pharaoh
returned to Memphis. From records which I discovered in the museum of
Cairo, I have reason to believe that the Pharaoh buried her with much
pomp in Ethiopia, sacrificing, I believe, many prisoners at her gorgeous
funeral rites. From the wealth of that Pharaoh--for wealthy he must have
been on account of his numerous victories--and from the love he bore
this princess, I am confident--confident,” added Braddock, striking the
table vehemently, “that when discovered, her tomb will be filled with
riches, and may also contain documents of incalculable value.”

“And you wish to get the money?” asked Mrs. Jasher, who was rather
bored.

The Professor rose fiercely. “Money! I care nothing for money. I desire
to obtain the funeral jewelry and golden masks, the precious images of
the gods, so as to place them in the British Museum. And the scrolls
of papyrus buried with the mummy of Tahoser may contain an account
of Ethiopian civilization, about which we know nothing. Oh, that
tomb,--that tomb!” Braddock began to walk the room, quite forgetting
that he had not finished his dinner. “I know the mountains whose
entrails were pierced to form the sepulchre. Were I able to go to
Africa, I am certain that I should discover the tomb. Ah, with what
glory would my name be covered, were I so fortunate!”

“Why don't you go to Africa, sir, and try?” asked Hope.

“Fool!” cried the Professor politely. “To fit out an expedition would
take some five thousand pounds, if not more. I would have to penetrate
through a hostile country to reach the chain of mountains I speak of,
where I know this precious tomb is to be found. I need supplies, an
escort, guns, camels, and all the rest of it. A leader must be obtained
to manage the fighting men necessary to pass through this dangerous
zone. It is no easy task to find the tomb of Tahoser. And yet if I
could--if I could only get the money,” and he walked up and down with
his head bent on his breast.

Mrs. Jasher was used to Braddock's vagaries by this time, and merely
continued to fan herself placidly.

“I wish I could help you with the expedition,” she said quietly. “I
should like to have some of that lovely Egyptian jewelry myself. But
I am quite a pauper, until my brother dies, poor man. Then--” She
hesitated.

“What then?” asked Braddock, wheeling.

“I shall aid you with pleasure.”

“It's a bargain!” Braddock stretched out his hand.

“A bargain,” said Mrs. Jasher, accepting the grasp somewhat nervously,
for she had not expected to be taken so readily at her word. A glance at
Lucy revealed her nervousness.

“Do sit down, father, and finish your dinner,” said that young lady. “I
am sure you will have more than enough to do when the mummy arrives.”

“Mummy--what mummy?” murmured Braddock, again beginning to eat.

“The Inca mummy.”

“Of course. The mummy of Inca Caxas, which Sidney is bringing from
Malta. When I strip that corpse of its green bandages I shall find--”

“Find what?” asked Archie, seeing that the Professor hesitated.

Braddock cast a swift look at his questioner.

“I shall find the peculiar mode of Peruvian embalming,” he replied
abruptly, and somehow the way in which he spoke gave Hope the impression
that the answer was an excuse. But before he could formulate the thought
that Braddock was concealing something, Mrs. Jasher spoke frivolously.

“I hope your mummy has jewels,” she said.

“It has not,” replied Braddock sharply. “So far as I know, the Inca race
never buried their dead with jewels.”

“But I have read in Prescott's History that they did,” said Hope.

“Prescott! Prescott!” cried the Professor contemptuously, “a most
unreliable authority. However, I'll promise you one thing, Hope, that if
there are any jewels, or jewelry, you shall have the lot.”

“Give me some, Mr. Hope,” cried the widow.

“I cannot,” laughed Archie; “the green mummy belongs to the Professor.”

“I cannot accept such a gift, Hope. Owing to circumstances I have been
obliged to borrow the money from you; otherwise the mummy would have
been acquired by some one else. But when I find the tomb of Queen
Tahoser, I shall repay the loan.”

“You have repaid it already,” said Hope, looking at Lucy.

Braddock's eyes followed his gaze and his brows contracted. “Humph!” he
muttered, “I don't know if I am right in consenting to Lucy's marriage
with a pauper.”

“Oh, father!” cried the girl, “Archie is not a pauper.”

“I have enough for Lucy and me to live on,” said Hope, although his face
had flushed, “and, had I been a pauper I could not have given you that
thousand pounds.”

“You will be repaid--you will be repaid,” said Braddock, waving his hand
to dismiss the subject. “And now,” he rose with a yawn, “if this tedious
feast is at an end, I shall again seek my work.”

Without a word of apology to the disgusted Mrs. Jasher, he trotted to
the door, and there paused.

“By the way, Lucy,” he said, turning, “I had a letter to-day from
Random. He returns in his yacht to Pierside in two or three days. In
fact, his arrival will coincide with that of The Diver.”

“I don't see what his arrival has to do with me,” said Lucy tartly.

“Oh, nothing at all--nothing at all,” said Braddock airily, “only I
thought--that is, but never mind, never mind. Cockatoo, come down with
me. Good night! Good night!” and he disappeared.

“Well,” said Mrs. Jasher, drawing along breath, “for rudeness and
selfishness, commend me to a scientist. We might be all mud, for what
notice he takes of us.”

“Never mind,” said Miss Kendal, rising, “come to the drawing-room and
have some music. Archie, will you stop here?”

“No. I don't care to sit over my wine alone,” said that young gentleman,
rising. “I shall accompany you and Mrs. Jasher. And Lucy,” he stopped
her at the door, through which the widow had already passed, “what did
your father mean by his hints concerning Random?”

“I think he regrets giving his consent to my marriage with you,” she
whispered back. “Did you not hear him talk about that tomb? He desires
to get money for the expedition.”

“From Random? What rubbish! Sooner than that--if our marriage is stopped
by the beastly business--I'll sell out and--”

“You'll do nothing of the sort,” interrupted the girl imperiously; “we
must live if we marry. You have given my father enough.”

“But if Random lends money for this expedition?”

“He does so at his own risk. I am not going to marry Sir Frank because
of my step-father's requirements. He has no rights over me, and, whether
he consents or not, I marry you.”

“My darling!” and Archie kissed her before they followed Mrs. Jasher
into the drawing-room. All the same, he foresaw trouble.




CHAPTER IV. THE UNEXPECTED


For the next two or three days, Archie felt decidedly, worried over
his projected marriage with Lucy. Certainly he had--to put it
bluntly--purchased Braddock's consent, and that gentleman could scarcely
draw back from his plighted word, which had cost the lover so much.
Nevertheless, Hope did not entirely, trust the Professor, as, from the
few words which he had let drop at the dinner party, it was plain that
he hankered after money with which to fit out the expedition in search
of the mysterious tomb to which he had alluded. Archie knew, as did the
Professor, that he could not supply the necessary five thousand pounds
without practically ruining himself, and already he had crippled his
resources in paying over the price of the green mummy. He had fondly
believed that Braddock would have been satisfied with the relic of
Peruvian humanity; but it seemed that the Professor, having got what he
wanted, now clamored for what was at present beyond his reach. The mummy
was his property, but he desired the contents of Queen Tahoser's tomb
also. This particular moon, which he cried for, was a very expensive
article, and Hope did not see how he could gain it.

Unless--and here came in the cause of Archie's worry--unless the five
thousand pounds was borrowed from Sir Frank Random, the Professor would
have to content himself with the Maltese mummy. But from what the young
man had seen of Braddock's longing for the especial sepulchre, which
he desired to loot, he believed that the scientist would not readily
surrender his whim. Random could easily lend or give the money, since he
was extremely rich, and extremely generous, but it was improbable that
he would aid Braddock without a quid pro quo. As the sole desire of the
baronet's heart was to make Lucy his wife, it could easily be guessed
that he would only assist the Professor to realize his ambition on
condition that the savant used his influence with his step-daughter.
That meant the breaking of the engagement with Hope and the marriage
of the girl to the soldier. Of course such a state of things would make
Lucy unhappy; but Braddock cared very little for that. To gratify his
craze for Egyptian research, he would be willing to sacrifice a dozen
girls like Lucy.

Undoubtedly Lucy would refuse to be passed along from one man to another
like a bale of goods, and Archie knew that, so far as in her lay, she
would keep to her engagement, especially as she denied Braddock's right
to dispose of her hand. All the same, the Professor, in spite of
his cherubical looks, could make himself extremely disagreeable, and
undoubtedly would do so if thwarted. The sole course that remained,
should Braddock begin operations to break the present engagement, would
be to marry Lucy at once. Archie would willingly have done so, but
pecuniary difficulties stood in the way. He had never told any one of
these, not even the girl he loved, but they existed all the same. For
many years he had been assisting needy relatives, and thus had hampered
himself, in spite of his income. By sheer force of will, so as to force
Braddock into giving him Lucy, he had contrived to secure the necessary
thousand pounds, without confusing the arrangements he had made to pay
off certain debts connected with his domestic philanthropy; but this
brought him to the end of his resources. In six months he hoped to
be free to have his income entirely to himself, and then--small as it
was--he could support a wife. But until the half year elapsed he could
see no chance of marrying Lucy with any degree of comfort, and meanwhile
she would be exposed to the persecutions of the Professor. Perhaps
persecutions is too harsh a word, as Braddock was kind enough to the
girl. Nevertheless, he was pertinacious in gaining his aims where his
pet hobby was concerned, and undoubtedly, could he see any chance of
obtaining the money from Random by selling his step-daughter, he
would do so. Assuredly it was dishonorable to act in this way, but the
Professor was a scientific Jesuit, and deemed that the end justified the
means, when any glory to himself and gain to the British Museum was in
question.

“But I may be doing him an injustice,” said Archie, when he was
explaining his fears to Miss Kendal on the third day after the dinner
party. “After all, the Professor is a gentleman, and will probably hold
to the bargain which he has made.”

“I don't care whether he does or not,” cried Lucy, who had a fine color
and a certain amount of fire in her eyes. “I am not going to be bought
and sold to forward these nasty scientific schemes. My father can say
what he likes and do what he likes, but I marry you--to-morrow if you
like.”

“That's just it,” said Archie, flushing, “we can't marry.”

“Why?” she asked, much astonished.

Hope looked at the ground and drew patterns with his cane-point in the
sand. They were seated in the hot sunshine--for the Indian summer still
continued--under a moldering brick wall, which ran around the most
delightful of kitchen gardens. This was situated at the back of the
Pyramids, and contained a multiplicity of pot herbs and fruit trees and
vegetables. It resembled the Fairy Garden in Madame D'Alnoy's story
of The White Cat, and in the autumn yielded a plentiful crop of
fine-flavored fruit. But now the trees were bare and the garden looked
somewhat forlorn for lack of greenery. But in spite of the lateness of
the season, Lucy often brought a book to read under the glowing wall,
and there ripened like a peach in the warm sunshine. On this occasion
she brought Archie into the old-world garden, as he had hinted at
confidences. And the time had come to speak plainly, as Hope began to
think that he had not treated Lucy quite fairly in hiding from her his
momentarily embarrassed position.

“Why can't we marry at once?” asked Lucy, seeing that her lover held his
peace and looked confused.

Hope did not reply directly. “I had better release you from your
engagement,” he said haltingly.

“Oh!” Lucy's nostrils dilated and she threw back her head scornfully.
“And the other woman's name?”

“There is no other woman. I love you and you only. But--money.”

“What about money? You have your income!”

“Oh yes--that is sure, small as it is. But I have incurred debts on
behalf of an uncle and his family. These have embarrassed me for the
moment, and so I cannot see my way to marrying you for at least six
months, Lucy.” He caught her hand. “I feel ashamed of myself that I
did not tell you of this before. But I feared to lose you. Yet, on
reflection, I see that it is dishonorable to keep you in the dark, and
if you think that I have behaved badly--”

“Well, I do in a way,” she interrupted quickly, “as your silence was
quite unnecessary. Don't treat me as a doll, my dear. I wish to share
your troubles as well as your joys. Come, tell me all about it.”

“You are not angry?”

“Yes, I am--at your thinking I loved you so little as to be biased
against our marriage because of money troubles. Pooh!” she flicked away
a speck of dust from his coat, “I don't care that for such things.”

“You are an angel,” he cried ardently.

“I am a very practical girl just now,” she retorted. “Go on, confess!”

Archie, thus encouraged, did so, and it was a very mild confession that
she heard, involving a great deal of unnecessary sacrifice in helping
a pauper uncle. Hope strove to belittle his good deeds as much as
possible, but Lucy saw plainly the good heart that had dictated the
giving up of his small income for some years. When in possession of all
the facts, she threw her arms around his neck and kissed him.

“You are a silly old boy,” she whispered. “As if what you tell me could
make any difference to me!”

“But we can't be married for six months, dearest.”

“Of course not. Do you believe that I as a woman can gather together my
trousseau under six months? No, my dear. We must not marry in haste to
repent at leisure. In another half year you will enjoy your own income,
and then we can marry.”

“But meanwhile,” said Archie, after kissing her, “the Professor will
bother you to marry Random.”

“Oh no. He has sold me to you for one thousand pounds. There! There, do
not say a single word. I am only teasing you. Let us say that my father
has consented to my marriage with you, and cannot withdraw his word. Not
that I care if he does. I am my own mistress.”

“Lucy!”--he took her hands again and looked into her eyes--“Braddock
is a scientific lunatic, and would do anything to forward his aims
with regard to this very expensive tomb, which he has set his heart on
discovering. As I can't lend or give the money, he is sure to apply to
Random, and Random--”

“Will want to marry me,” cried Lucy, rising. “No, my dear, not at all.
Sir Frank is a gentleman, and when he learns that I am engaged to you,
he will simply become a dear friend. There, don't worry any more about
the matter. You ought to have told me of your troubles before, but as
I have forgiven you, there is no more to be said. In six months I
shall become Mrs. Hope, and meanwhile I can hold my own against any
inconvenience that my father may cause me.”

“But--” He rose and began to remonstrate, anxious to abase himself still
further before this angel of a maiden.

She placed her hand over his mouth. “Not another word, or I shall box
your ears, sir--that is, I shall exercise the privilege of a wife before
I become one. And now,” she slipped her arm within his, “let us go in
and see the arrival of the precious mummy.”

“Oh, it has arrived then.”

“Not here exactly. My father expects it at three o'clock.”

“It is now a quarter to,” said Archie, consulting his watch. “As I have
been to London all yesterday I did not know that The Diver had arrived
at Pierside, How is Bolton?”

Lucy wrinkled her brows. “I am rather worried over Sidney,” she said in
an anxious voice, “and so is my father. He had not appeared.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“Well,” she looked at the ground in a pondering manner, “my father got
a letter from Sidney yesterday afternoon, saying that the ship with the
mummy and himself on board had arrived about four o'clock. The letter
was sent on by special messenger and came at six.”

“Then it arrived in the evening and not in the afternoon?”

“How particular you are!” said Miss Kendal, with a shrug. “Well, then,
Sidney said that he could not bring the mummy to this place last night
as it was so late. He intended--so he told my father in the letter--to
remove the case containing the mummy ashore to an inn near the wharf at
Pierside, and there would remain the night so as to take care of it.”

“That's all right,” said Hope, puzzled. “Where's your difficulty?”

“A note came from the landlord of the inn this morning, saying that by
direction of Mr. Bolton--that is Sidney, you know--he was sending the
mummy in its case to Gartley on a lorry, and that it would arrive at
three o'clock this afternoon.”

“Well?” asked Hope, still puzzled.

“Well?” she rejoined impatiently. “Can't you see show strange it is
that Sidney should let the mummy out of his sight, after guarding it so
carefully not only from Malta to England, but all the night in Pierside
at that hotel? Why doesn't he bring the mummy here himself, and come on
with the lorry?”

“There is no explanation--no letter from Sidney Bolton?”

“None. He wrote yesterday, as I stated, saying that he would keep the
case in the hotel, and send it on this morning.”

“Did he use the word `send,' or the word `bring'?”

“He said 'send.'”

“Then that shows he did not intend to bring it himself.”

“But why should he not do so?”

“I daresay he will explain when he appears.”

“I am very sorry for him when he does appear,” said Lucy seriously, “for
my father is furious. Why, this precious mummy, for which so much has
been paid, might have been lost.”

“Pooh! Who would steal a thing like that?”

“A thing like that is worth nearly one thousand pounds,” said Lucy in a
dry tone, “and if anyone got wind of it, stealing would be easy, since
Sidney, as appears likely, has sent on the case unguarded.”

“Well, let us go in and see if Sidney arrives with the case.”

They passed out of the garden and sauntered round to the front of the
house. There, standing in the roadway, they beheld a ponderous lorry
with a rough-looking driver standing at the horses' heads. The front
door of the house was open, so the mummy case had apparently arrived
before its time, and had been taken to Braddock's museum while they were
chatting in the kitchen garden.

“Did Mr. Bolton come with the case?” asked Lucy, leaning over the
railings and addressing the driver.

“No one came, miss, except myself and my two mates, who have taken the
case indoor.” The driver jerked a coarse thumb over his shoulder.

“Was Mr. Bolton at the hotel, where the case remained for the night?”

“No, miss--that is, I dunno who Mr. Bolton is. The landlord of the
Sailor's Rest told me and my mates to take the case to this here house,
and we done it. That's all I know, miss.”

“Strange,” murmured Lucy, walking to the front door. “What do you think,
Archie? Isn't it strange?”

Hope nodded. “But I daresay Bolton will explain his absence,” said he,
following her. “He will arrive in time to open the mummy case along with
the Professor.”

“I hope so,” said Miss Kendal, who looked much perplexed. “I can't
understand Sidney abandoning the case, when it might so easily have
been stolen. Come in and see my father, Archie,” and she passed into the
house, followed by the young man, whose curiosity was now aroused. As
they entered the door, the two men who had taken in the case blundered
out and shortly drove away on the lorry towards Jessum railway station.

In the museum they found Braddock purple with rage and swearing
vigorously. He was staring at a large packing case, which had been set
up on end against the wall, while beside him crouched Cockatoo, holding
chisels and hammers and wedges necessary to open the treasure trove.

“So the precious mummy has arrived, father,” said Lucy, who saw that the
Professor was furious. “Are you not pleased?”

“Pleased! pleased!” shouted the angry man of science. “How can I be
pleased when I see how badly the case has been treated? See how it
has been bruised and battered and shaken! I'll have an action against
Captain Hervey of The Diver if my mummy has been injured. Sidney should
have taken better care of so precious an object.”

“What does he say?” asked Archie, glancing round the museum to see if
the delinquent had arrived.

“Say!” shouted Braddock again, and snatching a chisel from Cockatoo.
“Oh, what can he say when he is not here?”

“Not here?” said Lucy, more and more surprised at the unaccountable
absence of Braddock's assistant. “Where is he, then?”

“I don't know. I wish I did; I'd have him arrested for neglecting to
watch over this case. As it is, when he comes back I'll dismiss him from
my employment. He can go back to his infernal laundry work along with
his old witch of a mother.”

“But why hasn't Bolton come back, sir?” asked Hope sharply.

Braddock struck a furious blow at the head of the chisel which he had
inserted into the case.

“I want to know that. He brought the case to the Sailor's Rest, and
should have come on with it this morning. Instead of doing so, he tells
the landlord--a most unreliable man--to send it on. And my precious
mummy--the mummy that has cost nine hundred pounds,” cried Braddock,
working furiously, and battering the chisel as though it were Bolton's
head, “is left to be stolen by any scientific thief that comes along.”
 While the Professor, assisted by Cockatoo, loosened the lid of the
packing case, a mild voice was heard at the door. Lucy turned, as did
Archie, to see Widow Anne curtseying on the threshold of the door.

Braddock himself took no notice of her entrance, being occupied with his
task, and even while doing it swore scientifically under his breath.
He was furious against Bolton for neglect of duty, and Hope rather
sympathized with him. It was a serious matter to have left a valuable
object like the green mummy to the rough care of laborers.

“I beg your pardon, my lady,” whimpered Widow Anne, who looked more lean
and rusty and dismal than ever; “but has my Sid come? I saw the cart and
the coffin. Where's my boy?”

“Coffin! coffin!” bellowed Braddock angrily between thunder blows. “What
do you mean by calling this case a coffin?”

“Well, it do hold one of them camphorated corps, sir,” said Mrs. Bolton
with another curtsey. “My boy Sid told me as much, afore he went to them
furren parts.”

“Have you seen him since he returned?” questioned Lucy, while Braddock
and Cockatoo strained at the lid, now nearly off.

“Why, I ain't set eyes on him,” moaned the widow dismally, “and summat
tells me as I never will.”

“Don't talk rubbish, woman,” said Archie tartly, for he did not wish
Lucy to be upset again by this ancient ghoul.

“Woman indeed, sir. I'd have you know,--oh!” the widow jumped and
quavered as the lid of the packing case fell on the floor with a bang.
“Oh lor, sir, the start you did give me!”

But Braddock had no eyes for her, and no ears for anyone. He pulled
lustily at the straw packing, and soon the floor was littered with
rubbish. But no green case appeared, and no mummy. Suddenly Widow Anne
shrieked again.

“There's my Sid--dead--oh, my son, dead! dead!”

She spoke truly. The body of Sidney Bolton was before them.




CHAPTER V. MYSTERY


After that one cry of agony from Widow Anne, there was silence for
quite one minute. The terrible contents of the packing case startled
and terrified all present. Faint and white, Lucy clung to the arm of
her lover to keep herself from sinking to the ground, as Mrs. Bolton had
done. Archie stared at the grotesque rigidity of the body, as though he
had been changed into stone, while Professor Braddock stared likewise,
scarcely able to credit the evidence of his eyes. Only the Kanaka was
unmoved and squatted on his hams, indifferently surveying the living
and the dead. As a savage he could not be expected to have the nerves of
civilized man.

Braddock, who had dropped chisel and hammer in the first movement of
surprise, was the quickest to recover his powers of speech. The sole
question he asked, revealed the marvelous egotism of a scientist,
nominated by one idea. “Where is the mummy of Inca Caxas?” he murmured
with a bewildered air.

Widow Anne, groveling on the floor, pulled her gray locks into wild
confusion, and uttered a cry of mingled rage and grief. “He asks that?
he asks that?” she cried, stammering and choking, “when he has murdered
my poor boy Sid.”

“What's that?” demanded Braddock sharply, and recovering from a
veritable stupor, which the disappearance of the mummy and the sight of
his dead assistant had thrown him into. “Kill your son: how could I
kill your son? What advantage would it have been to me had I killed your
son?”

“God knows! God knows!” sobbed the old woman, “but you--”

“Mrs. Bolton, you are raving,” said Hope hastily, and strove to raise
her from the floor. “Let Miss Kendal take you away. And you go, Lucy:
this sight is too terrible for your eyes.”

Lucy, inarticulate with nervous fear, nodded and tottered towards the
door of the museum; but Widow Anne refused to be lifted to her feet.

“My boy is dead,” she wailed; “my boy Sid is a corp as I saw him in my
dream. In the coffin, too, cut to pieces--”

“Rubbish! rubbish!” interrupted Braddock, peering into the depths of the
packing case. “I can see no wound.”

Mrs. Bolton leaped to her feet with an agility surprising in so aged a
woman. “Let me find the wound,” she screamed, throwing herself forward.

Hope caught her back and forced her towards the door. “No! The body must
not be disturbed until the police see it,” he said firmly.

“The police--ah, yes, the police,” remarked Braddock quickly, “we must
send for the police to Pierside and tell them my mummy has been stolen.”

“That my boy has been murdered,” screeched Widow Anne, waving her skinny
arms, and striving to break from Archie. “You wicked old devil to kill
my darling Sid. If he hadn't gone to them furren parts he wouldn't be a
corp now. But I'll have the lawr: you'll be hanged, you--you--”

Braddock lost his patience under this torrent of unjust accusations and
rushed towards Mrs. Bolton, dragging Cockatoo by the arm. In less time
than it takes to tell, he had swept both Archie and the widow out into
the hall, where Lucy was trembling, and Cockatoo, by his master's order,
was locking the door.

“Not a thing shall be touched until the police come. Hope, you are, a
witness that I have not meddled with the dead: you were present when
I opened the packing case: you have seen that a useless body has been
substituted for a valuable mummy. And yet this old witch dares--dares--”
 Braddock stamped and grew incoherent from sheer rage.

Archie soothed him, leaving go of Widow Anne's arm to do so. “Hush!
hush!” said the young man quietly, “the poor woman does not know what
she is saying. I'll go for the police and--”

“No,” interrupted the Professor sharply; “Cockatoo can go for the
inspector of Pierside. I shall call in the village constable.
Meanwhile you keep the key of the museum,” he dropped it into Hope's
breast-pocket, “so that you and the police may be sure the body has
not been touched. Widow Anne, go home,” he turned angrily on the old
creature, who was now trembling after her burst of rage, “and don't dare
to come here again until you ask pardon for what you have said.”

“I want to be near my poor boy's corp,” wailed Widow Anne, “and I'm very
sorry, Perfesser. I didn't mean to--”

“But you have, you witch. Go away!” and he stamped.

But by this time Lucy had recovered her self-possession, which had been
sorely shaken by the sight of the dead. “Leave her to me,” she observed,
taking Mrs. Bolton's arm, and leading her towards the stairs. “I shall
take her to my room and give her some brandy. Father, you must make some
allowance for her natural grief, and--”

Braddock stamped again. “Take her away! take her away!” he cried
testily, “and keep her out of my sight. Is it not enough to have lost
an invaluable assistant, and a costly mummy of infinite historical
and archaeological value, without my being accused of--of--oh!” The
Professor choked with rage and shook his hand in the air.

Seeing that he was unable to speak, Lucy seized the opportunity of the
lull in the storm, and hurried the old woman, sobbing and moaning, up
the stairs. By this time the shrieks of Mrs. Bolton, and the wordy
wrath of Braddock, had drawn the cook and her husband, along with the
housemaid, from the basement to the ground floor. The sight of their
surprised faces only added to their master's anger, and he advanced
furiously.

“Go downstairs again: go down, I tell you!”

“But if there's anything wrong, sir,” ventured the gardener timidly.

“Everything is wrong. My mummy has been lost: Mr. Bolton has been
murdered. The police are coming, and--and--” He choked again.

But the servants waited to hear no more. The mere mention of the words
“murder” and “police” sent them, pale-faced and startled, down to the
basement, where they huddled like a flock of sheep. Braddock looked
around for Hope, but found that he had opened the front door, and had
vanished. But he was too distracted to think why Archie had gone, and
there was much to do in putting things straight. Beckoning to Cockatoo,
he stalked into a side room, and scribbled a pencil note to the
inspector of police at Pierside, telling him of what had happened, and
asking him to come at once to the Pyramids with his underlings. This
communication he dispatched by Cockatoo, who flew to get his bicycle.
In a short time he was riding at top speed to Brefort, which was on this
side of the river; facing Pierside. There he could ferry across to the
town and deliver his terrible message.

Having done all that he could until the police came, Braddock walked out
of the front door and into the roadway to see if Archie was in sight. He
could not see the young man, but, as luck would have it, and by one of
those coincidences which are much more common than is suspected, he saw
the Gartley doctor walking briskly past.

“Hi!” shouted the Professor, who was purple in the face and perspiring
profusely. “Hi, there, Dr. Robinson! I want you. Come! come! hurry, man,
hurry!” he ended in a testy rage, and the doctor, knowing Braddock's
eccentricities, advanced with a smile. He was a slim, dark, young
medical practitioner with an amiable countenance, which argued of no
mighty intelligence.

“Well, Professor,” he remarked quietly, “do you want me to attend you
for apoplexy? Take your time, my dear sir--take your time.” He patted
the scientist on the shoulder to soothe his clamorous rage. “You are
already purple in the face. Don't let your blood rush to your head.”

“Robinson, you're a--a--a fool!” shouted Braddock, glaring at the suave
looks of the doctor. “I am in perfect health, damn you, sir.”

“Then Miss Kendal--?”

“She is quite well also. But Bolton--?”

“Oh!” Robinson looked interested. “Has he returned with your mummy?”

“Mummy,” bellowed Braddock, stamping like an insane Cupid--“the mummy
hasn't arrived.”

“Really, Professor, you surprise me,” said the doctor mildly.

“I'll surprise you more,” growled Braddock, dragging Robinson into the
garden and up the steps.

“Gently! gently! my dear sir,” said the doctor, who really began to
think that much learning had made the Professor mad. “Didn't Bolton--?”

“Bolton is dead, you fool.”

“Dead!” The doctor nearly tumbled backward down the steps.

“Murdered. At least I think he is murdered. At all events he arrived
here to-day in the packing case, which should have contained my green
mummy. Come in and examine the body at once. No,” Braddock pushed back
the doctor just as fiercely as he had dragged him forward, “wait until
the constable comes. I want him to see the body first, and to observe
that nothing has been touched. I have sent for the Pierside inspector to
come. There will be all sorts of trouble,” cried Braddock despairingly,
“and my work--most important work--will be delayed, just because this
silly young ass Sidney Bolton chose to be murdered,” and the Professor
stormed up and down the hall, shaking impotent arms in the air.

“Good heavens!” stammered Robinson, who was young in years and somewhat
new to his profession, “you--you must be mistaken.”

“Mistaken! mistaken!” shouted Braddock with another glare. “Come and see
that poor fellow's body then. He is dead, murdered.”

“By whom?”

“Hang you, sir, how should I know?”

“In what way has he been murdered? Stabbed, shot, or--”

“I don't know--I don't know! Such a nuisance to lose a man like
Bolton--an invaluable assistant. What I shall do without him I really
don't know. And his mother has been here, making no end of a fuss.”

“Can you blame her?” said the doctor, recovering his breath. “She is his
mother, after all, and poor Bolton was her only son.”

“I am not denying the relationship, confound you!” snapped the
Professor, ruffling his hair until it stood up like the crest of a
parrot. “But she needn't--ah!” He glanced through the open door, and
then rushed to the threshold. “Here is Hope and Painter. Come in--come
in. I have the doctor here. Hope, you have the key. You observe,
constable, that Mr. Hope has the key. Open the door: open the door, and
let us see the meaning of this dreadful crime.”

“Crime, sir?” queried the constable, who had heard all that was known
from Hope, but now wished to hear what Braddock had to say.

“Yes, crime: crime, you idiot! I have lost my mummy.”

“But I thought, sir, that a murder--”

“Oh, of course--of course,” gabbled the Professor, as if the death was
quite a minor consideration. “Bolton's dead--murdered, I suppose, as he
could scarcely have nailed himself down in a packing case. But it's my
precious mummy I am thinking of, Painter. A mummy--if you know what a
mummy is--that cost me nine hundred pounds. Go in, man. Go in and don't
stand there gaping. Don't you see that Mr. Hope has opened the door. I
have sent Cockatoo to Pierside to notify the police. They will soon be
here. Meanwhile, doctor, you can examine the body, and Painter here can
give his opinion as to who stole my mummy.”

“The assassin stole the mummy,” said Archie, as the four men entered the
museum, “and substituted the body of the murdered man.”

“That is all A B C,” snapped Braddock, issuing into the vast room, “but
we want to know the name of the assassin, if we are to revenge Bolton
and get back my mummy. Oh, what a loss!--what a loss! I have lost nine
hundred pounds, or say one thousand, considering the cost of bringing
Inca Caxas to England.”

Archie forebore to remind the Professor as to who had really lost
the money, as the scientist was not in a fit state to be talked to
reasonably, and seemed much more concerned because his Peruvian relic of
humanity had been lost than for the terrible death of Sidney Bolton.
But by this time Painter--a fair-haired young constable of small
intelligence--was examining the packing case and surveying the dead. Dr.
Robinson also looked with a professional eye, and Braddock, wiping
his purple face and gasping with exhaustion, sat down on a stone
sarcophagus. Archie, folding his arms, leaned against the wall and
waited quietly to hear what the experts in crime and medicine would say.

The packing case was deep and wide and long, made of tough teak and
banded at intervals with iron bands. Within this was a case of tin,
which, when it held the mummy, had been soldered up; impervious to
air and water. But the unknown person who had extracted the mummy, to
replace it by a murdered man's body, had cut open the tin casing with
some sharp instrument. There was straw round the tin casing and straw
within, amongst which the body of the unfortunate young man was placed.
Rigor mortis had set in, and the corpse, with straight legs and hands
placed stiffly by its side, lay against the back of the tin casing
surrounded more or less by the straw packing, or at least by so much as
the Professor had not torn away. The face looked dark, and the eyes were
wide open and staring. Robinson stepped forward and ran his hand round
the neck. Uttering an ejaculation, he removed the woollen scarf which
the dead man had probably worn to keep himself from catching cold, and
those who looked on saw that a red-colored window cord was tightly bound
about the throat of the dead.

“The poor devil has been strangled,” said the doctor quietly. “See: the
assassin has left the bow-string on, and had the courage to place over
it this scarf, which belonged to Bolton.”

“How do you know that, sir?” asked Painter heavily.

“Because Widow Anne knitted that scarf for Bolton before he went
to Malta. He showed it to me, laughingly, remarking that his mother
evidently thought that he was going to Lapland.”

“When did he show it to you, sir?”

“Before he went to Malta, of course,” said Robinson in mild surprise.
“You don't suppose he showed it to me when he returned. When did he
return to England?” he asked the Professor, with an afterthought.

“Yesterday afternoon, about four o'clock,” replied Braddock.

“Then, from the condition of the body”--the doctor felt the dead
flesh--“he must have been murdered last night. H'm! With your
permission, Painter, I'll examine the corpse.”

The constable shook his head. “Better wait, sir, until the inspector
comes,” he said in his unintelligent way. “Poor Sid! Why, I knew him. He
was at school with me, and now he's dead. Who killed him?”

None of his listeners could answer this question.




CHAPTER VI. THE INQUEST


Like a geographical Lord Byron, the isolated village of Gartley awoke
one morning to find itself famous. Previously unknown, save to the
inhabitants of Brefort, Jessum, and the surrounding country, and to
the soldiers stationed in the Fort, it became a nine days' centre of
interest. Inspector Date of Pierside arrived with his constables to
inquire into the reported crime, and the local journalists, scenting
sensation, came flying to Gartley on bicycles and in traps. Next morning
London was duly advised that a valuable mummy was missing, and that
the assistant of Professor Braddock, who had been sent to fetch it from
Malta, was murdered by strangulation. In a couple of days the three
kingdoms were ringing with the news of the mystery.

And a mystery it proved, to be, for, in spite of Inspector Date's
efforts and the enterprise of Scotland Yard detectives summoned by
the Professor, no clue could be found to the identity of the assassin.
Briefly, the story told by the newspapers ran as follows:

The tramp steamer Diver--Captain George Hervey in command--had berthed
alongside the Pierside jetty at four o'clock on a Wednesday afternoon in
mid-September, and some two hours later Sidney Bolton removed the case,
containing the green mummy, ashore.

As it was impossible to carry the case to the Pyramids on that night,
Bolton had placed it in his bedroom at the Sailor's Rest, a mean little
public-house of no very savory reputation near the water's edge. He was
last seen alive by the landlord and the barmaid, when, after a drink of
harmless ginger-beer, he retired to bed at eight, leaving instructions
to the landlord--overheard by the barmaid--that the case was to be sent
on next day to Professor Braddock of Gartley. Bolton hinted that he
might leave the hotel early and would probably precede the case to its
destination, so as to advise Professor Braddock--necessarily anxious--of
its safe arrival. Before retiring he paid his bill, and deposited in
the landlord's hand a small sum of money, so that the case might be sent
across stream to Brefort, thence to be taken in a lorry to the Pyramids.
There was no sign, said the barmaid and the landlord, that Bolton
contemplated suicide, or that he feared sudden death. His whole demeanor
was cheerful, and he expressed himself exceedingly glad to be in England
once more.

At eleven on the ensuing morning, a persistent knocking and a subsequent
opening of the door of Bolton's bedroom proved that he was not in the
room, although the tumbled condition of the bed-clothes proved that he
had taken some rest. No one in the hotel thought anything of Bolton's
absence, since he had hinted at an early departure, although the
chamber-maid considered it strange that no one had seen him leave the
hotel. The landlord obeyed Bolton's instructions and sent the case, in
charge of a trustworthy man, to Brefort across the river. There a lorry
was procured, and the case was taken to Gartley, where it arrived at
three in the afternoon. It was then that Professor Braddock, in opening
the case, discovered the body of his ill-fated assistant, rigid in
death, and with a red window cord tightly bound round the throat of the
corpse. At once, said the newspapers, the Professor sent for the police,
and later insisted that the smartest Scotland Yard detectives should
come down to elucidate the mystery. At present both police and
detectives were engaged in searching for a needle in a haystack, and so
far had met with no success.

Such was the tale set forth in the local and London and provincial
journals. Widely as it was discussed, and many as were the theories
offered, no one could fathom the mystery. But all agreed that the
failure of the police to find a clue was inexplicable. It was difficult
enough to understand how the assassin could have murdered Bolton and
opened the packing case, and removed the mummy to replace it by the body
of his victim in a house filled with at least half a dozen people; but
it was yet more difficult to guess how the criminal had escaped with so
noticeable an object as the mummy, bandaged with emerald-hued woollen
stuff woven from the hair of Peruvian llamas. If the culprit was one who
thieved and murdered for gain, he could scarcely sell the mummy without
being arrested, since all England was ringing with the news of its
disappearance; if a scientist, impelled to robbery by an archaeological
mania, he could not possibly keep possession of the mummy without
someone learning that he possessed it. Meanwhile the thief and his
plunder had vanished as completely as if the earth had swallowed both.
Great was the wonder at the cleverness of the criminal, and many were
the solutions offered to account for the disappearance. One enterprising
weekly paper, improving on the Limerick craze, offered a furnished house
and three pounds a week for life to the fortunate person who could solve
the mystery. As yet no one had won the prize, but it was early days
yet, and at least five thousand amateur detectives tried to work out the
problem.

Naturally Hope was sorry for the untimely death of Bolton, whom he had
known as an amiable and clever young man. But he was also annoyed
that his loan of the money to Braddock should have been, so to speak,
nullified by the loss of the mummy. The Professor was perfectly furious
at his double loss of assistant and embalmed corpse, and was only
prevented from offering a reward for the discovery of the thief and
assassin by the painful fact that he had no money. He hinted to Archie
that a reward should be offered, but that young man, backed by Lucy,
declined to throw away good money after bad. Braddock took this refusal
so ill, that Hope felt perfectly convinced he would try and wriggle
out of his promise to permit the marriage and persuade Lucy to engage
herself to Sir Frank Random, should the baronet be willing to offer a
reward. And Hope was also certain that Braddock, a singularly
obstinate man, would never rest until he once more had the mummy in
his possession. That the murderer of Sidney Bolton should be hanged was
quite a minor consideration with the Professor.

Meanwhile Widow Anne had insisted on the dead body being taken to her
cottage, and Braddock, with the consent of Inspector Date, willingly
agreed, as he did not wish a newly dead corpse to remain under his roof.
Therefore, the remains of the unfortunate young man were taken to
his humble home, and here the body was inspected by the jury when the
inquest took place in the coffee-room of the Warrior Inn, immediately
opposite Mrs. Bolton's abode. There was a large crowd round the inn, as
people had come from far and wide to hear the verdict of the jury, and
Gartley, for the first and only time in its existence, presented the
aspect of an August Bank Holiday.

The Coroner--an elderly doctor with a short temper; caused by the
unrealized ambition of a country practitioner--opened the proceedings by
a snappy speech, in which he set forth the details of the crime in the
same bold fashion in which they had been published by the newspapers.
A plan of the Sailor's Rest was then placed before the jury, and the
Coroner drew the attention of the twelve good and lawful men to the fact
that the bedroom occupied by deceased was on the ground floor, with a
window looking out on to the river, merely a stone-throw away.

“So you will see, gentlemen,” said the Coroner, “that the difficulty of
the assassin in leaving the hotel with his plunder was not so great as
has been imagined. He had merely to open the window in the quiet hours
of the night, when no one was about, and pass the mummy through to his
accomplice, who probably waited without. It is also probable that a boat
was waiting by the bank of the river, and the mummy having been placed
in this, the assassin and his friend could row away into the unknown
without the slightest chance of discovery.”

Inspector Date--a tall, thin, upright man with an iron jaw and a severe
expression--drew the Coroner's attention to the fact that there was no
evidence to show that the assassin had an accomplice.

“What you have stated, sir, may have occurred,” rasped Date in a
military voice, “but we cannot prove the truth of your assumption, since
the evidence at our disposal is merely circumstantial.”

“I never suggested that it was anything else,” snapped the Coroner. “You
waste time in traversing my statements. Say what you have to say, Mr.
Inspector, and produce your witnesses--if you have any.”

“There are no witnesses who can swear to the identity of the murderer,”
 said Inspector Date coldly, and determined not to be ruffled by the
apparent antagonism of the Coroner. “The criminal has vanished, and no
one can guess his name or occupation, or even the reason which led him
to slay the deceased.”

Coroner: “The reason is plain. He wanted the mummy.”

Inspector: “Why should he want the mummy?”

Coroner: “That is what we wish to find out.”

Inspector: “Exactly, sir. We wish to learn the reason why the murderer
strangled the deceased.”

Coroner: “We know that reason. What we wish to know is why the murderer
stole the mummy. And I would point out to you, Mr. Inspector, that, as
yet, we do not even know the sex of the assassin. It might be a woman
who murdered the deceased.”

Professor Braddock, who was seated near the door of the coffee-room,
being even more irascible than usual, rose to contradict.

“There isn't a scrap of evidence to show that the murderer was a woman.”

Coroner: “You are out of order, sir. And I would point out that, as yet,
Inspector Date has produced no witnesses.”

Date glared. He and the Coroner were old enemies, and always sparred
when they met. It seemed likely, that the peppery little Professor would
join in the quarrel and that there would be a duel of three; but Date,
not wishing for an adverse report in the newspapers as to his conduct of
the case, contented himself with the glare aforesaid, and, after a short
speech, called Braddock. The Professor, looking more like a cross
cherub than ever, gave his evidence tartly. It seemed ridiculous to his
prejudiced mind that all this fuss should be made over Bolton's body,
when the mummy; was still missing. However, as the discovery of the
criminal would assuredly lead to the regaining of that precious Peruvian
relic, he curbed his wrath and answered the Coroner's questions in a
fairly amiable fashion.

And, after all, Braddock had very little to tell. He had, so he stated,
seen an advertisement in a newspaper that a mummy, swathed in green
bandages, was to be sold in Malta; and had sent his assistant to buy it
and bring it home. This was done, and what happened after the mummy
left the tramp steamer was known to everyone, through the medium of the
press.

“With which,” grumbled the Professor, “I do not agree.”

“What do you mean by that?” asked the Coroner sharply.

“I mean, sir,” snapped Braddock, equally sharply, “that the publicity
given by the newspapers to these details will probably place the
assassin on his guard.”

“Why not on her guard?” persisted the Coroner wilfully.

“Rubbish! rubbish! rubbish! My mummy wasn't stolen by a woman. What the
devil would a woman want with my mummy?”

“Be more respectful, Professor.”

“Then talk sense, doctor,” and the two glared at one another.

After a moment or two the situation was adjusted in silence, and the
Coroner asked a few questions, pertinent to the matter in hand.

“Had the deceased any enemies?”

“No, sir, he hadn't, not being famous enough, or rich enough, or clever
enough to excite the hatred of mankind. He was simply an intelligent
young man, who worked excellently when supervised by me. His mother is
a washerwoman in this village, and the lad brought washing to my
house. Noting that he was intelligent and was anxious to rise above his
station, I engaged him as my assistant and trained him to do my work.”

“Archaeological work?”

“Yes. I don't wash, whatever Bolton's mother may, do. Don't ask silly
questions.”

“Be more respectful,” said the Coroner again, and grew red. “Have you
any idea as to the name of anyone who desired to obtain possession of
this mummy?”

“I daresay dozens of scientists in my line of business would have liked
to get the corpse of Inca Caxas. Such as--” and he reeled out a list of
celebrated men.

“Nonsense,” growled the Coroner. “Famous men like those you mention
would not murder even for the sake of obtaining this mummy.”

“I never said that they would,” retorted Braddock, “but you wanted to
hear who would like to have the mummy; and I have told you.”

The Coroner waived the question.

“Was there any jewelry on the mummy likely to attract a thief?” he
asked.

“How the devil should I know?” fumed the Professor. “I never unpacked
the mummy; I never even saw it. Any jewelry buried with Inca Caxas would
be bound up in the bandages. So far as I know those bandages were never
unwound.”

“You can throw no light on the subject?”

“No, I can't. Bolton went to get the mummy and brought it home. I
understood that he would personally bring his precious charge to my
house; but he didn't. Why, I don't know.”

When the Professor stepped down, still fuming at what he considered
were the unnecessary questions of the Coroner, the young doctor who had
examined the corpse was called. Robinson deposed that deceased had been
strangled by means of a red window cord, and that, from the condition of
the body, he would judge death had taken place some twelve hours more
or less before the opening of the packing case by Braddock. That was at
three o'clock on Thursday afternoon, so in witness's opinion the crime
was committed between two and three on the previous morning.

“But I can't be absolutely certain as to the precise hour,” added
witness; “at any rate poor Bolton was strangled after midnight and
before three o'clock.”

“That is a wide margin,” grumbled the Coroner, jealous of his
brother-practitioner. “Were there any, other wounds on the body?”

“No. You can see for yourself, if you have inspected the corpse.”

The Coroner, thus reproved, glared, and Widow Anne appeared after
Robinson retired. She stated, with many sobs, that her son had no
enemies and was a good, kind young man. She also related her dream,
but this was flouted by the Coroner, who did not believe in the occult.
However, the narration of her premonition was listened to with deep
interest by those in the court. Widow Anne concluded her evidence by
asking how she was to live now that her boy Sid was dead. The Coroner
professed himself unable to answer this question, and dismissed her.

Samuel Quass, the landlord of the Sailor's Rest, was next called. He
proved to be a big, burly, red-haired, red-whiskered man, who looked
like a sailor. And indeed a few questions elicited the information that
he was a retired sea-captain. He gave his evidence gruffly but honestly,
and although he kept so shady a public-house, seemed straightforward
enough. He told much the same tale as had appeared in the newspapers.
In the hotel on that night there was only himself, his wife and two
children, and the staff of servants. Bolton retired to bed saying that
he might start early for Gartley, and paid one pound to get the case
taken across to river and placed on a lorry. As Bolton had vanished next
morning, Quass obeyed instructions, with the result which everyone knew.
He also stated that he did not know the case contained a mummy.

“What did you think it contained?” asked the Coroner quickly.

“Clothes and curios from foreign parts,” said the witness coolly.

“Did Mr. Bolton tell you so?”

“He told me nothing about the case,” growled the witness, “but he
chatted a lot about Malta, which I know well, having put into that port
frequent when a sailor.”

“Did he hint at any rows taking place at Malta?”

“No, he didn't.”

“Did he say that he had enemies?”

“No, he didn't.”

“Did he strike you as a man who was in fear of death?”

“No, he didn't,” said the witness for the third time. “He seemed happy
enough. I never thought for one moment that he was dead until I heard
how his body had been found in the packing case.”

The Coroner asked all manner of questions, and so did Inspector Date;
but all attempts to incriminate Quass were vain. He was bluff and
straightforward, and told--so far as could be judged--everything he
knew. There was nothing for it but to dismiss him, and Eliza Flight was
called as the last witness.

She also proved to be the most important, as she knew several things
which she had not told to her master, or to the reporters, or even to
the police. On being asked why she had kept silence, she said that her
desire was to obtain any reward that might be offered; but as she had
heard that there would be no reward, she was willing to tell what she
knew. It was an important piece of evidence.

The girl stated that Bolton had retired to bed at eight on the ground
floor, and the bedroom had a window--as marked in the plan--which looked
on to the river a stone-throw distant. At nine or a trifle later witness
went out to have a few words with her lover. In the darkness she saw
that the window was open and that Bolton was talking to an old woman
muffled in a shawl. She could not see the woman's face, nor judge of her
stature, as she was stooping down to listen to Bolton. Witness did
not take much notice, as she was in a hurry to see her lover. When she
returned past the window at ten o'clock it was closed and the light was
extinguished, so she thought that Mr. Bolton was asleep.

“But, to tell the truth,” said Eliza Flight, “I never thought anything
of the matter at all. It was only after the murder that I saw how
important it was I should remember everything.”

“And you have?”

“Yes, sir,” said the girl, honestly enough. “I have told you everything
that happened on that night. Next morning--” She hesitated.

“Well, what about next morning?”

“Mr. Bolton had locked his door. I know that, because a few minutes
after eight on the night before, not knowing he had retired. I tried to
enter the room and make ready the bed for the night. He sang out through
the door--which was locked, for I tried it--that he was in bed. That was
a lie also, as after nine I saw him talking to the woman at the window.”

“You previously said an old woman,” said the Coroner, referring to his
notes. “How do you know she was old?”

“I can't say if she was old or young,” said the witness candidly; “it's
only a manner of speaking. She had a dark shawl over her head and a dark
dress. I couldn't say if she was old or young, fair or dark, stout or
lean, tall or short. The night was dark.”

The Coroner referred to the plan.

“There is a gas-lamp near the window of the bedroom. Did you not see her
in that light?”

“Oh, yes, sir; but just for a moment. I took very little notice. Had I
known that the gentleman was to be murdered, I should have taken a great
deal of notice.”

“Well, about this locked door?”

“It was locked over-night, sir, but when I went next morning, it was
not locked. I knocked and knocked, but could get no answer. As it was
eleven, I thought the gentleman was sleeping very long, so I tried to
open the door. It was not locked, as I say--but,” added witness with
emphasis, “the window was snibbed and the blind was down.”

“That is natural enough,” said the Coroner. “Mr. Bolton, after his
interview with the woman, would of course snib the window, and pull down
the blind. When he went away next morning he would unlock the door.”

“Begging your pardon, sir, but, as we know, he didn't go away next
morning, being in the packing case, nailed down.”

The Coroner could have kicked himself for the very natural mistake
he had made, for he saw a derisive grin on the faces around him, and
particularly on that of Inspector Date.

“Then the assassin must have gone out by the door,” he said weakly.

“Then I don't know how he got out,” cried Eliza Flight, “for I was up at
six and the front and back doors of the hotel were locked. And after six
I was about in passages and rooms doing my work, and master and missus
and others were all over the place. How could the murderer walk out,
sir, without some of us seeing him?”

“Perhaps you did, and took no notice?”

“Oh, sir, if a stranger was around we should all have taken notice.”

This concluded the evidence, which was meagre enough. Widow Anne was
indeed recalled to see if Miss Flight could identify her as the woman
who, had been talking to Bolton, but witness failed to recognize her,
and the widow herself proved, by means of three friends, that she had
been imbibing gin at home on the night and at the hour in question.
Also, there was no evidence to connect this unknown woman with the
murder, and no sound--according to the unanimous testimony of the
inmates of the Sailor's Rest--had been heard in the bedroom of Bolton.
Yet, as the Coroner observed, there must have been some knocking and
hammering and ripping going on. But of this nothing could be proved,
and although several witnesses were examined again, not one could throw
light on the mystery. Under these circumstances the jury could only
bring in a verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons
unknown, which was done. And it may be mentioned that the cord with
which Bolton had been strangled was identified by the landlord and the
chamber-maid as belonging to the blind of the bedroom window.

“Well,” said Hope, when the inquest was over, “so nothing can be proved
against anyone. What is to be done next?”

“I'll tell you after I have seen Random,” said the Professor curtly.




CHAPTER VII. THE CAPTAIN OF THE DIVER


The day after the inquest, Sidney Bolton's body was buried in Gartley
churchyard. Owing to the nature of the death, and the publicity given
to the murder by the press, a great concourse of people assembled to
witness the interment, and there was an impressive silence when the
corpse was committed to the grave. Afterwards, as was natural, much
discussion followed on the verdict at the inquest. It was the
common opinion that the jury could have brought in no other verdict,
considering the nature of the evidence supplied; but many people
declared that Captain Hervey of The Diver should have been called. If
the deceased had enemies, said these wiseacres, it was probable that he
would have talked about them to the skipper. But they forgot that the
witnesses called at the inquest, including the mother of the dead man,
had insisted that Bolton had no enemies, so it is difficult to see what
they expected Captain Hervey to say.

After the funeral, the journals made but few remarks about the mystery.
Every now and then it was hinted that a clue had been found, and that
the police would sooner or later track down the criminal. But all this
loose chatter came to nothing, and as the days went by, the public--in
London, at all events--lost interest in the case. The enterprising
weekly paper that had offered the furnished house and the life income
to the person who found the assassin received an intimation from
the Government that such a lottery could not be allowed. The paper,
therefore, returned to Limericks, and the amateur detectives, like so
many Othellos, found their occupation gone. Then a political crisis took
place in the far East, and the fickle public relegated the murder
of Bolton to the list of undiscovered crimes. Even the Scotland Yard
detectives, failing to find a clue, lost interest in the matter, and it
seemed as though the mystery of Bolton's death would not be solved until
the Day of Judgment.

In the village, however, people still continued to be keenly interested,
since Bolton was one of themselves, and, moreover, Widow Anne kept up a
perpetual outcry about her murdered boy. She had lost the small weekly
sum which Sidney had allowed her out of his wages, so the neighbors, the
gentry of the surrounding country, and the officers at the Fort sent
her ample washing to do. Widow Anne in a few weeks had quite a large
business, considering the size of the village, and philosophically
observed to a neighbor that “It was an ill wind which blew no one any
good,” adding also that Sidney was more good to her dead than alive. But
even in Gartley the villagers grew weary of discussing a mystery which
could never be solved, and so the case became rarely talked about. In
these days of bustle and worry and competition, it is wonderful how
people forget even important events. If a blue sun arose to lighten
the world instead of a yellow one, after nine days of wonder, man would
settle down quite comfortably to a cerulean existence. Such is the
wonderful adaptability of humanity.

Professor Braddock was less forgetful, as he always bore in mind the
loss of his mummy, and constantly thought of schemes whereby he could
trap the assassin of his late secretary. Not that he cared for the dead
in any way, save from a strictly business point of view, but the capture
of the criminal meant the restitution of the mummy, and--as Braddock
told everyone with whom he came in contact--he was determined to regain
possession of his treasure. He went himself to the Sailor's Rest, and
drove the landlord and his servants wild by asking tart questions and
storming when a satisfactory answer could not be supplied. Quass
was glad when he saw the plump back of the cross little man, who so
pertinaciously followed what everyone else had abandoned.

“Life was too short,” grumbled Quass, “to be bothered in that way.”

The wooing of Archie and Lucy went on smoothly, and the Professor showed
no sign of wishing to break the engagement. But Hope, as he confided
to Lucy, was somewhat worried, as his pauper uncle, on an insufficient
borrowed capital, had begun to speculate in South African mines, and it
was probable that he would lose all his money. In that case Hope fancied
he would be once more called upon to make good the avuncular loss, and
so the marriage would have to be postponed. But it so happened that the
pauper uncle made some lucky speculative shots and acquired money, which
he promptly reinvested in new mines of the wildcat description. Still,
for the moment all was well, and the lovers had a few halcyon days of
peace and happiness.

Then came a bolt from the blue in the person of Captain Hervey, who
called a fortnight after the funeral to see the Professor. The skipper
was a tall, slim man, lean as a fasting friar, and hard as nails, with
closely clipped red hair, mustache of the same aggressive hue, and
an American goatee. He spoke with a Yankee accent, and in a truculent
manner, sufficiently annoying to the fiery Professor. When he met
Braddock in the museum, the two became enemies at the first glance, and
because both were bad-tempered and obstinate, took an instant dislike to
one another. Like did not draw to like in this instance.

“What do you want to see me about?” asked Braddock crossly. He had
been summoned by Cockatoo from the perusal of a new papyrus to see his
visitor, and consequently was not in the best of tempers.

“I've jes' blew in fur a trifle of chin-music,” replied Hervey with an
emphatic U.S.A. accent.

“I'm busy: get out,” was the uncomplimentary reply.

Hervey took a chair and, stretching his lengthy legs, produced a black
cheroot, as long and lean as himself.

“If you were in the States, Professor, I'd draw a bead on you for that
style of lingo. I'm not taking any. See!” and he lighted up.

“You're the captain of 'The Diver'?”

“That's so; I was, that is. Now, I've shifted to a dandy wind-jammer of
sorts that can run rings round the old barky. I surmise I'm off for the
South Seas, pearl-fishing, in three months. I'll take that Kanaka along
with me, if y'like, Professor,” and he cast a side glance at Cockatoo,
who was squatting on his hams as usual, polishing a blue enameled jar
from a Theban tomb.

“I require the services of the man,” said Braddock stiffly. “As to you,
sir: you've been paid for your business in connection with Bolton's
passage and the shipment of my mummy, so there is no more to be said.”



“Heaps more! heaps, you bet,” remarked the man of the sea placidly, and
controlling a temper which in less civilized parts would have led him to
wipe the floor with the plump scientist. “My owners were paid fur that
racket: not me. No, sir. So I've paddled into this port to see if I can
rake in a few dollars on my own.”

“I've no dollars to give you--in charity, that is.”

“Huh! An' who asked charity, you bald-headed jelly-bag?”

Braddock grew scarlet with fury. “If you speak to me like that, you
ruffian, I'll throw you out.”

“What?--you?”

“Yes, me,” and the Professor stood on tip-toe, like the bantam he was.

“You make me smile, and likewise tired,” murmured Hervey, admiring the
little man's pluck. “See here, Professor, touching that mummy?”

“My mummy: my green mummy. What about it?” Braddock rose to the fly
thrown by this skilful angler.

“That's so. What will you shell out if I pass along that corpse?”

“Ah!” The Professor again stood on tip-toe, gasping and purple in the
face. He almost squeaked in the extremity of his anger. “I knew it.”

“Knew what?” demanded the skipper, genuinely surprised.

“I knew that you had stolen my mummy. Yes, you needn't deny it. Bolton,
like the silly fool he was, told you how valuable the mummy was, and you
strangled the poor devil to get my property.”

“Go slow,” said the captain, in no wise perturbed by this accusation.
“I would have you remember that at the inquest it was stated that the
window was locked and the door was open. How then could I waltz into
that blamed hotel and arrange for a funeral? 'Sides, I guess shooting
is mor'n my line than garrotting. I leave that to the East Coast
Yellow-Stomachs.”

Braddock sat down and wiped his face. He saw plainly enough that he had
not a leg to stand on, as Hervey was plainly innocent.

“'Sides,” went on the skipper, chewing his cheroot, “I guess if I'd
wanted that old corpse of yours, I'd have yanked Bolton overside, and
set down the accident to bad weather. Better fur me to loot the case
aboard than to make a fool of myself ashore. No, sir, H.H. don't run 'is
own perticler private circus in that blamed way.”

“H.H. Who the devil is H.H.?”

“Me, you bet. Hiram Hervey, citizen of the U.S.A. Nantucket neighborhood
for home life. And see, don't you get m'hair riz, or I'll scalp.”

“You can't scalp me,” chuckled Braddock, passing his hand over a very
bald head. “See here, what do you want?”

“Name a price and I'll float round to get back your verdant corpse.”

“I thought you were going to the South Seas?”

“In three months, pearl-fishing. Lots of time, I reckon, to run this old
circus I want you to finance.”

“Have you any suspicions?”

“No, 'sept I don't believe in that window business.”

“What do you mean?” Braddock sat upright.

“Well,” drawled the Yankee, “y'see, I interviewed the gal as told that
perticler lie in court.”

“Eliza Flight. Was it a lie she told?”

“Well, not exactly. The window was snibbed, but that was done after the
chap who sent your pal to Kingdom Come had got out.”

“Do you mean to say that the window was locked from the outside?” asked
Braddock, and then, when Hervey nodded, he exclaimed “Impossible!”

“Narry an impossibility, you bet. The chap who engineered the circus
was all-fired smart. The snib was an old one, and he yanked a piece of
string round it, and passed the string through the crack between the
upper and lower sash of the window. When outside he pulled, and the snib
slid into place. But he left the string on the ground outside. I picked
it up nex' day and guessed the racket he'd been on. I tried the same
business and brought off the deal.”

“It sounds wonderful and yet impossible,” cried Braddock, rubbing his
bald head and walking excitedly to and fro. “See here, I'll come along
with you and see how it's done.”

“You bet you won't, unless you shell out. See here”--Hervey leaned
forward--“from that window business it's plain that no one inside the
shanty corpsed your pal. The chap as did it entered and left by the
window, and made tracks with that old corp you want. Now you pass along
five hundred pounds--that's English currency, I reckon--and I'll smell
round for the robber.”

“And where do you think I can obtain five hundred pounds?” asked the
Professor very dryly.

“Well, I guess if that blamed corpse is worth it, you'll be willing to
trade. Y'don't live in this shanty for nothing.”

“My good friend, I have enough to live on, and obtain this house at a
small rent on account of its isolation. But I can no more find the sum
of five hundred pounds than fly.”

Hervey rose and straightened his legs.

“Then I guess I'd best be getting back to Pierside.”

“One moment, sir. Did anything happen on the voyage?--did Bolton say
anything likely to lead you to suppose that he was in danger of being
robbed and murdered?”

“No,” said the skipper musingly, and pulling his goatee. “He told me
that he had secured the old corpse, and was bringing it home to you. I
didn't talk much to Bolton; he wasn't my style.”

“Have you any idea who killed him?”

“No, I ain't.”

“Then how do you propose to find the criminal who has the mummy?”

“You give me five hundred pounds and see,” said Hervey coolly.

“I haven't got the money.”

“Then I reckon you don't get the corpse. So long,” and the skipper
strolled towards the door. Braddock followed him.

“You have a clue?”

“No, I've got nothing; not even that five hundred pounds you make such
a fuss over. It's a wasted day with H.H., I surmise. Wait!” He scribbled
on a card and flung it across the room. “That's my Pierside address if
you should change your blamed mind.”

The Professor picked up the card. “The Sailor's Rest! What, are you
stopping there?” Then, when Hervey nodded, he cried violently, “Why, I
believe you have a clue, and stop at the hotel to follow it up.”

“Maybe I do and maybe I don't,” retorted the captain, opening the door
with a jerk; “anyhow, I don't hunt for that corpse without the dollars.”

When Hiram Hervey departed, the Professor raged up and down the room so
violently that Cockatoo was cowed by his anger. Apparently this American
skipper knew of something which might lead to the discovery of the
assassin and incidentally to the restoration of the green mummy to its
rightful owner. But he would not make a move unless he was paid five
hundred pounds, and Braddock did not know where to procure that
amount. Having long since made himself acquainted with Hope's financial
condition, he knew well that there was no chance of getting a second
check in that quarter. Of course there was Random, whom he had heard
casually had returned from his yachting cruise, and was now back again
at the Fort. But Random was in love with Lucy, and would probably only
give or lend the money on condition that the Professor helped him with
his wooing. In that case, since Lucy was engaged to Hope, there would
be some difficulty in altering present conditions. But having arrived
at this point of his somewhat angry meditations, Braddock sent Cockatoo
with a message to his step-daughter, saying that he wished to see her.

“I'll see if she really loves Hope,” thought the Professor, rubbing his
plump hands. “If she doesn't, there may be a chance of her throwing
him over to become Lady Random. Then I can get the money. And indeed,”
 soliloquized the Professor virtuously, “I must point out to her that
it is wrong of her to make a poor marriage, when she can gain a
wealthy husband. I will only be doing my duty by my dear dead wife, by
preventing her wedding poverty. But girls are so obstinate, and Lucy is
a thorough girl.”

His amiable anxiety on behalf of Miss Kendal was only cut short by the
entrance of the young lady herself. Professor Braddock then showed his
hand too plainly by evincing a strong wish to conciliate her in every
way. He procured her a seat: he asked after her health: he told her that
she was growing prettier every day, and in all ways behaved so unlike
his usual self, that Lucy became alarmed and thought that he had been
drinking.

“Why have you sent for me?” she asked, anxious to come to the point.

“Aha!” Braddock put his venerable head on one side like a roguish bird
and smiled in an infantine manner. “I have good news for you.”

“About the mummy?” she demanded innocently.

“No, about flesh and blood, which you prefer. Sir Frank Random has
arrived back at the Fort. There!”

“I know that,” was Miss Kendal's unexpected reply. “His yacht came to
Pierside on the same afternoon as The Diver arrived.”

“Oh, indeed!” said the Professor, struck by the coincidence, and with a
stare. “How do you know?”

“Archie met Sir Frank the other day, and learned as much.”

“What?” Braddock struck a tragic attitude. “Do you mean to say that
those two young men speak to one another?”

“Yes. Why not? They are friends.”

“Oh!” Braddock became roguish again. “I fancied they were lovers of a
certain young lady who is in this room.”

By this time Lucy was beginning to guess what her step-father was aiming
at, and grew correspondingly angry.

“Archie is my sole lover now,” she remarked stiffly. “Sir Frank knows
that we are engaged and is quite ready to be the friend of us both.”

“And he calls that love. Idiot!” cried the Professor, much disgusted.
“But I would point out to you, Lucy--and I do so because of my deep
affection for you, dear child--that Sir Frank is wealthy.”

“So is Archie--in my love.”

“Nonsense! nonsense! That is mere foolish romance, He has no money.”

“You should not say that. Archie had money to the extent of one thousand
pounds, which he gave you.”

“One thousand pounds: a mere nothing. Consider, Lucy, that if you marry
Random you will have a title.”

Miss Kendal, whose patience was getting exhausted, stamped a very neat
boot.

“I don't know why you talk in this way, father.”

“I wish to see you happy.”

“Then your wish is granted: you do see me happy. But I won't be happy
long if you keep bothering me to marry a man I don't care two straws
about. I am going to be Mrs. Hope, so there.”

“My dear child,” said the Professor, who always became paternal when
most obstinate, “I have reason to believe that the green mummy can be
discovered and poor Sidney's death avenged if a reward of five hundred
pounds is offered. If Hope can give me that money--”

“He will not: I shall not allow him to. He has lost too much already.”

“In that case I must apply to Sir Frank Random.”

“Well, apply,” she snapped, being decidedly angry; “it's none of my
business. I don't want to hear anything about it.”

“It is your business, miss,” cried Braddock, growing angry in his turn
and becoming very pink; “you know that only by getting you to marry
Random can I procure the money.”

“Oh!” said Lucy coldly. “So this is why you sent for me. Now, father, I
have had enough of this. You gave your consent to Archie being engaged
to me in exchange for one thousand pounds. As I love him I shall abide
by the word you gave. If I had not loved him I should have refused to
marry him. You understand?”

“I understand that I have a very obstinate girl to deal with. You shall
marry as I choose.”

“I shall do nothing of the sort. You have no right to dictate my choice
of a husband.”

“No right, when I am your father?”

“You are not my father: merely my step-father--merely a relation by
marriage. I am of age. I can do as I like, and intend to.”

“But, Lucy,” implored Braddock, changing his tune, “think.”

“I have thought. I marry Archie.”

“But he is poor and Random is rich.”

“I don't care. I love Archie and I don't love Frank.”

“Would you have me lose the mummy for ever?”

“Yes, I would, if my misery is to be the price of its restoration. Why
should I sell myself to a man I care nothing about, just because you
want a musty, fusty old corpse? Now I am going.” Lucy walked to the
door. “I shan't listen to another word. And if you bother me again, I
shall marry Archie at once and leave the house.”

“I can make you leave it in any case, you ungrateful girl,” bellowed
Braddock, who was purple with rage, never having a very good temper at
the best of times. “Look what I have done for you!”

Miss Kendal could have pointed out that her step-father had done nothing
save attend to himself. But she disdained such an argument, and
without another word opened the door and walked out. Almost immediately
afterwards Cockatoo entered, much to the relief of the Professor, who
relieved his feelings by kicking the unfortunate Kanaka. Then he sat
down again to consider ways and means of obtaining the necessary mummy
and still more necessary money.




CHAPTER VIII. THE BARONET

Sir Frank Random was an amiable young gentleman with--as the saying
goes--all his goods in the shop window. Fair-haired and tall, with a
well-knit, athletic figure, a polished manner, and a man-of-the-world
air, he strictly resembled the romantic officer of Bow Bells, Family
Herald, Young Ladies' Journal fiction. But the romance was all in his
well-groomed looks, as he was as commonplace a Saxon as could be
met with in a day's march. Fond of sport, attentive to his duties as
artillery captain, and devoted to what is romantically known as the fair
sex, he sauntered easily through life, very well contented with himself
and with his agreeable surroundings. He read fiction when he did read,
and those weekly papers devoted to sport; troubled his head very
little about politics, save when they had to do with a possible
German invasion, and was always ready to do any one a good turn. His
brother-officers declared that he was not half a bad sort, which was
high praise from the usually reticent service man. His capacity may be
accurately gauged by the fact that he did not possess a single enemy,
and that every one spoke well of him. A mortal who possesses no quality
likely to be envied by those around him is certain to belong to the rank
and file of humanity. But these unconsidered units of mankind can always
console themselves with the undoubted fact that mediocrity is invariably
happy.

Such a man as Random would never set the Thames on fire, and certainly
he had no ambition to perform that astounding feat. He was fond of his
profession and intended to remain in the army as long as he could. He
desired to marry and beget a family, and retire, when set free from
soldiering, to his country seat, and there perform blamelessly the
congenial role of a village squire, until called upon to join the
respectable corpses in the Random vault. Not that he was a saint or
ever could be one. Neither black nor white, he was simply gray, being an
ordinary mixture of good and bad. As theology has provided no hereafter
for gray people, it is hard to imagine where the bulk of humanity will
go. But doubts on this point never troubled Random. He went to church,
kept his mouth shut and his pores open and vaguely believed that it
would be all right somehow. A very comfortable if superficial philosophy
indeed.

It can easily be guessed that Random's somewhat colorless personality
would never attract Lucy Kendal, since the hues of her own character
were deeper. For this reason she was drawn to Hope, who possessed that
aggressive artistic temperament, where good and bad, are in violent
contrast. Random took opinions from books, or from other people, and
his mind, like a looking-glass, reflected whatever came along; but Hope
possessed opinions of his own, both right and wrong, and held to these
in the face of all verbal opposition. He could argue and did argue, when
Random simply agreed. Lucy had similar idiosyncrasies, inherited from
a clever father, so it was just as well that she preferred Archie
to Frank. Had the latter young gentleman married her, he would have
dwindled to Lady Random's husband, and would have found too late that he
had domesticated a kind of imitation George Eliot. When he congratulated
Archie on his engagement somewhat ruefully, he little thought what an
escape he had had.

But Professor Braddock, who did not belong to the gray tribe, knew
nothing of this, as his Egyptological studies did not permit him time to
argue on such commonplace matters. He therefore failed in advance when
he set out to persuade Random into renewing his suit. As the fiery
little man afterwards expressed himself, “I might as well have talked to
a mollusc,” for Random politely declined to be used as an instrument
to forward the Professor's ambition at the cost of Miss Kendal's
unhappiness. The interview took place in Sir Frank's quarters at the
Fort on the day after Hervey had called to propose a search for the
corpse. And it was during this interview that Braddock learned something
which both startled and annoyed him.

Random, at three o'clock, had just changed into mufti, when the
Professor was announced by his servant. Braddock, determined to give his
host no chance of denying himself, followed close on the man's heels,
and was in the room almost before Sir Frank had read the card. It was
a bare room, sparsely furnished, according to the War Office's idea
of comfort, and although the baronet had added a few more civilized
necessities, it still looked somewhat dismal. Braddock, who liked
comfort, shook hands carelessly with his host and cast a disapproving
eye on his surroundings.

“Dog kennel! dog kennel!” grumbled the polite Professor. “Bare
desolation like a damned dungeon. You might as well live in the Sahara.”

“It would certainly be warmer,” replied Random, who knew the scientist's
snappy ways very well. “Take a chair, sir!”

“Hard as bricks, confound it! Hand me over a cushion. There, that's
better! No, I never drink between meals, thank you. Smoke? Hang it,
Random, you should know by this time that I dislike making a chimney of
my throat! There! there! don't fuss. Take a seat and listen to what I
have to say. It's important. Poke the fire, please: it's cold.”

Random placidly did as he was told, and then lighted a cigar, as he sat
down quietly.

“I am sorry to hear of your trouble, sir.'”

“Trouble! trouble! What particular trouble?”

“The death of your assistant.”

“Oh yes. Silly young ass to get killed. Lost my mummy, too: there's
trouble if you like.”

“The green mummy.” Random looked into the fire, “Yes. I have heard of
the green mummy.”

“I should think you have,” snapped Braddock, warming his plump hands.
“Every penny-a-liner has been talking about it. When did you return?”

“On the same day that that steamer with the mummy on board arrived,” was
Random's odd reply.

The Professor stared suspiciously. “I don't see why you should date your
movements by my mummy,” he retorted.

“Well, I had a reason in doing so.”

“What reason?”

“The mummy--”

“What about it?--do you know where it is?” Braddock started to his feet,
and looked eagerly at the calm face of his host.

“No, I wish I did. How much did you pay for it, Professor?”

“What's that to you?” snapped the other, resuming his seat.

“Nothing at all. But it is a great deal to Don Pedro de Gayangos.”

“And who the deuce is he? Some Spanish Egyptologist?”

“I don't think he is an Egyptologist, sir.”

“He must be, if he wants my mummy.”

“You forget, Professor, that the green mummy comes from Peru.”

“Who denied that it did, sir? You are illogical--infernally so.” The
little man rose and straddled on the hearth-rug, with his back to the
fire and his hands under his coat-tails. “Now, sir,” he said, glaring
at the young man like a school-master--“what the deuce are you talking
about? Out with it: no evasion.”

“Oh, hang it, Professor, don't jump down my throat, spurs and all,” said
Random, rather annoyed by this dictatorial tone.

“I never wear spurs: go on, sir, and don't argue.”

Sir Frank could not help laughing, although he knew that it was useless
to induce Braddock to be civil. Not that the Professor, meant to be
rude, especially as he desired to conciliate Random. But long years of
fighting with other scientists and of having his own scientific way had
turned him into a kind of school-master, and every one knows that they
are the most domineering of the human race.

“It's a long story,” said the baronet, with a shrug and a smile.

“Story! story! What story?”


“'That which I am about to tell you.” And then

Random began hurriedly, so as to prevent further arguments of an
unprofitable kind. “I was at Genoa with my yacht, and there stopped on
shore at the Casa Bianca.”

“What place is that?”

“An hotel. I there met with a certain Don Pedro de Gayangos and his
daughter, Donna Inez, He was a gentleman from Lima, and had come to
Europe in search of the green mummy.”

Braddock stared.

“And what did this confounded Spaniard want with my green mummy?” he
demanded indignantly. “How did he know of its existence?--what reason
had he to try and obtain it? Answer, sir.”

“I shall let Don Pedro answer himself,” said Random dryly. “He arrives
in a couple of days, and intends to take rooms at the Warrior Inn along
with his daughter. Then you can question him, Professor.”

“I question you,” snapped Braddock angrily.

“And I am answering to the best of my ability. Don Pedro told me nothing
beyond the fact that he wanted the mummy, and had come to Europe to get
it. In some way he learned that it was in Malta and was for sale.”

“Quite so: quite so,” rasped the Professor. “He saw the advertisement in
the newspapers, as I did, and wanted to buy it over my head.”

“Oh, he wanted to buy it right enough, and wired to Malta,” said Random,
“but in reply he received a letter stating that it had been sold to you
and was being taken to England on The Diver. I followed The Diver in my
yacht and arrived at Pierside an hour after she did.”

“Ah!” Braddock glared. “I begin to see light. This infernal Spaniard was
on board, and wanted my mummy. He knew that Bolton had taken it to the
Sailor's Rest and went there to kill the poor lad and get my--”

“Nothing of the sort,” interrupted Sir Frank impatiently. “Don Pedro
remained behind in Genoa, intending to write and ask if you would sell
him the mummy. I wrote and told him of the murder of your assistant
and related all that had happened. He wired to me that he was coming to
England at once, as--as I told you. He will be in Gartley in a couple of
days. That is the whole story.”

“It is a sufficiently strange one,” grumbled Braddock, frowning. “What
does he want with my mummy?”

“I cannot tell you. But if you will sell--”

“Sell! sell! sell!” vociferated Braddock furiously.

“Don Pedro will give you a good price,” finished Random calmly.

“I haven't got the mummy,” said the Professor, sitting down and wiping
his pink head, “and if I had, I certainly would not sell. However, I'll
hear what this gentleman has to say when he arrives. Perhaps he can
throw some light on the mystery of this crime.”

“I am perfectly certain that he cannot, sir. Don Pedro--as I said--was
left behind in Genoa.”

“Humph!” said the Professor, unconvinced. “He could easily employ a
third party.”

Random rose, looking and feeling annoyed.

“I assure you that Don Pedro is a gentleman and a man of honor. He would
not stoop to--”

“There! there!” Braddock waved his hands. “Sit down: sit down.”

“You shouldn't say such things, Professor.”

“I say what I desire to say,” retorted the old gentleman tartly; “but we
can dismiss the subject for the time being.”

“I am only too glad to do so,” said Random, who was ruffled out of his
usual calm by the veiled accusation which Braddock had brought against
his foreign friend, “and to get to a more agreeable subject, tell me how
Miss Kendal is keeping.”

“She is ill, very ill,” said the Professor solemnly.

“Ill? Why, Hope, whom I met the other day, said that she was feeling
very well and very happy.”

“So Hope thinks, because he has forced her into an engagement.”

Random started to his feet.

“Forced her? Nonsense!”

“It isn't nonsense, and don't dare to speak like that to me, sir. I
repeat that Lucy--poor child--is breaking her heart for you.”

The young man stared and then broke into a hearty laugh.

“Pardon me, sir, but that is impossible.”

“It isn't, confound you!” said Braddock, who did not like being laughed
at. “I know women.”

“You don't know your daughter.”

“Step-daughter, you mean.”

“Ah, perhaps the more distant relationship accounts for your ignorance
of her character,” said Random dryly. “You are quite wrong. I was in
love with Miss Kendal, and asked her to be my wife before I went on
leave. She refused me, saying that she loved Hope, and because of her
refusal I took my broken heart to Monte Carlo, where I lost much more
money than I had any right to lose.”

“Your broken heart seems to have mended quickly,” said Braddock, who was
trying to suppress his wrath at this instance of Lucy's duplicity, for
so he considered it.

“Oh, pooh, it's only my way of speaking,” laughed the young man. “If my
heart had been really broken I should not have mentioned the fact.”

“Then you did not love Lucy, and you dared to play fast and loose with
her affections,” raged Braddock, stamping.

“You are quite wrong,” said Sir Frank sharply; “I did love Miss Kendal,
or I should certainly not have asked her to be my wife. But when she
told me that she loved another man, I stood aside as any fellow would.”

“You should have insisted on--”

“On nothing, sir. I am not the man to force a woman to give me a heart
which belongs to another person. I am very glad that Miss Kendal is
engaged to Hope, as he is a capital fellow, and will make her a better
husband than I ever could have made her. Besides,” Random shrugged his
shoulders, “one nail drives another out.”

“Humph! That means you love another.”

“I am not bound to tell you my private affairs, Professor.”

“Quite so: quite so; but Inez is a pretty and romantic name.”

“I don't know what you are talking about, sir,” said Random stiffly.

Braddock chuckled, having read the truth in the flush which had crept
over Random's tanned face.

“I ask your pardon,” he said elaborately. “I am an old man, and I
was your father's friend. You must not mind if I have been a trifle
inquisitive.”

“Say no more, sir: that is all right.”

“I don't agree with you, Random. Things are not all right and never will
be until my mummy is discovered. Now you can help me.”

“In what way?” asked the other uneasily.

“With money. Understand, my boy,” added the Professor in a genial way
which he knew well how to assume, “I should have preferred Lucy becoming
your wife. However, since she prefers Hope, there's no more to be said
on that score. I therefore will not make the offer I came here to make.”

“An offer, sir?”

“Yes! I fancied that you loved Lucy and were broken-hearted by the news
of her engagement to Hope. I therefore intended to ask you to give me,
or rather lend me, five hundred pounds on condition that I helped you
to--”

“Stop, Professor,” said Random, coloring, “I should never have bought
Miss Kendal as my wife on those terms.”

“Of course! of course! and--as I say--there is no more to be said. I
shall therefore agree to Lucy's engagement to Hope”--Braddock carefully
omitted to say that he had already agreed and had been paid one thousand
pounds to agree--“and will congratulate you when you lead Donna Inez to
the altar.”

“I never said anything about Donna Inez, Professor Braddock.”

“Of course not: modern reticence. However, I can see through a brick
wall as well as most people. I understand, so let us drop the subject,
my boy. And this five hundred pounds--”

“I cannot lend it to you, Professor. The fact is, I lost heaps of coin
at Monte Carlo, and am not in a position to--”

“Very good, let us shelve that also,” said Braddock with apparent
heartiness, although he was really very angry at his failure. “I am
sorry, though, as I wish to get back the mummy and to revenge poor
Sidney Bolton's death.”

“How can the five hundred do that?” asked Random with interest.

“Well,” drawled the Professor with his eyes on the young man's attentive
face, “Captain Hervey of The Diver came to me yesterday and proposed
to search for the assassin and his plunder on condition that I paid him
five hundred pounds. I am, as you know, very poor for a scientist,
and so I wished to borrow the five hundred from you on condition that
Lucy--”

“We won't talk of that again,” said Random hurriedly; “but do you mean
to say that this Captain Hervey knows of anything likely to solve this
mystery?”

“He says that he does not, and merely proposes to search. From what I
have seen of the man I should think that he had all the capacities of a
good bloodhound and would certainly succeed. But he will not move a step
without money.”

“Five hundred pounds,” murmured Random thoughtfully, while the Professor
watched him closely. “I can tell you how to obtain it.”

“How? In what way?”

“Don Pedro seems to be rich, and he wants the mummy,” said the baronet.
“So when he comes here ask him to--”

“Certainly not: certainly not,” raged Braddock, clapping on his hat in
a fury. “How dare you make such a proposition to me, Random! If this Don
Pedro offers the reward and Hervey finds the mummy, he will simply hand
it over to your friend.”

“He can scarcely do that, since you have bought the mummy. But Don Pedro
is willing to purchase it from you.”

“Humph!” Braddock moved to the door, thinking. “I shall reserve my
decision until this man arrives. Good day,” and he departed.

Random did not attempt to detain him, as he was somewhat weary of the
Professor's vagaries. He knew very well that Braddock would call on
Don Pedro when he came to the Warrior Inn, and join forces with him in
searching for the lost goods. And the train of thought initiated by the
Professor's visit led Random to a certain drawer, whence he took the
photograph of a splendid-looking beauty. To this he pressed his lips. “I
wonder if your father will give you to me in exchange for that mummy,”
 he thought, and kissed the pictured face again.




CHAPTER IX. MRS. JASHER'S LUCK'


Some weeks had now elapsed since the death and burial of Sidney Bolton,
and the excitement had simmered down to a gentle speculation as to who
had killed him. This question was discussed in a half-hearted manner
round the winter fires of Gartley, but gradually people were ceasing to
interest themselves in a crime, the mystery of which would apparently
never be solved. Life went on in the village and at the Pyramids much
in the same way, save that the Professor attended along with Cockatoo to
his museum and did not engage another assistant.

Archie and Lucy were perfectly happy, as they looked forward to being
married in the spring, and Braddock showed no desire to interfere with
their engagement. They knew, of course, that he had called upon Sir
Frank, but were ignorant of what had taken place. Random himself called
at the Pyramids to congratulate Miss Kendal on her engagement, and
seemed so very pleased that she was going to marry the man of her
choice, that, woman-like, she grew rather annoyed. As the baronet had
been her lover, she thought that he should wear the willow for her
sake. But Random showed no disposition to do so, therefore Lucy shrewdly
guessed that his broken heart had been mended by another woman. The
Professor could have confirmed the truth of this from the hints which
Random had given him, but he said nothing about his interview with the
young man, nor did he mention that a Spanish gentleman from Peru was
seeking for the famous green mummy.

Considerably vexed that Random should be so cheerful, Lucy cast round to
learn the truth. She could scarcely ask the baronet himself, and Archie
professed himself unable to explain. Miss Kendal did not dream of
cross-examining Braddock, as it never entered her mind that the
dry-as-dust scientist would know anything. It then occurred to this
inquisitive young lady that Mrs. Jasher might be aware of Random's
secret, which made him so cheerful. Sir Frank was a great friend of
the plump widow, and frequently went to take afternoon tea at her small
house, which was situated no great distance from the Fort. In fact,
Mrs. Jasher entertained the officers largely, as she was hospitable
by nature, and liked to have presentable men about her for flirting
purposes. With good-looking youth she assumed the maternal air, and in
the role of a clever woman of the world professed to be the adviser of
one and all. In this way she became quite a favorite, and her little
parlor--she liked the old English word--was usually, well filled at the
hour of afternoon tea.

Twice already Lucy had called on Mrs. Jasher after the commotion caused
by the crime, as she wished to speak to her about the same; but on each
occasion the widow proved to be absent in London. However, the third
visit proved to be more lucky, for Mrs. Jasher was at home, and
expressed herself happy to see the girl.

“So good of you to come and see me in my little wooden hut,” said the
widow, kissing her guest.

And Mrs. Jasher's cottage really was a little wooden hut, being what was
left of an old-fashioned farmhouse, built before the stone age. It lay
on the verge of the marshes in an isolated position and was placed in
the middle of a square garden, protected from the winter floods by a low
stone wall solidly built, but of no great height. The road to the Fort
ran past the front part of the garden, but behind the marshes spread
towards the embankment, which cut off the view of the Thames. The
situation was not an ideal one, nor was the cottage, but money was
scarce with Mrs. Jasher, and she had obtained the whole place at a
surprisingly small rental. The house and grounds were dry enough in
summer, but decidedly damp in winter. Therefore, the widow went to a
flat in London, as a rule, for the season of fogs. But this winter she
had made up her mind--so she told Lucy--to remain in her own little
castle and brave the watery humors of the marshes.

“I can always keep fires burning in every room,” said Mrs. Jasher, when
she had removed her guest's hat and had settled her for a confidential
talk on the sofa. “And after all, my dear, there is no place like home.”

The room was small, and Mrs. Jasher was small, so she suited her
surroundings excellently. Also, the widow had the good taste to furnish
it sparsely, instead of crowding it with furniture; but what furniture
there was could not be improved upon. There were Chippendale chairs,
a Louis Quinze table, a Sheridan cabinet, and a satin-wood desk,
hand-painted, which was said to have been the property of the unhappy
Marie Antoinette. Oil-paintings adorned the rose-tinted walls, chiefly
landscapes, although one or two were portraits. Also, there were
water-colored pictures, framed and signed caricatures, many plates
of old china, and rice-paper adornments from Canton. The room was
essentially feminine, being filled with Indian stuffs, with silver
oddments, with flowers, and with other trifles. The walls, the carpet,
the hangings, and the upholstery of the arm-chairs were all of a rosy
hue, so that Mrs. Jasher looked as young as Dame Holda in the Venusberg.
A very pretty room and a very charming hostess, was the verdict of the
young gentlemen from the Fort, who came here to flirt when they were not
serving their country.

Mrs. Jasher in a tea-rose tea-gown for afternoon tea--she always liked
to be in keeping--rang for that beverage dear to the feminine heart, and
lighted a rose-shaded lamp. When a glow as of dawn spread through the
dainty room, she settled Lucy on the sofa near the fire, and drew up an
arm-chair on the other side of the hearth-rug. Outside it was cold and
foggy, but the rose-hued curtains shut out all that was disagreeable in
the weather, and in the absence of male society, the two women talked
more or less confidentially. Lucy did not dislike Mrs. Jasher, even
though she fancied that the lively widow was planning to become the
mistress of the Pyramids.

“Well, my dear girl,” said Mrs. Jasher, shading her face from the fire
with a large fan, “and how is your dear father after his late terrible
experiences?”

“He is perfectly well, and rather cross,” replied Lucy, smiling.

“Cross?”

“Of course. He has lost that wretched mummy.”

“And poor Sidney Bolton.”

“Oh, I don't think he cares for poor Sidney's death beyond the fact
that he misses his services. But the mummy cost nine hundred pounds, and
father is much annoyed, especially as Peruvian mummies are somewhat hard
to obtain. You see, Mrs. Jasher, father wishes to see the difference
between the Peruvian and Egyptian modes of embalming.”

“Ugh! How gruesome!” Mrs. Jasher shuddered. “But has anything been
discovered likely to show who killed this poor lad?”

“No, the whole thing is a mystery.”

Mrs. Jasher looked into the fire over the top of the fan.

“I have read the papers,” she said slowly, “and have gathered what I
could from what the reporters explained. But I intend to call on the
Professor and hear all that evidence which did not get into the papers.”

“I think that everything has been made public. The police have no clue
to the murderer. Why do you want to know?”

Mrs. Jasher made a movement of surprise.

“Why, I am the Professor's friend, of course, my dear, and naturally I
want to help him to solve this mystery.”

“There is no chance, so far as I can see, of it ever being solved,” said
Lucy. “It's very sweet of you, of course, but were I you I should not
talk about it to my father.”

“Why?” asked Mrs. Jasher quickly.

“Because he thinks of nothing else, and both Archie and I are trying to
get him off the subject. The mummy is lost and poor Sidney is buried.
There is no more to be said.”

“Still, if a reward was offered--”

“My father is too poor to offer a reward, and the Government will not do
so. And as people will not work without money, why--” Lucy completed her
sentence with a shrug.

“I might offer a reward if the dear Professor will let me,” said the
widow unexpectedly.

“You! But I thought that you were poor, as we are.”

“I was, and I am not very rich now. All the same, I have come in for
some thousands of pounds.”

“I congratulate you. A legacy?”

“Yes. You remember how I told you about my brother who was a Pekin
merchant. He is dead.”

“Oh, I am so sorry.”

“My dear, what is the use of being sorry. I never cry over spilt milk,
or assume a virtue which I have not. My brother and I were almost
strangers, as we lived apart for so many years. However, he came home to
die at Brighton, and a few weeks ago--just after this murder took place,
in fact--I was summoned to his death-bed. He lingered on until last week
and died in my arms. He left me nearly all his money, so I will be able
to help the Professor.”

“I don't see why you should,” said Lucy, wondering why Mrs. Jasher did
not wear mourning for the dead.

“Oh yes, you do see,” remarked the widow, raising her eyes and rubbing
her plump hands together. “I want to marry your father.”

Lucy did not express astonishment, as she had understood this for a long
time.

“I guessed as much.”

“And what do you say?”

Miss Kendal shrugged her shoulders.

“If my step-father,” she emphasized the word--“if my step-father
consents, why should I mind? I am going to marry Archie, and no doubt
the Professor will be lonely.”

“Then you do not disapprove of me as a mother.”

“My dear Mrs. Jasher,” said Lucy, coldly, “there is no relationship
between me and my step-father beyond the fact that he married my
mother. Therefore you can never be my mother. Were I stopping on at the
Pyramids, that question might arise, but as I become Mrs. Hope in six
months, we can be friends--nothing more.”

“I am quite content with that,” said Mrs. Jasher in a businesslike way.
“After all, I am no sentimentalist. But I am glad that you do not mind
my marrying the Professor, as I don't want you to prevent the match, my
dear.”

Lucy laughed.

“I assure you that I have no influence with my father, Mrs. Jasher. He
will marry you if he thinks fit and without consulting me. But,” added
the girl with emphasis, “I do not see what you gain in becoming Mrs.
Braddock.”

“I may become Lady Braddock,” said the widow, dryly. Then, in answer to
the open astonishment on Lucy's face, she hastened to remark: “Do you
mean to say that you don't know your father is heir to a baronetcy?”

“Oh, I know that,” rejoined Miss Kendal. “The Professor's brother, Sir
Donald Braddock, is an old man and unmarried. If he dies without heirs,
as it seems likely, the Professor will certainly take the title.”

“Well, then, there you are!” cried Mrs. Jasher, in her liveliest tone.
“I want to give my legacy for the title and preside over a scientific
salon in London.”

“I understand. But you will never get my father to live in London.”

“Wait until I marry him,” said the little woman shrewdly. “I'll make a
man of him. I know, of course, that mummies and sepulchral ornaments and
those sort of horrid things are dull, but the Professor will become Sir
Julian Braddock, and that is enough for me. I don't love him, of course,
as love between two elderly people is absurd, but I shall make him a
good wife, and with my money he can take his proper position in the
scientific world, which he doesn't occupy at present. I would rather he
had been artistic, as science is so dull. However, I am getting on in
years and wish to have some amusement before I die, so I must take what
I can get. What do you say?”

“I am quite agreeable, as, when I leave, someone must look after my
father, else he will be shamefully robbed by everyone in household
matters. We are good friends, so why not you as well as another.”

“You are a dear girl,” said Mrs. Jasher with a sigh of relief, and
kissed Lucy fondly. “I am sure we shall get on excellently.”

“At a distance. The artistic world doesn't touch on the scientific, you
know. And you forget, Mrs. Jasher, that my father wishes to go to Egypt
to explore this mysterious tomb.”

Mrs. Jasher nodded.

“Yes, I promised, when I came in for my brother's money, to help the
Professor to fit out his expedition. But it seems to me that the money
will be better spent in offering a reward so that the mummy can be
found.”

“Well,” said Lucy, laughing, “you can give the Professor his choice.”

“Before marriage, not after. He needs to be managed, like all men.”

“You will not find him easy to manage,” said Lucy dryly. “He is a very
obstinate man, and quite feminine in his persistency.”

“H'm! I recognize that he is a difficult character, and between you and
me dear, I should not marry him but for the title. It sounds rather like
an adventuress talking in this way, but, after all, if he makes me Lady
Braddock I can give him enough money to let him realize his desire of
getting the mummy back. It's six of one and half a dozen of the other.
And I'll be good to him: you need not fear.”

“I am quite sure that, good or bad, the Professor will have his own way.
It is not his happiness I am thinking of so much as yours.”

“Really. Here is the tea. Put the table near the fire, Jane, between
Miss Kendal and myself. Thank you. The muffins on the fender. Thank you.
No, there is nothing more. Close the door when you go out.”

The tea equippage having been arranged, Mrs. Jasher poured out a cup
of Souchong, and handed it to her guest, resuming the subject of her
proposed marriage meanwhile.

“I don't see why you should be anxious about me, dear. I am quite
able to look after myself. And the Professor seems to be kind-hearted
enough.”

“Oh, he is kind-hearted when he gets his own way. Give him his hobby and
he will never bother you. But he won't live in London, and he will not
consent to this salon you wish to institute.”

“Why not? It means fame to him. I shall gather round me all the
scientists of London and make my house a centre of interest. The
Professor can stop in his laboratory if he likes. As his wife, I can
do all that is necessary. Well, my dear”--Mrs. Jasher took a cup of
tea--“we need not talk the subject threadbare. You do not disapprove of
my marriage with your step-father, so you can leave the rest to me. If
you can give me a hint of how to proceed to bring about this marriage,
of course I am not above taking it.”

Lucy glanced at the tea-gown.

“As you will have to tell the Professor that your brother is dead to
account for possessing the money,” she said pointedly, “I should advise
you to go into mourning. Professor Braddock will be shocked otherwise.”

“Dear me, what a tender heart he must have!” said Mrs. Jasher
flippantly. “My brother was very little to me, poor man, so he cannot
be anything to the Professor. However, I shall adopt your advice, and,
after all, black suits me very well. There”--she swept her hands across
the tea-table--“that is settled. Now about yourself?”

“Archie and I marry in the springtime.”

“And your other admirer, who has come back?”

“Sir Frank Random?” said Lucy, coloring.

“Of course. He called to see me a day or so ago, and seems less
broken-hearted than he should be.”

Lucy nodded and colored still deeper.

“I suppose some other woman has consoled him.”

“Of course. Catch a modern man wearing the willow for any girl, however
dear. Are you angry?”

“Oh no, no.”

“Oh yes, yes, I think,” said the widow, laughing, “else you are no
woman, my dear. I know I should be angry to see a man get over his
rejection so rapidly.”

“Who is she?” asked Lucy abruptly.

“Donna Inez de Gayangos.”

“A Spaniard?”

“I believe so--a colonial Spaniard, at least--from Lima. Her father, Don
Pedro de Gayangos, met Sir Frank in Genoa by chance.”

“Well?” demanded Lucy impatiently.

Mrs. Jasher shrugged her plump shoulders.

“Well, my dear, can't you put two and two together. Of course Sir Frank
fell in love with this dark-hued angel.”

“Dark-hued! and I am light-haired. What a compliment!”

“Perhaps Sir Frank wanted a change. He played on white and lost, and
therefore stakes his money on black to win. That's the result of having
been at Monte Carlo. Besides, this young lady is rich, I understand, and
Sir Frank--so he told me--lost much more money at Monte Carlo than he
could afford. Well, you don't look pleased.”

Lucy roused herself from a fit of abstraction.

“Oh yes, I am pleased, of course. I suppose, as any woman would, I felt
rather hurt for the moment in being forgotten so soon. But, after all,
I can't blame Sir Frank for consoling himself. If I am married first,
he shall dance at my wedding: if he is married first, I shall dance at
his.”

“And you shall both dance at mine,” said Mrs. Jasher. “Why, there is
quite an epidemic of matrimony. Well, Donna Inez arrives here with her
father in a day, or so. They stop at the Warrior Inn, I believe.”

“That horrid place?”

“Oh, it is clean and respectable. Besides, Sir Frank can hardly ask
them to stop in the Fort, and I have no room in this bandbox of mine.
However, the two of them--Donna Inez and Frank, I mean--can come here
and flirt; so can you and Archie if you like.”

“I fear four people in this room would not do,” laughed Lucy, rising to
take her leave. “Well, I hope Sir Frank will marry this lady and that
you will become Mrs. Braddock. Only one thing I should like to know.”

“And that is?”

“Why was the mummy stolen. It was not valuable save to a scientist.”

“By that argument a scientist must be the murderer and thief,” said Mrs.
Jasher. “However, we shall see. Meanwhile, live every moment of love's
golden hours: they never return.”

“That is good advice; I shall take it and my leave,” said Lucy, and
departed in a very happy frame of mind.




CHAPTER X. THE DON AND HIS DAUGHTER


Professor Braddock was usually the most methodical of men, and timed his
life by the clock and the almanac. He rose at seven, summer and winter,
to partake of a hearty breakfast, which served him until dinner came at
five thirty. Braddock dined at this unusual hour--save when there was
company--as he did not eat any luncheon and scorned the very idea of
afternoon tea. Two meals a day, he maintained, was enough for any man
who led a sedentary life, as too much food was apt to clog the wheels of
the intellect. He usually worked in his museum--if the indulgence of his
hobby could be called work--from nine until four, after which hour he
took a short walk in the garden or through the village. On finishing his
dinner he would glance over some scientific publication, or perhaps,
by way of recreation, play a game or two of patience; but at seven he
invariably retired into his own rooms to renew work. Retirement to bed
took place at midnight, so it can be guessed that the Professor got
through an enormous quantity of work during the year. A more methodical
man, or a more industrious man did not exist.

But on occasions even this enthusiast wearied of his hobby, and of the
year's routine. A longing to see brother scientists of his own way of
thinking would seize him, and he would abruptly depart for London, to
occupy quiet lodgings, and indulge in intercourse with his fellow-men.
Braddock rarely gave early intimation of his urban nostalgia. At
breakfast he would suddenly announce that the fit took him to go to
London, and he would drive to Jessum along with Cockatoo to catch the
ten o'clock train to London. Sometimes he sent the Kanaka back; at
other times he would take him to town; but whether Cockatoo remained or
departed, the museum was always locked up lest it should be profaned by
the servants of the house. As a matter of fact, Braddock need not have
been afraid, for Lucy--knowing her step-father's whims and violent
temper--took care that the sanctity of the place should remain
inviolate.

Sometimes the Professor came back in a couple of days; at times his
absence would extend to a week; and on two or three occasions he
remained absent for a fortnight. But whenever he returned, he said very
little about his doings to Lucy, perhaps deeming that dry scientific
details would not appeal to a lively young lady. As soon as he was
established in his museum again, life at the Pyramids would resume
its usual routine, until Braddock again felt the want of a change. The
wonder was, considering the nature of his work, and the closeness of
his application, that he did not more often indulge in these Bohemian
wanderings.

Lucy, therefore, was not astonished when, on the morning after her visit
to Mrs. Jasher, the Professor announced in his usual abrupt way that
he intended to go to London, but would leave Cockatoo in charge of his
precious collection. She was somewhat disturbed, however, as, wishing to
forward the widow's matrimonial aims, she had invited her to dinner for
the ensuing night. This she told her step-father, and, rather to her
surprise, he expressed himself sorry that he could not remain.

“Mrs. Jasher,” said Braddock hastily, drinking his coffee, “is a very
sensible woman, who knows when to be silent.”

“She is also a good housekeeper, I believe,” hinted Miss Kendal
demurely.

“Eh, what? Well? Why do you say that?” snapped Braddock sharply.

Lucy fenced.

“Mrs. Jasher admires you, father.”

Braddock grunted, but did not seem displeased, since even a scientist
possessing the usual vanity of the male is not inaccessible to flattery.

“Did Mrs. Jasher tell you this?” he inquired, smiling complacently.

“Not in so many words. Still, I am a woman, and can guess how much
another woman leaves unsaid.” Lucy paused, then added significantly:
“I do not think that she is so very old, and you must admit that she is
wonderfully well preserved.”

“Like a mummy,” remarked the Professor absently; then pushed back his
chair to add briskly: “What does all this mean, you minx? I know that
the woman is all right so far as a woman can be: but her confounded age
and her looks and her unexpressed admiration. What are these to an old
man like myself?”

“Father,” said Lucy earnestly, “when I marry Archie I shall, in all
probability, leave Gartley for London.”

“I know--I know. Bless me, child, do you think that I have not thought
of that? If you were only wise, which you are not, you would marry
Random and remain at the Fort.”

“Sir Frank has other fish to fry, father. And even if I did remain at
the Fort as his wife, I still could not look after you.”

“Humph! I am beginning to see what you are driving at. But I can't
forget your mother, my dear. She was a good wife to me.”

“Still,” said Lucy coaxingly, and becoming more and more the champion of
Mrs. Jasher, “you cannot manage this large house by yourself. I do not
like to leave you in the hands of servants when I marry. Mrs. Jasher is
very domesticated and--”

“And would make a good housekeeper. No, no, I don't want to give you
another mother, child.”

“There is no danger of that, even if I did not marry,” rejoined Lucy
stiffly. “A girl can have only one mother.”

“And a man apparently can have two wives,” said Braddock with dry humor.
“Humph!”--he pinched his plump chin--“it's not a bad idea. But of course
I can't fall in love at my age.”

“I don't think that Mrs. Jasher asks for impossibilities.”

The Professor rose briskly.

“I'll think over it,” said he. “Meanwhile, I am going to London.”

“When will you be back, father?”

“I can't say. Don't ask silly questions. I dislike being bound to time.
I may be a week, and I may be only a few days. Things can go on here
as usual, but if Hope comes to see you, ask Mrs. Jasher in, to play
chaperon.”

Lucy consented to this suggestion, and Braddock went away to prepare for
his departure. To get him off the premises was like launching a ship,
as the entire household was at his swift heels, packing boxes, strapping
rugs, cutting sandwiches, helping him on with his overcoat and assisting
him into the trap, which had been hastily sent for to the Warrior Inn.
All the time Braddock talked and scolded and gave directions and
left instructions, until every one was quite bewildered. Lucy and the
servants all sighed with relief when they saw the trap disappear round
the end of the road in the direction of Jessum. In addition to being a
famous archaeologist, the Professor was assuredly a great nuisance to
those who had to do with his whims and fancies.

For the next two or three days Lucy enjoyed herself in a quiet way with
Archie. In spite of the lateness of the season, the weather was still
fine, and the artist took the opportunity of the pale sunshine to sketch
a great deal of the marsh scenery. Lucy attended him as a rule when he
went abroad, and sometimes Mrs. Jasher, voluble and merry, would come
along with them to play the part of chaperon. But the girl noticed
that Mrs. Jasher's merriment was forced at times, and in the searching
morning light she appeared to be quite old. Wrinkles showed themselves
on her plump face and weary lines appeared round her mouth. Also, she
was absent-minded while the lovers chattered, and, when spoken to, would
return to the present moment with a start. As the widow was now well off
as regards money, and as her scheme to marry Braddock was well on the
way to success--for Lucy had duly reported the Professor's attitude--it
was difficult to understand why Mrs. Jasher should look so worried. One
day Lucy spoke to her on the subject. Random had strolled across the
marshes to look at Hope sketch, and the two men chatted together, while
Miss Kendal led the little widow to one side.

“There is nothing the matter, I hope,” said Lucy gently.

“No. Why do you say that?” asked Mrs. Jasher, flushing.

“You have been looking worried for the last few days.”

“I have a few troubles,” sighed the widow--“troubles connected with the
estate of my late brother. The lawyers are very disagreeable and make
all sorts of difficulties to swell their costs. Then, strangely enough,
I am beginning to feel my brother's death more than I thought I should
have done. You see that I am in mourning, dear. After what you said
the other day I felt that it was wrong for me not to wear mourning. Of
course my poor brother and I were almost strangers. All the same, as
he has left me money and was my only relative, I think it right to show
some grief. I am a lonely woman, my dear.”

“When my father comes back you will no longer be lonely,” said Lucy.

“I hope not. I feel that I want a man to look after me. I told you that
I desired to marry the Professor for his possible title and in order
to form a salon and have some amusement and power. But also I want a
companion for my old age. There is no denying,” added Mrs. Jasher with
another sigh, “that I am growing old in spite of all the care I take.
I am grateful for your friendship, dear. At one time I thought that you
did not like me.”

“Oh, I think we get on very well together,” said Lucy somewhat
evasively, for she did not want to say that she would make the widow an
intimate friend, “and, as you know, I am quite pleased that you should
marry my step-father.”

“So pleasant to think that you look at my ambition in that light,” said
Mrs. Jasher, patting the girl's arm. “When does the Professor return?”

“I cannot say. He refused to fix a date. But he usually remains away
for a fortnight. I expect him back in that time, but he may come much
earlier. He will come back when the fancy takes him.”

“I shall alter all that, when we are married,” muttered Mrs. Jasher with
a frown. “He must be taught to be less selfish.”

“I fear you will never improve him in that respect,” said Lucy dryly,
and rejoined the gentlemen in time to hear Random mention the name of
Don Pedro de Gayangos.

“What is that, Sir Frank?” she asked.

Random turned toward her with his pleasant smile.

“My Spanish friend, whom I met at Genoa, is coming here to-morrow.”

“With his daughter?” questioned Mrs. Jasher roguishly.

“Of course,” replied the young soldier, coloring. “Donna Inez is quite
devoted to her father and never leaves him.”

“She will one day, I expect,” said Hope innocently, for his eyes were
on his sketch and not on Random's face, “when the husband of her choice
comes along.”

“Perhaps he has come along already,” tittered Mrs. Jasher significantly.

Lucy took pity on Random's confusion.

“Where will they stay?”

“At the Warrior Inn. I have engaged the best rooms in the place. I fancy
they will be comfortable there, as Mrs. Humber, the landlady, is a good
housekeeper and an excellent cook. And I don't think Don Pedro is hard
to please.”

“A Spaniard, you say,” remarked Archie idly. “Does he speak English?”

“Admirably--so does the daughter.”

“But why does a Spaniard come to so out-of-the-way a place?” asked Mrs.
Jasher, after a pause.

“I thought I told you the other day, when we spoke of the matter,”
 answered Sir Frank with surprise. “Don Pedro has come here to interview
Professor Braddock about that missing mummy.”

Hope looked up sharply.

“What does he know about the mummy?”

“Nothing so far as I know, save that he came to Europe with the
intention of purchasing it, and found himself forestalled by Professor
Braddock. Don Pedro told me no more than that.”

“Humph!” murmured Hope to himself. “Don Pedro will be disappointed when
he learns that the mummy is missing.”

Random did not catch the words and was about to ask him what he had
said, when two tall figures, conducted by a shorter one, were seen
moving on the white road which led to the Fort.

“Strangers!” said Mrs. Jasher, putting up her lorgnette, which she used
for effect, although she had remarkably keen sight.

“How do you know?” asked Lucy carelessly.

“My dear, look how oddly the man is dressed.”

“I can't tell at this distance,” said Lucy, “and if you can, Mrs. Jasher
I really do not see why you require glasses.”

Mrs. Jasher laughed at the compliment to her sight, and colored through
her rouge at the reproof to her vanity. Meanwhile, the smaller figure,
which was that of a village lad leading a tall gentleman and a slender
lady, pointed toward the group round Hope's easel. Shortly, the boy ran
back up to the village road, and the gentleman came along the pathway
with the lady. Random, who had been looking at them intently, suddenly
started, having at length recognized them.

“Don Pedro and his daughter,” he said in an astonished voice, and sprang
forward to welcome the unexpected visitors.

“Now, my dear,” whispered the widow in Lucy's ear, “we shall see the
kind of woman Sir Frank prefers to you.”

“Well, as Sir Frank has seen the kind of man I prefer to him,” retorted
Lucy, “that makes us quite equal.”

“I am glad these new-comers talk English,” said Hope, who had risen to
his feet. “I know nothing of Spanish.”

“They are not Spanish, but Peruvian,” said Mrs. Jasher.

“The language is the same, more or less. Confound it! here is Random
bringing them here. I wish he would take them to the Fort. There's no
more work for the next hour, I suppose,” and Hope, rather annoyed, began
to pack his artistic traps.

On a nearer view, Don Pedro proved to be a tall, lean, dry man, not
unlike Dore's conception of Don Quixote. He must have had Indian blood
in his veins, judging from his very dark eyes, his stiff, lank hair,
worn somewhat long, and his high cheek-bones. Also, although he was
arrayed in puritanic black, his barbaric love of color betrayed itself
in a red tie and in a scarlet handkerchief which was twisted loosely
round a soft slouch hat, It was the hat and the brilliant red of tie and
handkerchief which had caught Mrs. Jasher's eye at so great a distance,
and which had led her to pronounce the man a stranger, for Mrs. Jasher
well knew that no Englishman would affect such vivid tints. All the
same, in spite of this eccentricity, Don Pedro looked a thorough
Castilian gentleman, and bowed gravely when presented to the ladies by
Random.

“Mrs. Jasher, Miss Kendal, permit me to present Don Pedro de Gayangos.”

“I am charmed,” said the Peruvian, bowing, hat in hand, “and in turn,
allow me, ladies, to introduce my daughter, Donna Inez de Gayangos.”

Archie was also presented to the Don and to the young lady, after which
Lucy and Mrs. Jasher, while not appearing to look, made a thorough
examination of the lady with whom Random was in love. No doubt Donna
Inez was making an examination on her own account, and with the
cleverness of the sex the three women, while chatting affably, learned
all that there was to be learned from the outward appearance of each
other in three minutes. Miss Kendal could not deny but what Donna Inez
was very beautiful, and frankly admitted--inwardly, of course--her own
inferiority. She was merely pretty, whereas the Peruvian lady was truly
handsome and quite majestic in appearance.

Yet about Donna Inez there was the same indefinite barbaric look
as characterized her father. Her face was lovely, dark and proud in
expression, but there was an aloofness about it which puzzled the
English girl. Donna Inez might have belonged to a race populating
another planet of the solar system. She had large black, melting eyes,
a straight Greek nose and perfect mouth, a well-rounded chin and
magnificent hair, dark and glossy as the wing of the raven, which was
arranged in the latest Parisian style of coiffure. Also, her gown--as
the two women guessed in an instant--was from Paris. She was perfectly
gloved and booted, and even if she betrayed somehow a barbaric taste for
color in the dull ruddy hue of her dress, which was subdued with black
braid, yet she looked quite a well-bred woman. All the same, her whole
appearance gave an observant onlooker the idea that she would be more
at home in a scanty robe and glittering with rudely wrought ornaments of
gold. Perhaps Peru, where she came from, suggested the comparison, but
Lucy's thoughts flew back to an account of the Virgins of the Sun, which
the Professor had once described. It occurred to her, perhaps wrongly,
that in Donna Inez she beheld one who in former days would have been the
bride of some gorgeous Inca.

“I fear you will find England dull after the sunshine of Lima,” said
Lucy, having ended a swift examination.

Donna Inez shivered a trifle and glanced around at the gray misty air
through which the pale sunshine struggled with difficulty.

“I certainly prefer the tropics to this,” she said in musical English,
“but my father has come down here on business, and until it is concluded
we shall remain in this place.”

“Then we must make things as bright as possible for you,” said Mrs.
Jasher cheerfully, and desperately anxious to learn more of the
new-comers. “You must come to see me, Donna Inez--yonder is my cottage.”

“Thank you, madame: you are very good.”

Meanwhile Don Pedro was talking to the two young men.

“Yes, I did arrive here earlier than I expected,” he was remarking, “but
I have to return to Lima shortly, and I wish to get my business with
Professor Braddock finished as speedily as possible.”

“I am sorry,” said Lucy politely, “but my father is absent.”

“And when will he return, Miss Kendal?”

“I can scarcely say--in a week or a fortnight.”

Don Pedro made a gesture of annoyance.

“It is a pity, as I am so very pressed for time. Still, I must remain
until the Professor returns. I am so anxious to hear if the mummy has
been found.”

“It is not found yet,” said Hope quickly, “and never will be.”

Don Pedro looked at him quietly.

“It must be found,” said he. “I have come all the way from Lima to
obtain it. When you hear my story you will not be surprised at my desire
to regain the mummy.”

“Regain it?” echoed Hope and Random in one breath.

Don Pedro nodded.

“The mummy was stolen from my father,” he said.




CHAPTER XI. THE MANUSCRIPT


It was certainly strange how constantly the subject of the missing
mummy came uppermost. Since it had disappeared and since the man who had
brought it to England was dead, it might have been thought that nothing
more would be said about the matter. But Professor Braddock harped
incessantly on his loss--which was perhaps natural--and Widow Anne also
talked a great deal as to the possibility of the mummy, being found,
as she hoped to learn by that means the name of the assassin who had
strangled her poor boy. Now Don Pedro de Gayangos appeared with the
strange information that the weird relic of Peruvian civilization had
been stolen from his father. Apparently fate was not inclined to let the
matter of the lost mummy drop, and was working round to a denouement,
which would possibly include the solution of the mystery of Sidney
Bolton's death. Yet, on the face of it, there appeared to be no chance
of the truth becoming known.

Of course, when Don Pedro announced that the Mummy had formerly belonged
to his father, every one was anxious to hear how it had been stolen. The
Gayangos family were established in Lima, and the embalmed body of Inca
Caxas had been purchased from a gentleman residing in Malta. How, then,
had it crossed the water, and how had Don Pedro learned its whereabouts,
only to arrive too late to secure his missing property? Mrs. Jasher was
especially anxious to learn these things, and explained her reasons to
Lucy.

“You see, my dear,” she said to the girl on the day after Don Pedro's
arrival in Gartley, “if we learn the past of that horrid mummy, we may
gain a clue to the person who desired possession of the nasty thing, and
so may hunt down this terrible criminal. Once he is found, the mummy may
be secured again, and should I be able to return it to your father, out
of gratitude he would certainly marry me.”

“You seem to think that the assassin is a man,” said Lucy dryly; “yet
you forget that the person who talked to Sidney through the window of
the Sailor's Rest was a woman.”

“An old woman,” emphasized Mrs. Jasher briskly: “quite so.”

Lucy contradicted.

“Eliza Flight did not say if the woman was old or young, but merely
stated that she wore a dark dress and a dark shawl over her head. Still,
this mysterious woman was connected in some way with the murder, else
she would not have been speaking to Sidney.”

“I don't follow you, my dear. You talk as though poor Mr. Bolton
expected to be murdered. For my part, I hold by the verdict of wilful
murder against some person or persons unknown. The truth is to be found,
if anywhere, in the past of the mummy.”

“We can discover nothing about that.”

“You forget what Don Pedro said, my dear,” remarked Mrs. Jasher hastily,
“that the mummy had been stolen from his father. Let us hear what he has
to say and we may find a clue. I am anxious that the Professor should
regain the green mummy for reasons which you know of. And now, my hear,
can you come to dinner to-night?”

“Well, I don't know.” Miss Kendal hesitated. “Archie said that he would
look in this evening.”

“I shall ask Mr. Hope also, my love. Don Pedro is coming and his
daughter likewise. Needless to say Sir Frank will follow the young lady.
We shall be a party of six, and after dinner we must induce Don Pedro to
relate the story of how the mummy was stolen.”

“He may not be inclined.”

“Oh, I think so,” replied; Mrs. Jasher quickly. “He wants to get the
mummy back again, and if we discuss the subject we may see some chance
of securing it.”

“But Don Pedro will not wish it to be restored to my father.”

Mrs. Jasher shrugged her plump shoulders.

“Your father and Don Pedro can arrange that themselves. All I desire is,
that the mummy should be found. Undoubtedly it belongs by purchase to
the Professor, but as it has been stolen, this Peruvian gentleman may
claim it. Well?”

“I shall come and Archie also,” assented Lucy, who was beginning to be
interested in the matter. “The affair is somewhat romantic.”

“Criminal, my dear, criminal,” said Mrs. Jasher, rising to take her
leave. “It is not a matter I care to mix myself up with. Still”--she
laughed--“you know, why I am doing so.”

“If I had to take all this trouble to gain a husband,” observed Lucy
somewhat acidly, “I should remain single all my life.”

“If you were as lonely as I am,” retorted the plump widow, “you would
do your best to secure a man toy look after you. I should prefer a young
and handsomer husband--such as Sir Frank Random, for instance but, as
beggars cannot be choosers, I must content myself with old age, a famous
scientist, and the chance of a possible title. Now mind, dear, to-night
at seven--not a minute later,” and she bustled away to prepare for the
reception of her guests.

It seemed to Lucy that Mrs. Jasher was taking a great deal of trouble to
become Mrs. Braddock, especially as the Professor's brother might live
for many a long day yet, in which case the widow would not gain the
title she coveted for years. However, the girl rather sympathized
with Mrs. Jasher, who was a companionable soul, and fond of society.
Circumstances condemned her to a somewhat lonely life in an isolated
cottage in a rather dull neighborhood, so it was little to be wondered
at that she should strive to move heaven and earth--as she was doing--in
the hope of escaping from her solitude. Besides, although Miss Kendal
did not wish to make a close companion of the widow, yet she did not
dislike her, and, moreover, thought that she would make Professor
Braddock a very presentable wife. Thinking thus, Lucy was quite willing
to forward Mrs. Jasher's plans by inducing Don Pedro to tell all he knew
about this missing mummy.

Thus it came about that six people assembled in the tiny pink parlor
of Mrs. Jasher at the hour of seven o'clock. It required dexterous
management to seat the whole company in the dining room, which was only
a trifle larger than the parlor. However, Mrs. Jasher contrived to place
them round her hospitable board in, a fairly comfortable fashion, and,
once seated, the dinner was so good that no one felt the drawbacks of
scanty elbow room. The widow, as hostess, was placed at the head of the
table; Don Pedro, as the eldest of the men, at the foot; and Sir Frank,
with Donna Inez, faced Archie and Lucy Kendal. Jane, who was well
instructed in waiting by her mistress, attended to her duties admirably,
acting both as footman and butler. Lucy, indeed, had offered Mrs. Jasher
the services of Cockatoo to hand round the wine, but the widow with a
pretty shudder had declined.

“That dreadful creature with his yellow mop of hair gives me the
shivers,” she declared.

Considering the isolation of the district, and the narrow limits of Mrs.
Jasher's income, the meal was truly, admirable, being well cooked and
well served, while the table was arrayed like an altar for the reception
of the various dishes. Whatever Mrs. Jasher might be as an adventuress,
she certainly proved herself to be a capital housekeeper, and Lucy
foresaw that, if she did become Mrs. Braddock, the Professor would fare
sumptuously, for the rest of his scientific life. When the meal was
ended the widow produced a box of superfine cigars and another of
cigarettes, after which she left the gentlemen to sip their wine, and
took her two young friends to chatter chiffons in the tiny parlor. And
it said much for Mrs. Jasher's methodical ways that, considering the
limited space, everything went--as the saying goes--like clockwork.
Likewise, the widow had proved herself a wonderful hostess, as she
kept the ball of conversation rolling briskly and induced a spirit of
fraternity, uncommon in an ordinary dinner party.

During the meal Mrs. Jasher had kept off the subject of the mummy, which
was the excuse for the entertainment; but when the gentlemen strolled
into the parlor, feeling well fed and happy, she hinted at Don Pedro's
quest. As the night was cold and the Peruvian gentleman came from the
tropics, he was established in a well padded arm-chair close to the
sea-coal fire, and with her own fair hands Mrs. Jasher gave him a cup of
fragrant coffee, which was rendered still more agreeable to the palate
by the introduction of a vanilla bean. With this and with a good
cigar--for the ladies gave the gentlemen permission to smoke--Don Pedro
felt very happy and easy, and complimented Mrs. Jasher warmly on her
capability of making her fellow-creatures comfortable.

“It is altogether comfortable, madame,” said Don Pedro, rising to make
a courtly bow. In fact, so agreeable was the foreigner that Mrs. Jasher
dreamed for one swift moment of throwing over the dry-as-dust scientist
to become a Spanish lady of Lima.

“You flatter me, Don Pedro,” she said, waving a wholly unnecessary fan
out of compliment to her guest's Spanish extraction. “Indeed, I am very
glad that you are pleased with my poor little house.”

“Pardon, madame, but no house can be poor when it is a casket to contain
such a jewel.”

“There!” said Lucy somewhat satirically to the young men, while
Mrs. Jasher blushed and bridled, “what Englishman could turn such a
compliment? It reminds one of Georgian times.”

“We are more sober now than my fathers were then,” said Hope, smiling,
“and I am sure if Random thought for a few minutes he could produce
something pretty. Go on, Random.”

“My brain is not equal to the strain after dinner,” said Sir Frank.

As for Donna Inez, she did not speak, but sat smiling quietly in her
corner of the room, looking remarkably handsome. As a young girl Lucy
was pretty, and Mrs. Jasher was a comely widow, but neither one had the
majestic looks of the Spanish lady. She smiled, a veritable queen amidst
the gim-crack ornaments of Mrs. Jasher's parlor, and Sir Frank, who was
fathoms deep in love, could not keep his eyes off her face.

For a few minutes the conversation was frivolous, quite the Shakespeare
and musical glasses kind of speech. Then Mrs. Jasher, who had no idea
that her good dinner should be wasted in charming nothings, introduced
the subject of the mummy by a reference to Professor Braddock. It was
characteristic of her cleverness that she did not address Don Pedro, but
pointed her speech at Lucy Kendal.

“I do hope your father will return with that mummy,” she observed, after
a dexterous allusion to the late tragedy.

“I don't think he has gone to look for it,” replied Miss Kendal
indifferently.

“But surely he desired to get it back, after paying nearly one thousand
pounds for it,” said Mrs. Jasher, with well-feigned astonishment.

“Oh, of course; but he would scarcely look for it in London.”

“Has Professor Braddock gone to search for the mummy?” asked Don Pedro.

“No,” answered Lucy. “He is visiting the British Museum to make some
researches in the Egyptian department.”

“When do you expect him back, please?”

Lucy shrugged her shoulders.

“I can't say, Don Pedro. My father comes and goes as the whim takes
him.”

The Spanish gentleman looked thoughtfully into the fire.

“I shall be glad to see the Professor when he returns,” he said in his
excellent, slow-sounding English. “My concern about this mummy is deep.”

“Dear me,” remarked Mrs. Jasher, shielding her fair cheek with the
unnecessary fan, and venturing on a joke, “is the mummy a relative?”

“Yes, madame,” replied Don Pedro, gravely and unexpectedly.

At this every one, very naturally, looked astonished--that is, all save
Donna Inez, who still preserved her fixed smile. Mrs. Jasher took a
mental note of the same, and decided that the young lady was not very
intelligent. Meanwhile Don Pedro continued his speech after a glance
round the circle.

“I have the blood of the royal Inca race in my veins,” he said with
pride.

“Ha!” murmured the widow to herself, “then that accounts for your love
of color, which is so un-English;” then she raised her voice. “Tell us
all about it, Don Pedro,” she entreated; “we are usually so dull here
that a romantic story excites us dreadfully.”

“I do not know that it is very romantic,” said Don Pedro with a polite
smile, “and if you will not find it dull--”

“Oh, no!” said Archie, who was as anxious as Mrs. Jasher to hear what
was to be said about the mummy. “Come, sir, we are all attention.”

Don Pedro bowed again, and again swept the circle with his deep-set
eyes.

“The Inca Caxas,” he remarked, “was one of the decadent rulers of
ancient Peru. At the Conquest by the Spaniards, Inca Atahuallpa was
murdered by Pizarro, as you probably know. Inca Toparca succeeded him as
a puppet king. He died also, and it was suspected that he was slain by
a native chief called Challcuchima. Then Manco succeeded, and is looked
upon by historians as the last Inca of Peru. But he was not.”

“This is news, indeed,” said Random lazily. “And who was the last Inca?”

“The man who is now the green mummy.”

“Inca Caxas,” ventured Lucy timidly.

Don Pedro looked at her sharply. “How do you come to know the name?”

“You mentioned it just now, but, before that, I heard my father mention
it,” said Lucy, who was surprised at the sharpness of his tone.

“And where did the Professor learn the name?” asked Don Pedro anxiously.

Lucy shook her head.

“I cannot say. But go on with the story,” she continued, with the naive
curiosity of a child.

“Yes, do,” pleaded Mrs. Jasher, who was listening with all her ears.

The Peruvian meditated for a few minutes, then slipped his hand into the
pocket of his coat and brought out a discolored parchment, scrawled and
scribbled with odd-looking letters in purple ink somewhat faded.

“Did you ever see this before?” he asked Lucy, “or any manuscript like
it?”

“No,” she answered, bending forward to examine the parchment carefully.

Don Pedro again swept an inquiring eye round the circle, but everyone
denied having seen the manuscript.

“What is it?” asked Sir Frank curiously.

Don Pedro restored the manuscript to his pocket.

“It is an account of the embalming of Inca Caxas, written by his son,
who was my ancestor.”

“Then you are descended from this Inca?” said Mrs. Jasher eagerly.

“I am. Had I my rights I should rule Peru. As it is, I am a poor
gentleman with very little money. That,” added Don Pedro with emphasis,
“is why I wish to recover the mummy of my great ancestor.”

“Is it then so valuable?” asked Archie suddenly. He was thinking of some
reason why the mummy should have been stolen.

“Well, in itself it is of no great value, save to an archaeologist,” was
Don Pedro's reply; “but I had better tell you the story of how it was
stolen from my father.”

“Go on, go on,” cried Mrs. Jasher. “This is most interesting.”

Don Pedro plunged into his story without further preamble.

“Inca Caxas held his state amidst the solitudes of the Andes, away from
the cruel men who had conquered his country. He died and was buried.
This manuscript,”--he touched his pocket--“was written by his son, and
details the ceremonies, the place of sepulchre, and also gives a list of
the jewels with which the mummy was buried.”

“Jewels,” murmured Hope under his breath. “I thought as much.”

“The son of Inca Caxas married a Spanish lady and made peace with the
Spaniards. He came to live at Cuzco, and brought with him, for some
purpose which the manuscript does not disclose, the mummy of his father.
But the manuscript was lost for years, and although my family--the De
Gayangoses--became poor, no member of it knew that, concealed in the
corpse of Inca Caxas, were two large emeralds of immense value. The
mummy of our royal ancestor was treated as a sacred thing and venerated
accordingly. Afterwards my family came to live at Lima, and I still
dwell in the old house.”

“But how was the mummy stolen from you?” asked Random curiously.

“I am coming to that,” said Don Pedro, frowning at the interruption.
“I was not in Lima at the time; but I had met the man who stole the
precious mummy.”

“Was he a Spaniard?”

“No,” answered Don Pedro slowly, “he was an English sailor called Vasa.”

“Vasa is a Swedish name,” observed Hope critically.

“This man said that he was English, and certainly spoke like an
Englishman, so far as I, a foreigner, can tell. At that time, when I was
a young man, civil war raged in Peru. My father's house was sacked, and
this Vasa, who had been received hospitably by my father when he was
shipwrecked at Callao, stole the mummy, of Inca Caxas. My father died of
grief and charged me to get the mummy back. When peace was restored to
my unhappy country I tried to recover the venerated body of my ancestor.
But all search proved vain, as Vasa had disappeared, and it was supposed
that, for some reason, he had taken the embalmed body out of the
country. It was when the mummy was lost that I unexpectedly came across
the manuscript, which detailed the funeral ceremonies of Inca Caxas,
and on learning about the two emeralds I was naturally more anxious than
ever to discover the mummy and retrieve my fallen fortunes by means
of the jewels. But, as I said, all search proved vain, and I afterward
married, thinking to settle down on what fortune remained to me. I did
live quietly in Lima for years until my wife died. Then with my daughter
I came to Europe on a visit.”

“To search for the mummy?” questioned Archie eagerly.

“No, sir. I had given up all hope of finding that. But chance placed a
clue in my hands. At Genoa I came across a newspaper, which stated that
a mummy in a green case--and a Peruvian mummy at that--was for sale
at Malta. I immediately made inquiries, thinking that this was the
long-lost body of Inca Caxas. But it so happened that I was too late,
as already the mummy had been sold to Professor Braddock, and had been
taken to England on board The Diver by Mr. Bolton. Chance, which had
pointed out the whereabouts of the mummy, also brought me at Genoa
into relations with Sir Frank Random”--Don Pedro bowed his head to
the baronet--“and, as it appeared that he knew Professor Braddock, I
thankfully accepted his offer to introduce me. Hence I am here, but only
to hear that the mummy is again lost. That is all,” and the Peruvian
gentleman dramatically waved his arm.

“A strange story,” said Archie, who was the first to speak, “and it
certainly solves at least one part of the mystery.”

“What is that?” demanded Mrs. Jasher quickly.

“It shows that the mummy was stolen on account of the emeralds.”

“Pardon me, but that is impossible, sir,” said Don Pedro, drawing up his
lean figure. “No one but myself knew that the mummy held two emeralds
in its dead hands, and I learned that only a few years ago from the
manuscript which I had the honor of showing you.”

“There is that objection assuredly,” replied Hope with composure. “Yet
I can hardly believe that any man would risk his neck to steal so
remarkable a mummy, which he would have a difficulty in disposing of.
But did this assassin know of the emeralds, he would venture much to
gain them, since jewels can be disposed of with comparative ease, and
cannot easily be traced.”

“All the same,” said Random, looking up, “I do not see how the assassin
could have learned that the jewels were wrapped in the bandages.”

“Humph!” said Hope, glancing at De Gayangos, “perhaps there is more than
one copy of this manuscript you speak of.”

“Not to my knowledge.”

“The sailor Vasa might have copied it.”

“No.” Don Pedro shook his head. “It is written in Latin, since a Spanish
priest taught the son of Inca Caxas, who wrote it, that language. I do
not think that Vasa knew Latin. Also, if Vasa had copied the manuscript,
he would have stripped the mummy to procure the jewels. Now, in the
newspaper advertisement it stated that the bandages of the mummy were
intact, as also was the verdant case. No,” said Don Pedro decisively, “I
am quite of opinion that Vasa, and indeed everyone else, was ignorant of
this manuscript.”

“It seems to me,” suggested Mrs. Jasher, “that it would be best to find
this sailor.”

“That,” remarked De Gayangos, “is impossible. It is twenty years since
he disappeared with the mummy. Let us drop the subject until Professor
Braddock returns to discuss it with me.” And this was accordingly done.


CHAPTER XII. A DISCOVERY


Three days went by, and Professor Braddock still remained absent in
London, although an occasional letter to Lucy requested such and such an
article from the museum to be forwarded, sometimes by post and on other
occasions by Cockatoo, who traveled up to town especially. The Kanaka
always returned with the news that his master was looking well, but
brought no word of the Professor's return. Lucy was not surprised, as
she was accustomed to Braddock's vagaries.

Meanwhile Don Pedro, comfortably established at the Warrior Inn,
wandered about Gartley in his dignified way, taking very little interest
in the village, but a great deal in the Pyramids. As the Professor was
absent, Lucy could not ask him to dinner, but she did invite him and
Donna Inez to afternoon tea. Don Pedro was anxious to peep into the
museum, but Cockatoo absolutely refused to let him enter, saying that
his master had forbidden anyone to view the collection during his
absence. And in this refusal Cockatoo was supported by Miss Kendal, who
had a wholesome dread of her step-father's rage, should he return and
find that a stranger had been making free of his sacred apartments. The
Peruvian gentleman expressed himself extremely disappointed, so much
so, indeed, that Lucy fancied he believed Braddock had the green mummy
hidden in the museum, in spite of the reported loss from the Sailor's
Rest.

Failing to get permission to range through the rooms of the Pyramids,
Don Pedro paid occasional visits to Pierside and questioned the police
regarding the Bolton murder. From Inspector Date he learned nothing of
any importance, and indeed that officer expressed his belief that not
until the Day of judgment would the truth become known. It then occurred
to De Gayangos to explore the neighborhood of the Sailor's Rest, and
to examine that public-house himself. He saw the famous window through
which the mysterious woman had talked to the deceased, and noted that
it looked across a stony, narrow path to the water's edge, wherefrom a
rugged jetty ran out into the stream for some little distance. Nothing
would have been easier, reflected Don Pedro, than for the assassin to
enter by the window, and, having accomplished his deed, to leave in the
same way, bearing the case containing the mummy. A few steps would carry
the man and his burden to a waiting boat, and once the craft slipped
into the mists on the river, all trace would be lost, as had truly
happened. In this way the Peruvian gentleman believed the murder and the
theft had been accomplished, but even supposing things had happened as
he surmised, still, he was as far as ever from unraveling the mystery.

While Don Pedro searched for his royal ancestor's corpse, and
incidentally for the thief and murderer, his daughter was being wooed by
Sir Frank Random. Heaven only knows what he saw in her--as Lucy observed
to young Hope--for the girl had not a word to say for herself. She was
undeniably handsome, and dressed with great taste, save for stray
hints of barbaric delight in color, doubtless inherited from her Inca
ancestors. All the same, she appeared to be devoid of small talk or
great talk, or any talk whatsoever. She sat and smiled and looked like
a handsome picture, but after her appearance had satisfied the eye,
she left much to be desired. Yet Sir Frank approved of her stately
quietness, and seemed anxious to make her his wife. Lucy, in spite of
the fact that he had so speedily got over her refusal to marry him, was
anxious that he should be happy with Donna Inez, whom he appeared to
love, and afforded him every opportunity of meeting the lady, so that
he might prosecute his wooing. All the same, she wondered that he should
desire to marry an iceberg, and Donna Inez, with her silent tongue and
cold smiles, was little else. However, as Frank Random was the
chief party concerned in the love-making--for Donna Inez was merely
passive--there was no more to be said.

Sometimes Hope came to dine at the Pyramids, and on these occasions
Mrs. Jasher was present in her character of chaperon. As Miss Kendal was
helping the widow to marry Professor Braddock, she in her turn did her
best to speed Archie's wooing. Certainly the young couple were engaged
and there was no understanding to be brought about. Nevertheless, Mrs.
Jasher was a useful article of furniture to be in the room when they
were together, for Gartley, like all English villages, was filled with
scandalmongers, who would have talked, had Hope and Lucy not employed
Mrs. Jasher as gooseberry. Sometimes Donna Inez came with the widow,
while her father was hunting for the mummy in Pierside, and then Sir
Frank Random would be sure to put in an appearance to woo his Dulcinea
in admiring silence. Mrs. Jasher declared that the two must have made
love by telepathy, for they rarely exchanged a word. But this was all
the better, as Archie and Lucy chattered a great deal, and two pair of
magpies--Mrs. Jasher declared--would have been too much for her nerves.
She made a very good chaperon, as she allowed the young people to act as
they pleased, only sanctioning the meetings by her elderly presence.

One evening Mrs. Jasher was due to dinner, and Hope had already arrived.
No one else was expected, as Don Pedro had taken his daughter to the
theatre at Pierside and Sir Frank had gone to London in connection with
his military duties. It was a bitterly cold night, and already a fall
of snow had hinted that there was to be a real English Christmas of
the genuine kind. Lucy had prepared an excellent dinner for three, and
Archie had brought a set of new patience cards for Mrs. Jasher, who was
fond of the game. While the widow played, the lovers hoped to make love
undisturbed, and looked forward to a happy evening. But there was one
drawback, for although the dinner hour was supposed to be eight o'clock,
and it was now thirty minutes past, Mrs. Jasher had not arrived. Lucy
was dismayed.

“What can be keeping her?” she asked Archie, to which that young
gentleman replied that he did not know, and, what was more, he did not
care. Miss Kendal very properly rebuked this sentiment. “You ought to
care, Archie, for you know that if Mrs. Jasher does not come to dinner,
you will have to go away.”

“Why should I?” he inquired sulkily.

“People will talk.”

“Let them. I don't care.”

“Neither do I, you stupid boy. But my father will care, and if people
talk he will be very angry.”

“My dear Lucy,” and Archie put his arm round her waist to say this, “I
don't see why you should be afraid of the Professor. He is only your
step-father, and you aren't so very fond of him as to mind what he says.
Besides, we can marry soon, and then he can go hang.”

“But I don't want him to go hang,” she replied, laughing. “After all,
the Professor has always been kind to me, and as a step-father has
behaved very well, when he could easily have made himself disagreeable.
Another thing is that he can be very bad tempered when he likes, and if
I let people talk about us--which they will do if they get a chance--he
will behave so coldly to me, that I shall have a disagreeable time. As
we can't marry for ever so long, I don't want to be uncomfortable.”

“We can marry whenever you like,” said Hope unexpectedly.

“What, with your income so unsettled?”

“It is not unsettled.”

“Yes, it is. You will help that horrid spendthrift uncle of yours, and
until he and his family are solvent I don't see how we can be sure of
our money.”

“We are sure of it now, dearest. Uncle Simon has turned up trumps after
all, and so have his investments.”

“What do you mean exactly?”

“I mean that yesterday I received a letter from him saying that he was
now rich, and would pay back all I had lent him. I went up to London
to-day, and had an interview. The result of that is that I am some
thousands to the good, that Uncle Simon is well off for the rest of his
life and will require no more assistance, and that my three hundred a
year is quite clear for ever and ever and ever.”

“Then we can marry,” cried Miss Kendal with a gasp of delight.

“Whenever you choose--next week if you like.”

“In January then--just after Christmas. We'll go on a trip to Italy and
return to take a flat in London. Oh, Archie, I am sorry I thought so
badly of your uncle. He has behaved very well. And what a mercy it is
that he will require no more assistance! You are sure he will not.”

“If he does, he won't get it,” said Hope candidly. “While I was a
bachelor I could assist him; but when I am married I must look after
myself and my wife.” He gave Lucy a hug. “It's all right now, dear,
and Uncle Simon has behaved excellently--far better than I expected.
We shall go to Italy for the honeymoon and need not hurry back until
we--well, say until we quarrel.”

“In that case we shall live in Italy for the rest of our lives,” said
Lucy with twinkling eyes; “but we must come back in a year and take a
studio in Chelsea.”

“Why not in Gartley? Remember, the Professor will be lonely.”

“No, he won't. Mrs. Jasher, as I told you, intends to marry him.”

“He might not wish to marry her”

“That doesn't matter,” rejoined Lucy, with the cleverness of a woman.
“She can manage to bring the marriage about. Besides, I want to break
with the old life here, and begin quite a new one with you. When I
am your wife and Mrs. Jasher is my step-father's, everything will be
capitally arranged.”

“Well, I hope so,” said Archie heartily, “for I want you all to myself
and have no desire to share you with anyone else. But I say,” he glanced
at his watch; “it is getting towards nine o'clock, and I am desperately
hungry. Can't we go to dinner?”

“Not until Mrs. Jasher arrives,” said Lucy primly.

“Oh, bother--!”

Hope, being quite exasperated with hunger, would have launched out into
a speech condemning the widow's unpunctuality, when in the hall below
the drawing-room was heard the sound of the door opening and closing.
Without doubt this was Mrs. Jasher arriving at last, and Lucy ran out
of the room and down the stairs to welcome her in her eagerness to get
Archie seated at the dinner table. The young man lingered by the open
door of the drawing-room, ready to welcome the widow, when he heard Lucy
utter an exclamation of surprise and became aware that she was ascending
the stairs along with Professor Braddock. At once he reflected there
would be trouble, since he was in the house with Lucy, and lacked the
necessary chaperon which Braddock's primitive Anglo-Saxon instincts
insisted upon.

“I did not know you were returning to-night,” Lucy was saying when she
re-entered the drawing-room with her step-father.

“I arrived by the six o'clock train,” explained the Professor, unwinding
a large red scarf from his neck, and struggling out of his overcoat with
the assistance of his daughter. “Ha, Hope, good evening.”

“Where have you been since?” asked Lucy, throwing the Professor's coat
and wraps on to a chair.

“With Mrs. Jasher,” said Braddock, warming his plump hands at the fire.
“So you must blame me that she is not here to preside at dinner as the
chaperon of you young people.”

Lucy and her lover glanced at one another in surprise. This light and
airy tone was a new one for the Professor to take. Instead of being
angry, he seemed to be unusually gay, and looked at them in quite a
jocular manner for a dry-as-dust scientist.

“We waited dinner for her, father,” ventured Lucy timidly.

“Then I am ready to eat it,” announced Braddock. “I am extremely hungry,
my dear. I can't live on love, you know.”

“Live on love?” Lucy stared, and Archie laughed quietly.

“Oh yes, you may smile and look astonished;” went on the Professor
good-humoredly, “but science does not destroy the primeval instincts
entirely. Lucy, my dear,” he took her hand and patted it, “while in
London and in lodgings, it was borne in upon me forcibly how lonely I
was and how lonely I would be when you married our young friend yonder.
I had intended to come down to-morrow, but to-night, such was my feeling
of loneliness that I considered favorably your idea that I should find a
second helpmate in Mrs. Jasher. I have always had a profound admiration
for that lady, and so--on the spur of the moment, as I may say--I
decided to come down this evening and propose.”

“Oh,” Lucy clapped her hands, very well satisfied with the unexpected
news, “and have you?”

“Mrs. Jasher,” said the Professor gravely, “did me the honor to promise
to become my wife this evening.”

“She will become your wife this evening?” said Archie, smiling.

Braddock, with one of those odd twists of humor which were
characteristic of him, became irascible.

“Confound it, sir, don't I speak English,” he snapped, with his eyes
glaring rebuke. “She promised this evening to become Mrs. Braddock.
We shall marry--so we have arranged--in the springtime, which is the
natural pairing season for human beings as well as for birds. And I am
glad to say that Mrs. Jasher takes a deep interest in archaeology.”

“And, what is more, she is a splendid housekeeper,” said Lucy.

The temporary anger of the Professor vanished. He drew his step-daughter
towards him and kissed her on the cheek.

“I believe that I have to thank you for putting the idea into my head,”
 said he, “and also--if Mrs. Jasher is to be believed--for aiding her
to see the mutual advantage it would be to both of us to marry. Ha,” he
released Lucy and rubbed his hands, “let us go to dinner.”

“I am very glad,” said Miss Kendal heartily.

“So am I, so am I,” replied Braddock, nodding. “As you very truly
observed, my child, the house would have gone to rack and ruin without
a woman to look after my interests. Well,” he took the arms of the two
young people, “I really think that we must have a bottle of champagne on
the strength of it.”

Shortly the trio were seated at the table, and Braddock explained that
Mrs. Jasher, being overcome by his proposal, had not been able to face
the ordeal of congratulations.

“But she will come to-morrow,” said he, as Cockatoo filled three
glasses.

“Indeed, I shall congratulate her to-night,” said Lucy obstinately. “As
soon as dinner is over, I shall go with Archie to her house, and tell
her how pleased I am.”

“It is very cold for you to be out, Lucy dear,” urged Archie anxiously.

“Oh, I can wrap up warmly,” she answered.

Strange to say, the Professor made no objection to the excursion,
although Hope quite expected such a stickler for etiquette to refuse
permission to his step-daughter. But Braddock seemed rather pleased
than otherwise. His proposal of marriage seemed to have put him into
excellent humor, and he raised his glass with a chuckle.

“I drink to your happiness, my dear Lucy, and to that of Mrs. Jasher's.”

“And I drink to Archie's and to yours, father,” she replied. “I am glad
that you will not be lonely when we are married. Archie and I wish to
become one in January.”

“Yes,” said Hope, finishing his champagne, “my income is now all right,
as my uncle has paid up.”

“Very good, very good. I make no objection,” said Braddock placidly. “I
will give you a handsome wedding present, Lucy, for you may have heard
that my future wife has money left to her by her brother, who was lately
a merchant in Pekin. She is heart and hand with me in our proposed
expedition to Egypt.”

“Will you go there for the honeymoon, sir?” asked Hope.

“Not exactly for the honeymoon, since we are to be married in spring,
and my expedition to the tomb of Queen Tahoser cannot start until the
late autumn. But Mrs. Braddock will come with me. That is only just,
since it will be her money which will furnish the sinews of war.”

“Well, everything is arranged very well,” said Lucy. “I marry Archie;
you, father, make Mrs. Jasher your wife; and I suspect Sir Frank will
marry Donna Inez.”

“Ha!” said Braddock with a start, “the daughter of De Gayangos, who has
come here for the missing mummy. Mrs. Jasher told me somewhat of that,
my dear. But I shall see Don Pedro myself to-morrow. Meanwhile, let us
eat and drink. I must go down to the museum, and you--”

“We shall go to congratulate Mrs. Jasher,” said Lucy.

So it was arranged, and shortly Professor Braddock retired into his
sanctum along with the devoted Cockatoo, who displayed lively joy on
beholding his master once more. Lucy, after being carefully wrapped up
by Archie, set out with that young man to congratulate the bride-elect.
It was just half-past nine when they started out.

The night was frosty and the stars twinkled like jewels in a cloudless
sky of dark blue. The moon shone with hard brilliance on the ground,
which was powdered with a light fall of snow. As the young people walked
briskly through the village, their footsteps rang on the frosty earth
and they scrunched the snow in their quick tread. The Warrior Inn was
still open, as it was not late, and lights shone from the windows of the
various cottages. When the two, following the road through the marshes,
emerged from the village, they saw the great mass of the Fort bulking
blackly against the clear sky, the glittering stream of the Thames,
and the marshes outlined in delicate white. The fairy world of snow and
moonlight appealed to Archie's artistic sense, and Lucy approving of the
same, they did not hurry to arrive at their destination.

But shortly they saw the squarely fenced acre of ground near the
embankment, wherein Mrs. Jasher's humble abode was placed. Light shone
through the pink curtains of the drawing-room, showing that the widow
had not yet retired. In a few minutes the lovers were at the gate and
promptly entered. It was then that one of those odd things happened
which would argue that some people are possessed of a sixth sense.

Archie closed the gate after him, and, glancing right and left, walked
up the snowy path with Lucy. To the right was a leafless arbor, also
powdered with snow, and against the white bulked a dark form something
like a coffin. Hope out of curiosity went up to it.

“What the deuce is this?” he asked himself; then raised his voice in
loud surprise. “Lucy! Lucy! come here!”

“What is it?” she asked, running up.

“Look”--he pointed to the oddly shaped case--“the green mummy!”




CHAPTER XIII. MORE MYSTERY


Neither Lucy nor Archie Hope had ever seen the mummy, but they knew
the appearance which it would present, as Professor Braddock, with the
enthusiasm of an archaeologist, had often described the same to them. It
appeared, according to Braddock, that on purchasing the precious corpse
in Malta, his dead assistant had written home a full description of
the treasure trove. Consequently, being advised beforehand, Hope had no
difficulty in recognizing the oddly shaped case, which was made somewhat
in the Egyptian form. On the impulse of the moment he had proclaimed
this to be the long-lost mummy, and when a closer examination by the
light of a lucifer match revealed the green hue of the coffin wood, he
knew that he was right.

But what was the mummy in its ancient case doing in Mrs. Jasher's arbor?
That was the mute question which the two young people asked themselves
and each other, as they stood in the chilly moonlight, staring at the
grotesque thing. The mummy had disappeared from the Sailor's Rest at
Pierside some weeks ago, and now unexpectedly appeared in a lonely
garden, surrounded by marshes. How it had been brought there, or why
it should have been brought there, or who had brought it to such an
unlikely place, were questions hard to answer. However, the most obvious
thing to do was to question Mrs. Jasher, since the uncanny object was
lying within a stone-throw of her home. Lucy, after a rapid word or two,
went to ring the bell, and summon the lady, while Archie stood by the
arbor, wondering how the mummy came to be there. In the same way George
III had wondered how the apples got into the dumplings.

Far and wide spread the marshes, flatly towards the shore of the river
on one side, but on the other sloping up to Gartley village, which
twinkled with many lights on the rising ground. Some distance away the
Fort rose black and menacing in the moonlight, and the mighty stream of
the Thames glittered like polished steel as it flowed seaward. As there
were only a few leafless trees dotted about the marshy ground, and as
that same ground, lightly sprinkled with powdery snow, revealed every
moving object for quite a mile or so, Hope could not conceive how the
mummy case, which seemed heavy, could have been brought into the silent
garden without its bearers being seen. It was not late, and soldiers
were still returning through Gartley to the Fort. Then, again, some
noise must have been caused by so bulky an object being thrust through
the narrow wicket, and Mrs. Jasher, inhabiting a wooden house, which was
a very sea-shell for sound, might have heard footsteps and voices. If
those who had brought the mummy here--and there was more than one from
the size of the case--could be discovered, then the mystery of Sidney
Bolton's death would be solved very speedily. It was at this moment of
his reflections that Lucy returned to the arbor, leading Mrs. Jasher,
who was attired in a tea-gown and who looked bewildered.

“What are you talking about, my dear?” she said, as Lucy led her towards
the arbor. “I declare I was ever so much astonished, when Jane told
me that you wished to speak to me. I was just writing a letter to
the lawyer who has my poor brother's property in hand, announcing my
engagement to the Professor. Mr. Hope? You here also. Well, I'm sure.”

Lucy grew impatient at all this babble.

“Did you not hear what I said, Mrs. Jasher?” she cried irritably. “Can't
you use your eyes? Look! The green mummy is in your arbor.”

“The--green--mummy--in--my--arbor,” repeated Mrs. Jasher, like a child
learning words of one syllable, and staring at the black object before
which the three were standing.

“As you see,” said Archie abruptly. “How did it come here?”

He spoke harshly. Of course, it was absurd to accuse Mrs. Jasher of
knowing anything about the matter, since she had been writing letters.
Still, the fact remained that a mummy, which had been thieved from a
murdered man, was in her arbor, and naturally she was called upon to
explain.

Some suspicion in his tone struck the little woman, and she turned on
him with indignation.

“How did it come here?” she repeated. “Now, how can I tell, you silly
boy. I have been writing to my lawyer about my engagement to Mr.
Braddock. I daresay he has told you.”

“Yes,” chimed in Miss Kendal, “and we came here to congratulate you,
only to find the mummy.”

“Is that the horrid thing?” Mrs. Jasher stared with all her eyes, and
timidly touched the hard green-stained wood.

“It's the case--the mummy is inside.”

“But I thought that the Professor opened the case to find the body of
poor Sidney Bolton,” argued Mrs. Jasher.

“That was a packing case in which this”--Archie struck the old-world
coffin--“was stored. But this is the corpse of Inca Caxas, about which
Don Pedro told us the other night. How does it come to be hidden in your
garden?”

“Hidden.” Mrs. Jasher repeated the word with a laugh. “There is not much
hiding about it. Why, every one can see it from the path.”

“And from the door of your house,” remarked Hope significantly. “Did you
not see it when you took leave of Braddock?”

“No,” snapped the widow. “If I had I should certainly have come to look.
Also Professor Braddock, who is so anxious to recover it, would not have
allowed it to remain here.”

“Then the case was not here when the Professor left you to-night?”

“No! He left me at eight o'clock to go home to dinner.”

“When did he arrive here?” questioned Hope quickly.

“At seven. I am sure of the time, for I was just sitting down to my
supper. He was here an hour. But he said nothing, when he entered, of
any mummy being in the arbor; nor when he left me at the door and I came
to say good-bye to him--did either of us see this object. To be sure,”
 added Mrs. Jasher meditatively, “we did not look particularly in the
direction of this arbor.”

“I scarcely see how any one entering or leaving the garden could fail to
see it, especially as the snow reflects the moonlight so brightly.”

Mrs. Jasher shivered, and taking the skirt of her tea-gown, flung it
over her carefully attired head,

“It is very cold,” she remarked irritably. “Don't you think we had
better return to the house, and talk there?”

“What!” said Archie grimly, “and leave the mummy to be carried away
as mysteriously as it has been brought. No, Mrs. Jasher. That mummy
represents one thousand pounds of my money.”

“I understood that the Professor bought it himself.”

“So he did, but I supplied the purchase money. Therefore I do not intend
that this should be lost sight of again. Lucy, my dear, you run home
again and tell your father what we have found. He had better bring men,
to take it to his museum. When it is there, Mrs. Jasher can then explain
how it came to be in her garden.”

Without a word Lucy set off, walking quickly, anxious to fulfill her
mission and gladden the heart of her step-father with the amazing news.

Archie and Mrs. Jasher were left alone, and the former lighted a
cigarette, while he tapped the mummy case, and examined it as closely as
the pale gleam of the moonlight permitted. Mrs. Jasher made no move to
enter the house, much as she had complained of the cold. But perhaps she
found the flimsy skirt of the tea-gown sufficient protection.

“It seems to me, Mr. Hope,” said she very tartly, “that you suspect my
having a hand in this,” and she tapped the mummy coffin also.

“Pardon me,” observed Hope very politely, “but I suspect nothing,
because I have no grounds upon which to base my suspicions. But
certainly it is odd that this missing mummy should be found in your
garden. You will admit that much.”

“I admit nothing of the sort,” she rejoined coolly. “Only myself and
Jane live in the cottage, and you don't expect that two delicate women
could move this huge thing.” She tapped the case again. “Moreover, had I
found the mummy I should have taken it to the Pyramids at once, so as to
give Professor Braddock some pleasure.”

“It will certainly be an acceptable wedding present,” said Archie
sarcastically.

“Pardon me,” said Mrs. Jasher in her turn, “but I have nothing to do
with it as a present or otherwise. How the thing came into my arbor
I really cannot say. As I told you, Professor Braddock made no remark
about it when he came; and when he left, although I was at the door,
I did not notice anything in this arbor. Indeed I cannot say if I ever
looked in this direction.”

Archie mused and glanced at his watch.

“The Professor told Lucy that he came by the six train: you say that he
was here at seven.”

“Yes, and he left at eight. What is the time now?”

“Ten o'clock, or a few minutes after. Therefore, since neither you nor
Braddock saw the mummy, I take it that the case was brought here by some
unknown people between eight o'clock and a quarter to ten, about which
time I arrived here with Lucy.”

Mrs. Jasher nodded.

“You put the matter very clearly,” she observed dryly. “You have
mistaken your vocation, Mr. Hope, and should have been a criminal
lawyer. I should turn detective were I you.”

“Why?” asked Archie with a start.

“You might ascertain my movements on the night when the crime was
committed,” snapped the little widow. “A woman muffled in a shawl,
in much the same way as my head is now muffled in my skirt, talked to
Bolton through the bedroom window of the Sailor's Rest, you know.”

Hope expostulated.

“My dear lady, how you run on! I assure you that I would as soon suspect
Lucy as you.”

“Thank you,” said the widow very dryly and very tartly.

“I merely wish to point out,” went on Archie in a conciliatory tone,
“that, as the mummy in its case--as appears probable--was brought into
your garden between the hours of eight and ten, less fifteen minutes,
that you may have heard the voices or footsteps of those who carried it
here.”

“I heard nothing,” said Mrs. Jasher, turning towards the path. “I had my
supper, and played a game or two of patience, and then wrote letters,
as I told you before. And I am not going to stand in the cold, answering
silly questions, Mr. Hope. If you wish to talk you must come inside.”

Hope shook his head and lighted a fresh cigarette.

“I stand guard over this mummy until its rightful owner comes,” said he
determinedly.

“Ho!” rejoined Mrs. Jasher scornfully: she was now at the door. “I
understood that you bought the mummy and therefore were its owner. Well,
I only hope you'll find those emeralds Don Pedro talked about,” and with
a light laugh she entered the cottage.

Archie looked after her in a puzzled way. There was no reason to suspect
Mrs. Jasher, so far as he saw, even though a woman had been seen talking
to Bolton on the night of the crime. And yet, why should the widow refer
to the emeralds, which were of such immense value, according to Don
Pedro? Hope glanced at the case and shook the primitive coffin, anxious
for the moment to open it and ascertain if the jewels were still
clutched grimly in the mummy's dead hands. But the coffin was fastened
tightly down with wooden pegs, and could only be opened with extreme
care and difficulty. Also, as Hope reflected, even did he manage to
open this receptacle of the dead, he still could not ascertain if
the emeralds were safe, since they would be hidden under innumerable
swathings of green-dyed llama wool. He therefore let the matter rest
there, and, staring at the river, wondered how the mummy had been
brought to the garden in the marshes.

Hope recollected that experts had decided the mode in which the mummy
had been removed from the Pierside public-house. It had been passed
through the window, according to Inspector Date and others, and, when
taken across the narrow path which bordered the river, had been placed
in a waiting boat. After that it had vanished until it had re-appeared
in this arbor. But if taken by water once, it could have been taken by
water again. There was a rude jetty behind the embankment, which Hope
could easily see from where he stood. In all probability the mummy had
been landed there and carried to the garden, while Mrs. Jasher was busy
with her supper and her game of cards and her letters. Also, the path
from the shore to the house was very lonely, and if any care had been
exercised, which was probable, no one from the Fort road or from the
village street could have seen the stealthy conspirators bringing their
weird burden. So far Hope felt that he could argue excellently. But who
had brought the mummy to the garden and why had it been brought there?
These questions he could not answer so easily, and indeed not at all.

While thus meditating, he heard, far away in the frosty air, a puffing
and blowing and panting like an impatient motor-car. Before he could
guess what this was, Braddock appeared, simply racing along the marshy
causeway, followed closely by Cockatoo, and at some distance away by
Lucy. The little scientist rushed through the gate, which he flung open
with a noise fit to wake the dead, and lunged forward, to fall with
outstretched arms upon the green case. There he remained, still puffing
and blowing, and looked as though he were hugging a huge green beetle.
Cockatoo, who, being lean and hard, kept his breath more easily, stood
respectfully by, waiting for his master to give orders, and Lucy came
in quietly by the gate, smiling at her father's enthusiasm. At the same
moment Mrs. Jasher, well wrapped up in a coat of sables, emerged from
the cottage.

“I heard you coming, Professor,” she called out, hurrying down the path.

“I should think the whole Fort heard the Professor coming,” said Hope,
glancing at the dark mass. “The soldiers must think it is an invasion.”

But Braddock paid no heed to this jocularity, or even to Mrs. Jasher, to
whom he had been so lately engaged. All his soul was in the mummy case,
and as soon as he recovered his breath, he loudly proclaimed his joy at
this miraculous recovery of the precious article.

“Mine! mine!” he roared, and his words ran violently through the frosty
air.

“Be calm, sir,” advised Hope--“be calm.”

“Calm! calm!” bellowed Braddock, struggling to a standing position. “Oh,
confound you, sir, how can I be calm when I find what I have lost?
You have a mean, groveling soul, Hope, not the soaring spirit of a
collector.”

“There is no need to be rude to Archie, father,” corrected Lucy sharply.

“Rude! Rude! I am never rude. But this mummy.” Braddock peered closely
at it and rapped the wood to assure himself it was no phantom. “Yes!
it is my mummy, the mummy of Inca Caxas. Now I shall learn how the
Peruvians embalmed their royal dead. Mine! mine! mine!” He crooned like
a mother over a child, caressing the coffin; then suddenly drew himself
upright and fixed Mrs. Jasher with an indignant eye. “So it was you,
madam, who stole my mummy,” he declared venomously, “and I thought of
making you my wife. Oh, what an escape I have had. Shame, woman, shame!”

Mrs. Jasher stared, then her face grew redder than the rouge on her
cheeks, and she stamped furiously in the neat Louis Quinze slippers in
which she had in judiciously come out.

“How dare you say what you have said?” she cried, her voice shrill and
hard with anger. “Mr. Hope has been saying the same thing. Are you both
mad? I never set eyes on the horrid thing in my life. And only to-night
you told me that you loved--”

“Yes, yes, I said many foolish things, I don't doubt, madam. But that
is not the question. My mummy! my mummy!” he rapped the wood
furiously--“how does my mummy come to be here?”

“I don't know,” said Mrs. Jasher, still furious, “and I don't care.”

“Don't care: don't care, when I look forward to your helping me in my
lifework! As my wife--”

“I shall never be your wife,” cried the widow, stamping again. “I
wouldn't be your wife for a thousand or a million pounds. Marry your
mummy, you horrid, red-faced, crabbed little--”

“Hush! hush!” whispered Lucy, taking the angry woman round the waist,
“you must make allowances for my father. He is so excited over his good
fortune that he--”

“I shall not make allowance,” interrupted Mrs. Jasher angrily. “He
practically accuses me of stealing the mummy. If I did that, I must have
murdered poor Sidney Bolton.”

“No, no,” cried the Professor, wiping his red face. “I never hinted at
such a thing. But the mummy is in your garden.”

“What of that? I don't know how it came there. Mr. Hope, surely you do
not support Professor Braddock in his preposterous accusation?”

“I bring no accusation,” stuttered the Professor.

“Neither do I, Mrs. Jasher. You are excited now. Go in and sleep, and
to-morrow you will talk reasonably.” This brilliant speech was from
Hope, and wrought Mrs. Jasher into a royal rage.

“Well,” she gasped, “he asks me to be calm, as it I wasn't the very
calmest person here. I declare: oh, I shall be ill! Lucy,” she seized
the girl's hand and dragged her towards the cottage, “come in and give
me red lavender. I shall be in bed for days and days and days. Oh, what
brutes men can be! But listen, you two horrors,” she indicated Braddock
and Hope, as she pushed open the door, “if you dare to say a word
against me, I'll have an action for libel against you. Oh, dear me,
how very ill I feel! Lucy, darling, help me, oh, help me,
and--and--oh--oh--oh!” She flopped down on the threshold of her home
with a cry.

“Archie! Archie! She's fainted.”

Hope rushed forward, and raised the stout little woman in his arms.
Jane, attracted by the clamor, appeared on the scene, and between the
three of them they managed to get Mrs. Jasher placed on the sofa of the
pink drawing-room. She certainly was in a dead faint, so Hope left her
to the administrations of Lucy and the servant, and walked out again
into the garden, closing the cottage door after him.

He found the heartless Professor quite oblivious to Mrs. Jasher's
sufferings, so taken up was he with the newly found mummy. Cockatoo had
been sent for a hand-cart, and while he was absent Braddock expatiated
on the perfections of this relic of Peruvian civilization.

“Will you sell it to Don Pedro?” asked Hope.

“After I have done with it, not before,” snapped Braddock, hovering
round his treasure. “I shall want a percentage on my bargain also.”

Archie thought privately that if Braddock unswathed the mummy, he
would find the emeralds and would probably stick to them, so that his
expedition to Egypt might be financed. It that case Don Pedro would no
longer wish to buy the corpse of his ancestor. But while he debated as
to the advisability of telling the Professor of the existence of the
emeralds, Cockatoo returned with the hand-cart.

“You have lost Mrs. Jasher,” said Hope, while he, assisted the Professor
to hoist the mummy on to the cart.

“Never mind! never mind!” Braddock patted the coffin. “I have found
something much more to my mind: something ever so much better. Ha! ha!”




CHAPTER XIV. THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS


In spite of newspapers and letters and tape-machines and telegrams and
such like aids to the speedy diffusion of news, the same travels
quicker in villages than in cities. Word of mouth can spread gossip
with marvelous rapidity in sparsely inhabited communities, since it is
obvious that in such places every person knows the other--as the saying
goes--inside out. In every English village walls have ears and windows
have eyes, so that every cottage is a hot-bed of scandal, and what is
known to one is, within the hour, known to the others. Even the Sphinx
could not have preserved her secret long in such a locality.

Gartley could keep up its reputation in this respect along with the
best, therefore it was little to be wondered at, that early next morning
every one knew that Professor Braddock had found his long-lost mummy in
Mrs. Jasher's garden, and had removed the same to the Pyramids without
unnecessary delay. It was not particularly late when the hand-cart, with
its uncanny burden, had passed along the sole street of the place, and
several men had emerged from the Warrior Inn ostensibly to offer help,
but really to know what the eccentric master of the great house was
doing. Braddock brusquely rejected these offers; but the oddly shaped
mummy case, stained green, having been seen, it needed little wit
for those who had caught a sight of it to put two and two together,
especially as the weird object had been described at the inquest and had
been talked over ever since in every cottage. And as the cart had been
seen coming out of the widow's garden, it naturally occurred to the
villagers that Mrs. Jasher had been concealing the mummy. Shortly the
rumor spread that she had also murdered Bolton, for unless she had
done so, she certainly--according to village logic--could not have been
possessed of the spoil. Finally, as Mrs. Jasher's doors and windows were
small and the mummy was rather bulky, it was natural to presume that she
had hidden it in the garden. Report said she had buried it and had dug
it up just in time to be pounced upon by its rightful owner. From which
it can be seen that gossip is not invariably accurate.

However this may be, the news of Professor Braddock's good fortune
shortly came to Don Pedro's ears through the medium of the landlady. As
she revealed what she had heard in the morning, the Peruvian gentleman
was spared a sleepless night. But as soon as he learned the truth--which
was surprising enough in its unexpectedness--he hastily finished his
breakfast and hurried to the Pyramids. As yet he had not intended to
see Braddock so promptly, or at least not until he had made further
inquiries at Pierside, but the news that Braddock possessed the royal
ancestor of the De Gayangoses brought him immediately into the museum.
He greeted the Professor in his usual grave and dignified manner, and
no one would have guessed from his inherent calmness that the unexpected
news of Braddock's arrival, and the still more unexpected information
about the green mummy, had surprised him beyond measure. Being somewhat
superstitious, it also occurred to Don Pedro that the coincidence meant
good fortune to him in the recovery of his long-lost ancestor.

Braddock, already knowing a great deal about Don Pedro from Lucy and
Archie Hope, was only too pleased to see the Peruvian, hoping to find in
him a kindred spirit. As yet the Professor was not aware of the contents
of the ancient Latin manuscript, which revealed the fact of the hidden
emeralds, since Hope had decided to leave it to the Peruvian to impart
the information. Archie knew very well that Don Pedro--as he had
plainly stated--wished to purchase the mummy, and it was only right that
Braddock should know what he was selling. But Hope forgot one important
fact perhaps from the careless way in which Don Pedro had told his
story--namely, that the Professor in a second degree was a receiver
of stolen goods. Therefore it was more than probable that the Peruvian
would claim the mummy as his own property. Still, in that event he would
have to prove his claim, and that would not be easy.

The plump little professor had not yet unsealed the case, and when Don
Pedro entered, he was standing before it rubbing his fat hands, with a
gloating expression in his face. However, as Cockatoo had brought in the
Peruvian's card, Braddock expected his visitor and wheeled to face him.

“How are you, sir?” said he, extending his hand. “I am glad to see you,
as I hear that you know all about this mummy of Inca Caxas.”

“Well, I do,” answered De Gayangos, sitting down in the chair which his
host pushed forward. “But may I ask who told you that this mummy was
that of the last Inca?”

Braddock pinched his plump chin and replied readily, enough.

“Certainly, Don Pedro. I wished to learn the difference in embalming
between the Egyptians and the ancient Peruvians, and looked about for a
South American corpse. Unexpectedly I saw in several European newspapers
and in two English journals that a green Peruvian mummy was for sale at
Malta for one thousand pounds. I sent my assistant, Sidney Bolton, to
buy it, and he managed to get it, coffin and all, for nine hundred.
While in Malta, and before he started back in The Diver with the mummy,
he wrote me an account of the transaction. The seller--who was the son
of a Maltese collector--told Bolton that his father had picked up the
mummy in Paris some twenty and more years ago. It came from Lima some
thirty years back, I believe, and, according to the collector in Paris,
was the corpse of Inca Caxas. That is the whole story.”

Don Pedro nodded gravely.

“Was there a Latin manuscript delivered along with the mummy?” he asked.

Braddock's eyes opened widely.

“No, sir. The mummy came thirty years ago from Lima to Paris. It passed
twenty years back into the possession of the Maltese collector, and his
son sold it to me a few months ago. I never heard of any manuscript.”

“Then Mr. Hope did not repeat to you what I told him the other night?”

The Professor sat down and his mouth grew obstinate.

“Mr. Hope related some story you told him and others about this mummy
having been stolen from you.”

“From my father,” corrected the unsmiling Peruvian; keeping a careful
eye on his host; “that is really the case. Inca Caxas is, or was, my
ancestor, and this manuscript”--Don Pedro produced the same from his
inner pocket--“details the funeral ceremonies.”

“Very interesting; most interesting,” fussed Braddock, stretching out
his hand. “May I see it?”

“You read Latin,” observed Don Pedro, surrendering the manuscript.

Braddock raised his eyebrows.

“Of course,” he said simply, “every well-educated man reads Latin, or
should do so. Wait, sir, until I glance through this document.”

“One moment,” said Don Pedro, as the Professor began to literally devour
the discolored page. “You know from Hope, I have no doubt, how I chance
upon my own property in Europe?”

Braddock, still with his eyes on the manuscript, mumbled

“Your own property. Quite so: quite so.”

“You admit that. Then you will no doubt restore the mummy to me.”

By this time the drift of Don Pedro's observations entirely reached
the understanding of the scientist, and he dropped the document he was
reading to leap to his feet.

“Restore the mummy to you!” he gasped. “Why, it is mine.”

“Pardon me,” said the Peruvian, still gravely but very decisively, “you
admitted that it belonged to me.”

Braddock's face deepened to a fine purple.

“I didn't know what I was saying,” he protested. “How could I say it was
your property when I have bought it for nine hundred pounds?”

“It was stolen from me.”

“That has got to be proved,” said Braddock caustically.

Don Pedro rose, looking more like, Don Quixote than ever.

“I have the honor to give you my word and--”

“Yes, yes. That is all right. I cast no imputation on your honor.”

“I should think not,” said the other coldly but strongly.

“All the same, you can scarcely expect me to part with so valuable
an object,” Braddock waved his hand towards the case, “without strict
inquiry into the circumstances. And again, sir, even if you succeed in
proving your ownership, I am not inclined to restore the mummy to you
for nothing.”

“But it is stolen property you are keeping from me.”

“I know nothing about that: I have only your bare word that it is so,
Don Pedro. All I know is that I paid nine hundred pounds for the
mummy and that it cost the best part of another hundred to bring it to
England. What I have, I keep.”

“Like your country,” said the Peruvian sarcastically.

“Precisely,” replied the Professor suavely. “Every Englishman has
a bull-dog tenacity of purpose. Brag is a good dog, Don Pedro, but
Holdfast is a better one.”

“Then I understand,” said the Peruvian, stretching out his hand to pick
up the fallen manuscript, “that you will keep the mummy.”

“Certainly,” said Braddock coolly, “since I have paid for it. Also, I
shall keep the jewels, which the manuscript tells me--from the glance I
obtained of it--were buried with it.”

“The sole jewels buried are two large emeralds which the mummy holds in
its hands,” explained Don Pedro, restoring the manuscript to his pocket,
“and I wish for them so that I may get money to restore the fortunes of
my family.”

“No! no! no!” said Braddock forcibly. “I have bought the mummy and the
jewels with it. They will sell to supply me with money to fit out my
expedition to the tomb of Queen Tahoser.”

“I shall dispute your claim,” cried De Gayangos, losing his calmness.

Braddock waved his hand with supreme content.

“I can give you the address of my lawyers,” he retorted; “any steps you
choose to take will only result in loss, and from what you hint I should
not think that you had much money to spend on litigation.”

Don Pedro bit his lip, and saw that it was indeed a more difficult task
than he had anticipated to make Braddock yield up his prize.

“If you were in Lima,” he muttered, speaking Spanish in his excitement,
“you would then learn that I speak truly.”

“I do not doubt your truth,” answered the Professor in the same
language.

De Gayangos wheeled and faced his host, much surprised.

“You speak my tongue, senor?” he demanded.

Braddock nodded.

“I have been in Spain, and I have been in Peru,” he answered dryly,
“therefore I know classical Spanish and its colonial dialects. As to
being in Lima, I was there, and I do not wish to go there again, as I
had quite enough of those uncivilized parts thirty years ago, when the
country was much disturbed after your civil war.”

“You were in Lima thirty years ago,” echoed Don Pedro; “then you were
there when Vasa stole this mummy.”

“I don't know who stole it, or even if it was stolen,” said the
Professor obstinately, “and I don't know the name of Vasa. Ah! now I
remember. Young Hope did say something about the Swedish sailor who you
said stole the mummy.”

“Vasa did, and brought it to Europe to sell--probably to that man in
Paris, who afterwards sold it to your Malteses collector.”

“No doubt,” rejoined Braddock calmly; “but what has all this to do with
me, Don Pedro?”

“I want my mummy,” raged the other, and looked dangerous.

“Then you won't get it,” retorted Braddock, adopting a pugnacious
attitude and quite composed. “This mummy has caused one death, Don
Pedro, and from your looks I should think you would like it to cause
another.”

“Will you not be honest?”

“I'll knock your head off if you bring my honesty into question,” cried
the Professor, standing on tip-toe like a bantam. “The best thing to do
will be to take the matter into court. Then the law can decide, and I
have little doubt but what it will decide in my favor.”

The Englishman and the Peruvian glared at one another, and Cockatoo, who
was crouching on the floor, glanced from one angry face to another. He
guessed that the white men were quarreling and perhaps would come to
blows. It was at this moment that a knock came to the door, and a
minute later Archie entered. Braddock glanced at him, and took a sudden
resolution as he stepped forward.

“Hope, you are just in time,” he declared. “Don Pedro states that the
mummy belongs to him, and I assert that I have bought it. We shall make
you umpire. He wants it: I want it. What is to be done?”

“The mummy is my own flesh and blood, Mr. Hope,” said Don Pedro.

“Precious little of either about it,” said Braddock contemptuously.

Archie twisted a chair round and straddled his long legs across it, with
his arms resting on its back. His quick brain had rapidly comprehended
the situation, and, being acquainted with both sides of the question, it
was not difficult to come to a decision. If it was hard that Don Pedro
should lose his ancestor's mummy, it was equally hard that Braddock--or
rather himself--should lose the purchase money, seeing that it had been
paid in good faith to the seller in Malta for a presumably righteously
acquired object. On these premises the young Solon proceeded to deliver
judgment.

“I understand,” said he judiciously, “that Don Pedro had the mummy
stolen from him thirty years ago, and that you, Professor, bought it
under the impression that the Maltese owner had a right to possess it.”

“Yes,” snapped Braddock, “and I daresay the Maltese owner thought so
too, since he bought it from that collector in Paris.”

Hope nodded.

“And if Vasa sold it to the man in Paris,” said he calmly, “he certainly
would not tell the purchaser that he had looted the mummy in Lima, and
the poor man would not know that he was receiving stolen goods. Is that
right, Don Pedro?”

“Yes, sir,” said the Peruvian, who had recovered his temper and his
gravity; “but I declare solemnly that the mummy was stolen from my
father and should belong to me.”

“No one disputes that,” said Archie cheerfully; “but it ought to belong
to the Professor also, since he has bought it. Now, as it can't possibly
belong to two people, we must split the difference. You, Professor,
must sell back the mummy to Don Pedro for the price you paid for it, and
then, Don Pedro, you must recompense Professor Braddock for his loss.”

“I have not much money,” said Don Pedro gravely; “still, I am willing to
do as you say.”

“I don't know that I am,” protested Braddock noisily. “There are the two
emeralds which are of immense value, as Don Pedro says, and they belong
to me, since the mummy is my property.”

“Professor,” said Archie solemnly, “you must do right, even if you lose
by it. I believe the story of Senor De Gayangos; and the mummy with its
jewels belongs to him. Besides, you only wish to see the way in which
the Inca race embalmed their dead. Well, then, unpack the mummy here in
the presence of Don Pedro. When you have satisfied your curiosity, and
when Senor De Gayangos signs a check for one thousand pounds, he can
take away the corpse. You have had so much trouble over it, that I
wonder your are not anxious to see the last of it.”

“But the emeralds would sell for much money and would defray the
expenses of my expedition into Egypt to search for that Queen's tomb.”

“I understood from Lucy that Mrs. Jasher intended to finance that
expedition when she became your wife.”

“Humph!” muttered Braddock, stroking his fat chin. “I said a few foolish
things to her last night when I was heated up. She may not forgive me,
Hope.”

“A woman will forgive anything to the man she loves,” said Archie.

Braddock was no fool, and could not help casting a glance at his tubby
figure, which was reflected in a near mirror. It seemed incredible that
Mrs. Jasher could love him for his looks, and the fact that he
might some day be a baronet did not strike him at the moment as a
consideration. However, he foresaw trouble and expense should Don
Pedro go to law, as he seemed determined to do. Taking all things into
consideration, Braddock thought that Archie's judgment was a good one,
and yielded.

“Well,” he said after reflection, “let us agree. I shall open the case
and examine the mummy, which after all is the reason why I bought it.
When I have satisfied myself as to the difference between the modes of
embalming, Don Pedro can give me a check and take away the mummy. I only
hope that he will have less trouble with it than I have had,” and,
so speaking, Braddock, signing to Cockatoo to bring all the necessary
tools, laid hands on the case.

“I am content,” said Don Pedro briefly, and seated himself in a chair
beside the young Daniel who had delivered judgment.

Hope offered to assist the Professor to open the case, but was dismissed
with an abrupt refusal.

“Though I am glad you are present to see the mummy unpacked,” said
Braddock, laboring at the lid of the case, “for if the emeralds are
missing, Don Pedro might accuse me of stealing them.”

“Why should the emeralds be missing?” asked Hope quickly.

Braddock shrugged his shoulders.

“Sidney Bolton was killed,” said he in a low voice, “and it was not
likely that any one would commit a murder for the sake of this mummy,
and then leave it stranded in Mrs. Jasher's garden. I have my doubts
about the safety of the emeralds, else I would not have consented to
sell the thing back again.”

With this honest speech, the Professor vigorously attacked the lid of
the case, and inserted a steel instrument into the cracks to prize up
the covering. The lid was closed with wooden pegs in an antique but
perfectly safe manner, and apparently had not been opened since the
dead Inca had been laid to rest therein hundreds of years ago among the
Andean mountains. Don Pedro winced at this desecration of the dead, but,
as he had given his consent, there was nothing left to do but to grin
and bear it. In a wonderfully short space of time, considering the
neatness of the workmanship and the holding power of the wooden pegs,
the lid was removed. Then the four on-lookers saw that the mummy had
been tampered with. Swathed in green-stained llama wool, it lay rigid
in its case. But the swathings had been cut; the hands protruded and the
emeralds were gone--torn rudely from the hard grip of the dead.




CHAPTER XV. AN ACCUSATION


Both Don Pedro and Professor Braddock were amazed and angry at the
disappearance of the jewels, but Hope did not express much surprise.
Considering the facts of the murder, it was just what he expected,
although it must be confessed that he was wise after the event.

“I refer you to your own words immediately before the case was opened,
Professor,” he remarked, after the first surprise had subsided.

“Words! words!” snapped Braddock, who was anything but pleased. “What
words of mine do you mean, Hope?”

“You said that it was not likely that any one would commit a murder for
the sake of the mummy only, and then leave it stranded in Mrs. Jasher's
garden. Also, you declared that you had your doubts about the safety of
the emeralds, else you would not have consented to sell the mummy again
to its rightful owner.”

The Professor nodded.

“Quite so: quite so. And what I say I hold to,” he retorted,
“especially as I have proved myself a true prophet. You can both see
for yourselves,” he waved his hand towards the rifled case, “that poor
Sidney must have been killed for the sake of the emeralds. The question
is, who killed him?”

“The person who knew about the jewels,” said Don Pedro promptly.

“Of course: but who did know? I was ignorant until you told me about the
manuscript. And you, Hope?” He searched Archie's face.

“Do you intend to accuse me?” questioned the young man with a slight
laugh. “I assure you, Professor, that I was ignorant of what had been
buried with the corpse, until Don Pedro related his story the other
night to myself and Random, and the ladies.”

Braddock turned impatiently to De Gayangos, as he did not approve of
Archie's apparent flippancy.

“Does any one else know of the contents of this manuscript?” he demanded
irritably.

Don Pedro nursed his chin and looked musingly on the ground.

“It is just possible that Vasa may.”

“Vasa? Vasa? Oh yes, the sailor who stole the mummy thirty years ago
from your father in Lima. Pooh! pooh! pooh! You tell me that this
manuscript is written in Latin, and evidently in monkish Latin at that,
which is of the worst. Your sailor could not read it, and would not know
the value of the manuscript. If he had, he would have carried it off.”

“Senor,” said the Peruvian politely, “I have an idea that my father made
a translation of this manuscript, or at all events a copy.”

“But I understood,” put in Hope, still astride of his chair, “that you
did not find the original manuscript until your father died.”

“That is quite true, sir,” assented the other readily, “but I did not
tell you everything the other night. My father it was who found the
manuscript at Cuzco, and although I cannot state authoritatively, yet I
believe I am correct in saying that he had a copy made. But whether the
copy was merely a transcript or actually a translation, I cannot tell. I
think it was the former, as if Vasa, reading a translation, had learned
of the jewels, he undoubtedly would have stolen them before selling this
mummy to the Parisian collector.”

“Perhaps he did,” said Braddock, pointing to the rifled corpse. “You see
that the emeralds are missing.”

“Your assistant's assassin stole them,” insisted Don Pedro coldly.

“We cannot be sure of that,” retorted the Professor, “although I admit
that no man would jeopardize his neck for the sake of a corpse.”

Archie looked surprised.

“But an enthusiast such as you are, Professor, might risk so much.”

For once in his life Braddock made a good-humored reply.

“No, sir. Not even for this mummy would I place myself in the power of
the law. And I do not think that any other scientist would either. We
savants may not be worldly, but we are not fools. However, the fact
remains that the jewels are gone, and whether they were stolen by Vasa
thirty years ago, or by poor Sidney's assassin the other day, I don't
know, and, what is more, I don't care. I shall examine the mummy
further, and in a couple of days Don Pedro can bring me a check for one
thousand and remove his ancestor.”

“No! no!” cried the Peruvian hurriedly; “since the emeralds are missing,
I am not in a position to pay you one thousand English pounds, sir.
I want to take back the body of Inca Caxas to Lima; as one must show
respect to one's ancestors. But the fact is, I cannot pay the money.”

“You said that you could,” shouted the exasperated Professor in his
bullying way.

“I admit it, senor, but I had hoped to do so when I sold the emeralds,
which--as you can see--are not available. Therefore the body of my royal
ancestor must remain here until I can procure the money. And it may be
that Sir Frank Random will help me in this matter.”

“He wouldn't help me,” snapped Braddock, “so why should he help you?”

Don Pedro, looking more dignified than ever, drew himself up to his tall
height.

“Sir Frank,” he said, in a stately way, “has done me the honor of
seeking to be my son-in-law. As my daughter loves him, I am willing to
permit the marriage, but now that I have learned the emeralds are lost,
I shall not consent until Sir Frank buys the mummy from you, Professor.
It is only right that my daughter's hand should redeem her regal
forefather from purely scientific surroundings and that she should take
the mummy back to be buried in Lima. At the same time, sir, I must say
that I am the rightful owner of the dead, and that you should surrender
the mummy to me free of charge.”

“What, and lose a thousand pounds!” cried Braddock furiously. “No, sir,
I shall do nothing of the sort. You only wanted the mummy for the sake
of the jewels, and now that they are lost, you do not care what becomes
of your confounded ancestor, and you--”

The Professor would have gone on still more furiously, but that Hope,
seeing Don Pedro was growing angry at the insult, chimed in.

“Let me throw oil on the troubled waters,” he said, smoothly. “Don Pedro
is not able to redeem the mummy until the emeralds are found. As such
is the case, we must find the emeralds and enable him to do what is
necessary.”

“And how are we to find the jewels?” asked Braddock crossly.

“By finding the assassin.”

“How is that to be done?” asked De Gayangos gloomily. “I have been doing
my best at Pierside, but I cannot find a single clue. Vasa is not to be
found.”

“Vasa!” exclaimed Archie and the Professor, both profoundly astonished.

Don Pedro raised his eyebrows.

“Certainly. Vasa, if anyone, must have killed your assistant, since he
alone could have known that the jewels were buried with Inca Caxas.”

“But, my dear sir,” argued Hope good-naturedly, “if Vasa stole the
manuscript, whether translated or not, he certainly must have learned
the truth long, long ago, since thirty years have elapsed. In that event
he must have stolen the jewels, as Professor Braddock remarked lately,
before he sold the mummy to the Parisian collector.”

“That may be so,” said Don Pedro obstinately, while the Professor
muttered his approval, “but we cannot be certain on that point. No
one--I agree with the Professor in this--would have risked his neck to
steal a mere mummy, therefore the motive for the committal of the crime
must have been the emeralds. Only Vasa knew of their existence outside
myself and my dead father. He, therefore, must be the assassin. I shall
hunt for him, and, when I find him, I shall have him arrested.”

“But you can't possibly recognize the man after thirty years?” argued
Braddock disbelievingly.

“I have a royal memory for faces,” said Don Pedro imperturbably, “and in
the past I saw much of Vasa. He was then a young sailor of twenty.”

“Humph!” muttered Braddock. “He is now fifty, and must have changed in
thirty years. You'll never recognize him.”

“Oh, I think so,” said the Peruvian smoothly. “His eyes were peculiarly
blue and full of light. Also, he had a scar on the right temple from a
blow which he received in a street riot in which I also was concerned.
Finally, gentlemen, Vasa loved a peon girl on my father's estate, and
she induced him to have the sun encircled by a serpent--a Peruvian
symbol--tattooed on his left wrist. With all these marks, and with my
memory for faces, which never yet has failed me, I have no doubt but
what I shall recognize the man.”

“And then?”

“And then I shall have him arrested”

Hope shrugged his square shoulders. He had not much belief in Don
Pedro's boasted royal memory, and did not think that he would recognize
a young sailor of twenty in what would certainly be a grizzled old salt
of fifty years. However, it was possible that the man might be right in
his surmise, since Vasa alone could have known about the emeralds. The
only doubt was whether he would have waited for thirty years before
looting the mummy. Archie said nothing of these thoughts, as they
would only serve to prolong an unprofitable discussion. But he made one
suggestion.

“Your best plan,” he said suggestively, “is to write a description of
Vasa--who, by the way, has probably changed his name--and hand it to the
police, with the promise of a reward if he is found.”

“I am very poor, senor. Surely the Professor here--”

“I can offer nothing,” said Braddock quickly, “as I am quite as poor as
you are, if not more so, Sir Frank might help,” he added sarcastically.

“I shall not ask,” said Don Pedro loftily. “If Sir Frank chooses to
become my son-in-law by purchasing back my royal ancestor, to which you
have no right, I am willing that it should be so. But, poor as I am,
I shall offer a reward myself, since the honor of the De Gayangoses is
involved in this matter. What reward do you suggest, Mr. Hope?”

“Five hundred pounds,” said the Professor quickly.

“Too much,” said Hope sharply--“far too much. Make the reward one
hundred pounds, Don Pedro. That is enough to tempt many a man.”

The Peruvian bowed and noted down the amount.

“I shall go at once to Pierside and see Inspector Date, who had to do
with the inquest,” he remarked. “Meanwhile, Professor, please do not
desecrate my royal ancestor's body more than you can help.”

“I shall certainly not search for any more emeralds,” retorted Braddock
dryly. “Now, clear out, both of you, and leave me to examine the mummy.
Cockatoo, show these gentlemen out, and let no one else in.”

Don Pedro returned to the Warrior Hotel to inform his daughter of
what had taken place, with the intention of going in the afternoon to
Pierside. Meanwhile, he wrote out a full description of Vasa, making an
allowance for the lapse of years and explaining the scar and the
symbol on the left wrist. Hope also sought Lucy and related the latest
development of the case. The girl was not surprised, as she likewise
believed that the assassin had desired more than the mummy when he
murdered Sidney Bolton.

“Mrs. Jasher did not know about the emeralds?” she asked suddenly.

“No,” replied Archie, much surprised. “Surely you do not suspect her of
having a hand in the devilment?”

“Certainly not,” was the prompt answer. “Only I cannot understand how
the mummy came to be in her garden.”

“It was brought up from the river, I expect.”

“But why to Mrs. Jasher's garden?”

Hope shook his head.

“I cannot tell that. The whole thing is a mystery, and seems likely to
remain so.”

“It seems to me,” said the girl, after a pause, “that it would be best
for my father to return this mummy to Don Pedro, and have done with it,
since it seems to bring bad luck. Then he can marry Mrs. Jasher, and go
to Egypt on her fortune to seek for this tomb.”

“I doubt very much if Mrs. Jasher will marry the Professor now, after
what he said last night.”

“Nonsense, my father was in a rage and said what first came into his
mind. I daresay she is angry. However, I shall see her this afternoon,
and put matters right.”

“You are very anxious that the Professor should marry the lady.”

“I am,” replied Lucy seriously, “as I want to leave my father
comfortably settled when I marry you. The sooner he makes Mrs. Jasher
his wife, the readier will he be to let me go, and I want to marry you
as soon as I possibly can. I am tired of Gartley and of this present
life.”

Of course to this speech Archie could make only one answer, and as that
took the form of kissing, it was entirely satisfactory to Miss Kendal.
Then they discussed the future and also the proposed engagement of Sir
Frank Random to the Peruvian lady. But both left the subject of the
mummy alone, as they were quite weary of the matter, and neither could
suggest a solution of the mystery.

Meanwhile Professor Braddock had passed a very pleasant hour in
examining the swathings of the mummy. But his pleasure was destined
to be cut short sooner than he desired, as Captain Hiram Hervey
unexpectedly arrived. Although Cockatoo--as he had been instructed--did
his best to keep him out, the sailor forced his way in, and heralded his
appearance by throwing the Kanaka head-foremost into the museum.

“What does this mean?” demanded the fiery Professor, while Cockatoo,
with an angry expression, struggled to his feet, and Hervey, smoking
his inevitable cheroot, stood on the threshold--“how dare you treat my
property in this careless way.”

“Guess your property should behave itself then,” said the captain in
careless tones, and sauntered into the room. “D'y think I'm goin' to
be chucked out by a measly nigger and--Great Scott!”--this latter
exclamation was extorted by the sight of the mummy.

Braddock motioned to the still angry Cockatoo to move aside, and then
nodded triumphantly.

“You didn't expect to see that, did you?” he asked.

Hervey came to anchor on a chair and turned the cheroot in his mouth
with an odd look at the mummy.

“When will he be hanged?”

Braddock stared.

“When will who be hanged?”

“The man as stole that thing.”

“We haven't found him yet,” Braddock informed him swiftly.

“Then how in creation did you annex the corpse.”

The Professor sat down and explained. The lean, long mariner listened
quietly, only nodding at intervals. He did not seem to be surprised
when he heard that the corpse of the head Inca had been found in Mrs.
Jasher's garden, especially when Braddock explained the whereabouts of
the property.

“Wal,” he drawled, “that don't make my hair stand on end. I guess the
garden was on his way and he used it for a cemetery.”

“What are you talking about?” demanded the perplexed scientist.

“About the man who strangled your help and yanked away the corpse.”

“But I don't know who he is. Nobody knows.”

“Go slow. I do.”

“You!” Braddock started and flung himself across the room to seize
Hervey by the lapels of his reefer coat. “You know. Tell me who he is,
so that I can get the emeralds.”

“Emeralds!” Hervey removed Braddock's plump hands and stared greedily.

“Don't you know? No, of course you don't. But two emeralds were buried
with the mummy, and they have been stolen.”

“Who by?”

“No doubt by the assassin who murdered poor Sidney.”

Hervey spat on the floor, and his weather-beaten face took on an
expression of, profound regret.

“I guess I'm a fool of the best.”

“Why?” asked Braddock, again puzzled.

“To think,” said Hervey, addressing the mummy, “that you were on board
my boat, and I never looted you.”

“What!” Braddock stamped. “Would you have committed theft?”

“Theft be hanged!” was the reply. “It ain't thieving to loot the dead.
I guess a corpse hasn't got any use for jewels. You bet I'd have gummed
straightways onto that mummy, when I brought it from Malta in the old
Diver, had I known it was a jeweler's shop of sorts. Huh! Two emeralds,
and I never knew. I could kick myself.”

“You are a blackguard,” gasped the astonished Professor.

“Oh, shucks!” was the elegant retort, “give it a rest. I'm no worse than
that dandy gentleman who added murder to stealing, anyhow.”

“Ah!” Braddock bounded off his chair like an india-rubber ball, “you
said that you knew who had committed the murder.”

“Wal,” drawled Hervey again, “I do and I don't. That is I suspect, but I
can't swear to the business before a judge.”

“Who killed Bolton?” asked the Professor furiously. “Tell me at once.”

“Not me, unless it's made worth my while.”

“It will be, by Don Pedro.”

“That yellow-stomach. What's he got to do with it?”

“I have just told you the mummy belongs to him; he came to Europe to
find it. He wants the emeralds, and intends to offer a reward of one
hundred pounds for the discovery of the assassin.”

Hervey arose briskly.

“I'm right on the job,” said he, sauntering to the door. “I'll go to
that old inn of yours, where you say the Don's stopping, and look him
up. Guess I'll trade.”

“But who killed Bolton?” asked Braddock, running to the door and
gripping Hervey by his coat.

The mariner looked down on the anxious face of the plump little man with
a grim smile.

“I can tell you,” said he, “as you can't figure out the business, unless
I'm on the racket. No, sir; I'm the white boy in thin circus.”

The Professor shook the lean sailor in his anxiety.

“Who is he?”

“That almighty aristocrat that came on board my ship, when I lay in the
Thames on the very afternoon I arrived with Bolton.”

“Who do you mean?” demanded Braddock, more and more perplexed.

“Sir Frank Random.”

“What! did he kill Bolton and steal my mummy?”

“And hide it in that garden on his way to the Fort? I guess he did.”

The Professor sat down and closed his eyes with horror. When he opened
them again, Hervey was gone.




CHAPTER XVI. THE MANUSCRIPT AGAIN


But the Professor was not going to let Captain Hervey escape without
giving him full information. Before the Yankee skipper could reach
the front door, Braddock was at his heels, gasping and blowing like a
grampus.

“Come back, come back. Tell me all.”

“I reckon not,” rejoined the mariner, removing Braddock's grip. “You
ain't the one to give the money. I'll go to the Don, or to Inspector
Date of Pierside.”

“But Sir Frank must be innocent,” insisted Braddock.

“He's got to prove it,” was the dry response. “Let me go.”

“No. You must tell me on what grounds--”

“Oh, the devil take you!” said Hervey hastily, and sat down on one of
the hall chairs. “It's this way, since you won't let me skip until
I tell you. This almighty aristocrat came to Pierside on the same
afternoon as I cast anchor. While Bolton was on board, he looked in to
have a yarn of sorts.”

“What about?”

“Now, how in creation should I know?” snapped the skipper. “I wasn't on
hand, as I'd enough to do with unloading cargo. But his lordship went
with Bolton to the state-room, and they talked for half an hour. When
they came out, I saw that his lordship had his hair riz, and heard him
saying things to Bolton.”

“What sort of things?”

“Well, for one, he said, `You'll repent of this,' and then again, `Your
life isn't safe while you keep it.'”

“Meaning the mummy?”

“I reckon that's so, unless I am mistaken,” said Hervey serenely.

“Why didn't you go to the police with this information?”

“Me? Not much. Why, I saw no way of making dollars. And then, again,
I did not think of putting things together, until I found that his
lorship--”

“Meaning Sir Frank,” interpolated the Professor, frowning.

“I'm talking Queen's, or King's, or Republican lingo, I guess, and I
do mean his lorship,” said the skipper dryly--“until I found that his
lorship had been in the public-house where the crime was committed.”

“The Sailor's Rest? When did he go there?”

“In the evening. After his talk with Bolton, and after a row--as they
both seemed to have their hair off--he skipped over the side and went
back to his yacht, which wasn't far away. Bolton took his blamed mummy
ashore and got fixed at the Sailor's Rest. I gathered afterwards, from
the second mate of The Diver (which ain't my ship now), that his lorship
came into the hotel and had a drink. Afterwards my second mate saw him
talking to Bolton through the window.”

“In the same place as the woman talked?” questioned the Professor.

“That's so, only it was later in the evening that the woman came along
to give chin-music through the window. I am bound to say,” added the
captain generously, “that no one I can place my hand on saw his lorship
loafing about the hotel after dark. But what of that? He may have laid
his plans, and arranged for the corpse to be found later, in that blamed
packing case.”

“Is this all your evidence?”

“It's enough, I guess.”

“Not to procure a warrant.”

“Why, a man in the States would be electrocuted on half the evidence.”

“I daresay,” retorted the little man with contempt, “but we are in
a land where justice of the purest prevails. All your evidence is
circumstantial. It proves nothing.”

The captain was considerably nettled.

“I calculate that it proves Sir Frank wanted the mummy, else why did he
come on board my ship to see your infernal assistant. The words he
used showed that he was warning Bolton how he'd do for him. And then he
talked through the window, and was in the public-house, which ain't a
place for an almighty aristocrat to shelter in. I guess he's the man
wanted by the police. Why,” added Hervey, warming to his tale, “he'd a
slap-up yacht laying near the blamed hotel, and could easily ship the
corpse, after slipping it through the window. When he got tired of it,
and looted the emeralds, he took it by boat, below the Fort, to Mrs.
Jasher's garden and left it there, so as to pull the wool over the eyes
of the police. It's as clear as mud to me. You search his lorship's
shanty, and you'll find the emeralds.”

“It is strange,” muttered Braddock unwillingly.

“Strange, but not true,” said a voice from the head of the stairs, and
young Hope came down leisurely, with a pale face, but a very determined
air. “Random is absolutely innocent.”

“How do you know?” demanded the skipper contemptuously.

“Because he is an English gentleman and my very good friend.”

“Huh! I guess that defense won't save him from being lynched.”

Meanwhile Braddock was looking irritably at Archie.

“You've been listening to a private conversation, sir. How dare you
listen?”

“If you hold private conversations at the top of your voices in the
hall, you must be expected to be listened to,” said Archie coolly. “I
plead guilty, and I am not sorry.”

“When did you come?”

“In time to hear all that Captain Hervey has explained. I was chatting
with Lucy, and had just left her, when I heard your loud voices.”

“Has Lucy heard anything?”

“No. She is busy in her room. But I'll tell her,” Hope turned to mount
the stairs; “she likes Random, and will no more believe him guilty than
I do at this present moment.”

“Stop!” cried Braddock, flying forward to pull Hope back, as he placed
his foot on the first stair. “Tell Lucy nothing just now. We must go to
the Fort, you--and I, to see Random. Hervey, you come also, and then you
can accuse Sir Frank to his face.”

“If he dares to do it!” said Archie, who looked and felt indignant.

“Oh, I'll accuse him right enough when the time comes,” said Hervey in
his coolest manner, “but the time isn't now. Savy! I am going to see the
Don first and make sure of this reward.”

“Faugh!” cried Hope with disgust, “Blood-money!”

“What of that? Ifs a man is a murderer he should be lynched.”

“My friend, Sir Frank Random, is no murderer.”

“He's got to prove, that, as I said before,” rejoined the Yankee in a
calm way, and strolled to the door. “So-long, gents both. I'll light out
for the Warrior Inn and play my cards. And I may tell you,” he added,
pausing at the door, which he opened, “that I haven't got that blamed
wind-jammer, so need money to hold out until another steamer comes
along. One hundred pounds English currency will just fill the bill. So
now you know the lay I'm on. So-long,” and he walked quietly out of
the house, leaving Archie and Braddock looking at one another with pale
faces. The assurance of Hervey surprised and horrified them. Still, they
could not believe that Sir Frank Random had been guilty of so brutal a
crime.

“For one thing,” said Hope after a pause, “Random did not know where the
emeralds were to be found, or even that they existed.”

“I understood that he did know,” said Braddock reluctantly. “In my
hearing, and in your own, you heard Don Pedro state that he had related
the story of the manuscript to Random.”

“You forget that I learned about the emeralds at the same time,” said
Hope quietly. “Yet this Yankee skipper does not accuse me. The knowledge
of the emeralds came to Random's ears and to mine long after the crime
was committed. To have a motive for killing Bolton and stealing the
emeralds, Random would have had to know when he arrived in England.”

“And why should he have not known?” asked the Professor, biting his lip
vexedly. “I don't want to accuse Random, or even to doubt him, as he is
a very good fellow, even though he refused to assist me with money when
I desired a reward to be offered. All the same, he met Don Pedro in
Genoa, and it is just possible that the man told him of the jewels
buried with the mummy.”

Archie shook his head.

“I doubt that,” said he thoughtfully. “Random was as astonished as the
rest of us, when Don Pedro told his Arabian Night story. However, the
point can be easily settled by sending for Random. I daresay he is at
the Fort.”

“I shall send Cockatoo for him at once,” said the Professor quickly, and
walked into the museum to instruct the Kanaka. Archie remained where he
was, and seated himself on a chair, with folded arms and knitted brows.
It was incredible that an English gentleman with a stainless name and
such a well-known soldier should commit so terrible a crime. And the
matter of Hervey's accusation was complicated by the fact--of which
Hervey was ignorant--that Don Pedro was willing that Random should
become his son-in-law. Hope wondered what the fiery, proud Peruvian
would say when he heard his friend denounced. His reflections on this
point were cut short by the return of the Professor, who appeared at
the door of the museum dismissing Cockatoo. When the Kanaka took his
departure, Braddock beckoned to the young man.

“There is no reason why we should talk in the hall, and let the whole
house know of this new difficulty,” he said in a testy manner. “Come in
here.”

Hope entered and looked with ill-concealed repugnance at the uncanny
shape of the green mummy, which was lying on a long table. He
examined the portions where the swathings had been cut with some sharp
instrument, to reveal the dry, bony hands, which formerly had held the
costly jewels. The face was invisible and covered with a mask of dull
beaten gold. Formerly the eyes had been jeweled, but these last were now
absent. He pointed out the mask to the Professor, who was hovering over
the weird dead with a large magnifying-glass.

“It is strange,” said Hope earnestly, “that the mask of gold was not
stolen also, since it is so valuable.”

“Unless melted down, the mask could be traced,” said Braddock after a
pause. “The jewels, according to Don Pedro, are of immense value, and so
could have been got rid of easily. Random was satisfied with those.”

“Don't talk of him in that way, as though his guilt was certain,” said
Hope, wincing.

“Well, you must admit that the evidence against him is strong.”

“But purely circumstantial.”

“Circumstantial evidence has hanged many an innocent man before now.
Humph!” said Braddock uneasily, “I hope it won't hang our friend.
However, we shall hear what he has to say. I have sent Cockatoo to the
Fort to bring him here at once. If Random is absent, Cockatoo is to
leave a note in his room, on the writing-table.”

“Would it not have been better to have told Cockatoo to give the note to
Random's servant?”

“I think not,” responded Braddock dryly. “Random's servant is certainly
one of the most stupid men in the entire army. He would probably forget
to give him the note, and as it is important that we should see Random
at once, it is better that he should find it placed personally on his
writing-table by Cockatoo, upon whom I can depend.”

Archie abandoned the argument, as it really mattered very little. He
took up another line of conversation.

“I expect if the criminal tries to dispose of the emeralds he will
be caught,” said he: “such large jewels are too noticeable to escape
comment.”

“Humph! It depends upon the cleverness of the thief,” said the
Professor, who was more taken up with the mummy than with the
conversation, “He might have the jewels cut into smaller stones, or he
might go to India and dispose of them to some Rajah, who would certainly
say nothing. I don't know how criminals act myself, as I have never
studied their methods. But I hope that the clue you mention will be hit
upon, if only for Random's sake.”

“I don't believe for one moment that Random is in danger,” said Archie,
“and, if he is, I shall turn detective myself.”

“I wish you joy,” replied Braddock, bending over the mummy. “Look, Hope,
at the wonderful color of this wool. There are some arts we have lost
completely--dyeing of this surprising beauty is one. Humph!” mused the
archaeologist, “I wonder why this particular mummy is dyed green, or
rather why it is wrapped in green bandages. Yellow was the royal color
of the ancient Peruvian monarchs. Vicuna wool dyed yellow. What do you
think, Hope? It is strange.”

Archie shrugged his shoulders.

“I can say nothing, because I know nothing,” he said sharply. “All I do
know is that I wish this precious mummy had never been brought here. It
has caused trouble ever since its arrival.”

“Well,” said Braddock, surveying the dead with some disfavor, “I must
say that I shall be glad to see the last of it myself. I know now all
that I wanted to know! Humph! I wonder if Don Pedro will allow me to
strip the mummy? Of course! It is mine not his. I shall unswathe it
entirely,” and Braddock was about to lay sacrilegious hands on the dead,
when Cockatoo entered breathlessly. He had been so quick that he must
have run to the Fort and back again.

“I knock at door,” said the Kanaka, delivering his message, “and I hear
no voice. I go in and find no one, so I put the letter on the table.
I come down and ask, and a soldier tells me, sir, his master is coming
back in half an hour.”

“You should have waited,” said Braddock, waving Cockatoo aside. “Come
along with me to the Fort, Hope.”

“But Random will come here as soon as he returns.”

“Very likely, but I can't wait. I am anxious to hear what he has to
say in his defense. Come, Cockatoo, my coat, my hat, my gloves. Stir
yourself, you scoundrel!”

Archie was not unwilling to go, since he was anxious also to hear what
Random would say to the absurd accusation brought against him by the
Yankee. In a few minutes the two men were walking smartly down the
road through the village, the Professor striving to keep up with Hope's
longer legs by trotting as hard as he could. Halfway down the village
they met a trap, and in it Captain Hervey being driven to the Jessum
railway station.

“Have you seen Don Pedro?” asked the Professor, stopping the vehicle.

“I reckon not,” answered Hervey stolidly. “He's gone into Pierside to
see the police. I'm off there also.”

“You had better come with us,” said Archie sternly;--“we are going to
see Sir Frank Random.”

“Give him my respects,” said the skipper cold-bloodedly, “and say that
he's worth one hundred pounds to me,” he waved his hand and the trap
moved away, but he looked back with a wry smile. “Say I'll square the
matter for double the money and command of his yacht.”

Braddock and Archie looked after the trap in disgust.

“What a scoundrel the man is!” said the Professor pettishly; “he'd sell
his father for what he could get.”

“It shows how much his word is to be depended upon. I expect this
accusation of Random is a put-up job.”

“I hope so, for Random's sake,” said Braddock, trotting briskly along.

In a short time they arrived at the Fort and were informed that Sir
Frank had not yet returned, but was expected back every moment. In the
meanwhile, as Braddock and Hope were both extremely well known, they
were shown into Random's quarters, which were on the first floor. When
the soldier-servant retired and the door was closed, Hope seated himself
near the window, while Braddock trotted round, looking into things.

“It's a dog kennel,” said the Professor. “I told Random that.”

“Perhaps we should have waited him in the mess,” suggested Archie.

“No! no! no! We couldn't talk there, with a lot of silly young fools
hanging about. I told Random that I would never enter the mess, so he
invited me to come always to his quarters. He was in love with Lucy
then,” chuckled the Professor, “and nothing was too good for me.”

“Not even the dog kennel,” said Hope dryly, for the Professor's chatter
was so rude as to be quite annoying.

“Pooh! pooh! pooh! Random doesn't mind a joke. You, Hope, have no sense
of humor. Your name is Scotch also. I believe you are a Caledonian.”

“I am nothing of the sort. I was born on this side of the border.”

“You might have been born at the North Pole for all I care,” said the
little man politely. “I don't like artists: they are usually silly. I
wish Lucy had married a man of science. Now don't talk rubbish. I know
what you are going to say.”

“Well,” said Archie, humoring him, “what am I going to say?”

This non-plussed the irritable savant.

“Hum! Hum! hum! I don't know and don't care. Pouf! How hot this room is!
What a number of books of travel Random has!” Braddock was now at the
bookcase, which consisted of shelves swung by cords against the wall.

“Random travels a great deal,” Archie reminded him.

“Quite so: quite so. Wastes his money on that silly yacht. But he hasn't
traveled in South America. I expect he's going there. Come here, Hope,
and see the many, many books about Peru and Chili and Brazil. There must
be a dozen, and all library books too.”

Archie sauntered towards the shelves.

“I expect Random is getting up the subject of South America, so as to
talk to Donna Inez.”

“Probably! probably!” snapped Braddock, pulling several of the books out
of place. “Why, there isn't a--Ah, dear me! What a catastrophe!”

He might well say so, for in his desire to examine the books, they all
tipped off the shelves and lay in a disorderly heap on the floor. Hope
began to pick them up and replace them, and so did the author of the
mischief. Among the books were several papers scribbled with notes, and
Braddock bundled these all in a heap.. Shortly, he caught sight of the
writing on one.

“Hullo! Latin,” said he, and read a line or two. “Oh!” he gasped, “Hope!
Hope! The manuscript of Don Pedro!”

“Impossible!”

Archie rose and stared at the discolored paper.

“Sorry to have kept you,” said Random, entering at this moment.

“You villain!” shouted Braddock furiously, “so you are guilty after
all?”




CHAPTER XVII. CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE


Random was so taken aback by the fierce accusation of the Professor that
he stood suddenly still at the door, and did not advance into the room.
Yet he did not look so much afraid as puzzled. Whatever Braddock might
have thought, Hope, from the expression on the young soldier's face, was
more than ever satisfied of his innocence.

“What are you talking about, Professor?” asked Random, genuinely
surprised.

“You know well enough,” retorted the Professor.

“Upon my word I don't,” said the other, walking into the room and
unbuckling his sword. “I find you here, with the contents of my bookcase
on the floor, and you promptly accuse me of being guilty. Of what, I
should like to know? Perhaps you can tell me Hope.”

“There is no need for Hope to tell you, sir. You are perfectly well
aware of your own villainy.”

Random frowned.

“I allow a certain amount of latitude to my guests, Professor,” he said
with marked dignity, “but for a man of your age and position you go too
far. Be more explicit.”

“Allow me to speak,” intervened Archie, anticipating Braddock. “Random,
the Professor has just had a visit from Captain Hiram Hervey, who was
the skipper of The Diver. He accuses you of having murdered Bolton!”

“What?” the baronet started back, looking thunderstruck.

“Wait a moment. I have not finished yet. Hervey accuses you of this
murder, of stealing the mummy, of gaining possession of the emeralds,
and of placing the rifled corpse in Mrs. Jasher's garden, so that she
might be accused of committing the crime.”

“Exactly,” cried Braddock, seeing that his host remained silent from
sheer surprise. “Hope has stated the case very clearly. Now, sir, your
defense?”

“Defense! defense!” Random found his tongue at last and spoke
indignantly. “I have no defense to make.”

“Ah! Then you acknowledge your guilt?”

“I acknowledge nothing. The accusation is too preposterous for any
denial to be necessary. Do you believe this of me?” He looked from one
to the other.

“I don't,” said Archie quickly, “there is some mistake.”

“Thank you, Hope. And you, Professor?”

Braddock fidgeted about the room.

“I don't know what to think,” he said at length. “Hervey spoke very
decisively.”

“Oh, indeed,” returned Random dryly, and, walking to the door, he locked
it. “In that case, I must ask you for an explanation, and neither of you
shall leave this room until one is given. Your proofs?”

“Here is one of them,” snapped Braddock, throwing the manuscript on the
table. “Where did you get this?”

Random took up the discolored paper with a bewildered air.

“I never set eyes on this before,” he said, much puzzled. “What is it?”

“A copy of the manuscript mentioned by Don Pedro, which describes the
two emeralds buried with the mummy of Inca Caxas.”

“I see.” Random understood all in a moment. “So you say that I knew of
the emeralds from this, and so murdered Bolton to obtain them.”

“Pardon me,” said Braddock with elaborate politeness. “Hervey says
that you murdered my poor assistant, and although my discovery of this
manuscript proves that you must have known about the jewels, I say
nothing. I wait to hear your defense.”

“That's very good of you,” remarked Sir Frank ironically. “So it seems
that I am in the dock. Perhaps the counsel for the prosecution will
state the evidence against me,” and he looked again from one to the
other.

Archie shook the baronet by the hand very warmly.

“My dear fellow,” he declared decidedly, “I don't believe one word of
the evidence.”

“In that case there must be a flaw in it,” retorted Random, but did not
seem to be unmoved by Hope's generous action. “Sit down, Professor; it
appears that you are against me.”

“Until I hear your defense,” said the old man obstinately.

“I cannot make any until I hear your evidence. Go on. I am waiting,”
 and Sir Frank flung himself into a chair, where he sat calmly, his eyes
steadily fixed on the Professor's face.

“Where did you get that manuscript?” asked Braddock sharply.

“I got it nowhere: this is the first time I have seen it.”

“Yet it was hidden amongst your books.”

“Then I can't say how it got there. Were you looking for it?”

“No! Certainly not. To pass the time while waiting, I examined your
library, and in pulling out a book, your case, being a swing one,
over-balanced and shot its contents on to the floor. Amongst the papers
which fell with the books, I caught a glimpse of the manuscript, and,
noting that it was written in Latin, I picked it up, surprised to
think that a frivolous young man, such as you are, should study a dead
language. A few words showed me that the manuscript was a copy of the
one referred to by Don Pedro.”

“One moment,” said Archie, who had been thinking. “Perhaps this is the
original manuscript, which De Gayangos has given to you, Random.”

“It is good of you to afford me a loophole of escape,” said Sir Frank,
leaning back with folded arms, “but De Gayangos gave me nothing. I
saw the manuscript in his hands, when he showed it to us all at Mrs.
Jasher's. But whether this is the original or a copy I can't say. Don
Pedro certainly did not give it to me.”

“Has Don Pedro been in your quarters?” asked Hope thoughtfully.

“No. He has only visited me in the mess. And even if Don Pedro did come
in here--for I guess what is in your mind--I really do not see why he
should slip a manuscript which he values highly amongst my books.”

“Then you really never saw this before?” said Braddock, indicating the
paper on the table, and impressed by Random's earnestness.

“How often do you want me to deny it?” retorted the young man
impatiently. “Perhaps you will state on what grounds I am accused?”

Braddock nodded and cleared his throat.

“Captain Hervey declared that your yacht arrived at Pierside almost at
the same time as his steamer.”

“Quite right. When Don Pedro received a wire from Malta stating that the
mummy had been sold to you, and that it was being shipped to London on
The Diver, I got up steam at once, and chased the tramp to that port. As
the tramp was slow, and my boat was fast, I arrived on the same day
and almost at the same hour, even though Hervey's boat had the start of
mine.”

“Why were you anxious to follow The Diver?” asked Hope.

“Don Pedro wished to get back the mummy, and asked me to follow. As I
was in love with Donna Inez, and still am, I was only too willing to
oblige him.”

Braddock nodded again.

“Hervey says that you went on board The Diver, and had an interview with
Bolton.”

“That is perfectly true, and my visit was paid for the same reason as I
followed the steamer to London--that is, I acted on behalf of Don Pedro.
I wished to ascertain for certain that the mummy was on board, and
having done so from Bolton, I urged him to induce you to give back the
same, free of charge, to De Gayangos, from whom it had been stolen. He
refused, as he declared that he intended to deliver it to you.”

“I knew I could always trust Bolton,” said the Professor
enthusiastically. “It would have been better for you to have come to me,
Random.”

“I daresay; but I wished, as I told you, to make certain that the mummy
was on board. That was the real reason for my visit; but, being in
Bolton's company, I naturally told him that Don Pedro claimed the mummy
as his property, and warned him that if you or he kept the same, that
there would be trouble.”

“Did you use threats?” asked Hope, remembering what he had overheard.

“No; certainly not.”

“Yes, you did,” cried Braddock quickly. “Hervey declares that you told
Bolton that he would repent of keeping the mummy, and that his life
would not be safe while he held it.”

To the surprise of both visitors, Random admitted using these serious
threats without a moment's hesitation.

“Don Pedro told me that many Indians, both in Lima and Cuzco, who
look upon him as the lawful descendant of the last Inca, are anxiously
expecting the return of the royal mummy. He also stated that when the
Indians knew who held the mummy they would send one of themselves to get
it back, if he--Don Pedro, that is--did not fetch it. To get back the
mummy Don Pedro declared that these Indians would not stop short of
murder. Hence my warning to Bolton.”

“Oh!” Archie jumped up with widely opened eyes. “Then perhaps this
solves the problem. Bolton was murdered by some Peruvian Indian.”

Random shook his head gravely.

“Again you offer me a loophole of escape, my dear fellow,” he said
sententiously, “but that theory will not hold water. At present the
Indians in Lima and Cuzco do not know that the mummy has been found. Don
Pedro only chanced upon the paper which announced the sale by accident
and had no time to communicate with his barbaric friends in South
America. Failing to get the mummy from you, Professor, he would have
returned to Peru and then would have told who possessed the corpse of
Inca Caxas, leaving the Indians to deal with the matter. In that case my
warning to Bolton would be necessary. But at the time I told him, it
was not necessary. However, Bolton remained true to you, Professor, and
declined to surrender the mummy. I therefore wired to Don Pedro at Genoa
that the mummy was on board The Diver and was being sent to Gartley. I
also advised him to come to me here in order to be introduced to you.
The rest you know.”

There was a moment's silence. Then Archie, to test if Random was
willing to admit everything--as an innocent man certainly would--asked
significantly,

“Did you see Bolton again after your interview on board ship?”

It was then that the baronet proved his good faith.

“Oh, yes,” he said easily and without hesitation. “I was walking
about Pierside later, and, passing along that waterside alley near
the Sailor's Rest, I saw a window on the ground floor open, and Bolton
looking out across the river. I stopped and asked him when he proposed
to take the mummy to Gartley, and if it was on shore. He admitted that
it was in the hotel, but declined to say when he would send it on to
you, Professor. When he closed the window, I afterwards went into the
hotel and had a drink in order to ask casually when Mr. Bolton intended
to leave. I gathered--not directly, of course, but in a roundabout
way--that he had arranged to go next morning and to send on his luggage.
Then I left and went to London. In the course of time I returned here
and learned of the murder and the disappearance of the corpse of Inca
Caxas. And now,” Random stood up, “having admitted all this, perhaps you
will believe me to be innocent.”

“You have no idea who murdered Bolton and placed his body in the packing
case?” asked Braddock, manifestly disappointed.

“'No. No more than I have any idea of the person who placed the mummy
case and its contents in Mrs. Jasher's garden.”

“Oh, you know that!” said Archie quickly.

“Yes. The news was all over the village this morning. I could hardly
help knowing it. And I believe that the mummy has been taken to your
house, Professor.”

“It has,” admitted Braddock dryly. “I took it myself from Mrs. Jasher's
arbor in a hand-cart, with the assistance of Cockatoo. But when I made
an examination this morning in the presence of Hope and Don Pedro, I
found that the swathings of the body had been ripped up, and that the
emeralds mentioned in that manuscript had been stolen.”

“Strange!” said Random with a frown; “and by whom?”

“No doubt by the assassin of Sidney Bolton.”

“Probably.” Random kicked a mat straight with his foot. “At any rate
the theft of the emeralds shows that it was not any Indian who killed
Bolton. None of them would rifle so sacred a corpse.”

“Besides which--as you say--the Indians in Peru do not know that the
mummy has reappeared after thirty years' seclusion,” chimed in Hope,
rising. “Well, and what is to be done now?”

For answer Sir Frank picked up the manuscript which still remained on
the table.

“I shall see Don Pedro about this,” he said quietly, “and ascertain if
it is the original or a copy.”

Braddock rose slowly and stared at the paper.

“Do you know Latin?” he asked.

“No,” rejoined Random, knowing what the savant meant. “I learned it, of
course, but I have forgotten much. I might translate a word or two,
but certainly not the hedge-priest Latin in which this is written.” He
looked carefully at the manuscript as he spoke.

“But who could have placed it in your room?” questioned Archie.

“We cannot learn that until we see Don Pedro. If this is the original
manuscript which we saw the other night, we may learn how it passed from
the possession of De Gayangos to my bookcase. If it is a copy, then we
must learn, if possible, who owned it.”

“Don Pedro said that a transcript or a translation had been made,”
 mentioned Hope.

“Evidently a transcript,” said Braddock, glaring at the paper in
Random's hand. “But how could that find its way from Lima to this
place?”

“It might have been packed up with the mummy,” suggested Archie.

“No,” contradicted Random decisively, “in that event, the man in Malta
from whom the mummy was bought would have discovered the emeralds, and
would have taken them.”

“Perhaps he did. We have nothing to show that Bolton's assassin
committed the crime for the sake of the jewels.”

“He must have done so,” cried the Professor, irritably, “else there is
no motive for the commission of the crime. But I think myself that we
must start at the other end to find a clue. When we discover who placed
the mummy in Mrs. Jasher's garden--”

“That will not be easy,” murmured Hope thoughtfully, “though, of
course, the same must have been brought by river. Let us go down to the
embankment and see if there are any signs of a boat having been brought
there last night,” and he moved to the door. “Random?”

“I cannot leave the Fort, as I am on duty,” replied the officer, putting
the manuscript away in a drawer and locking the same, “but this evening
I shall see Don Pedro, and in the meanwhile I shall endeavor to learn
from my servant who visited me lately while I was absent. The manuscript
must have been brought here by someone. But I trust,” he added as he
escorted his two visitors to the door, “that you now acquit me of--”

“Yes! yes! yes!” cried Braddock, hastily cutting him short and shaking
his hand. “I apologize for my suspicions. Now I maintain that you are
innocent.”

“And I never believed you to be guilty,” cried Hope heartily.

“Thank you both,” said Random simply, and, having closed the door, he
returned to a chair near the fire to smoke a pipe, and meditate over his
future movements. “An enemy hath done this,” said Random, referring
to the concealment of the manuscript, but he could think of no one who
desired to harm him in any way.




CHAPTER XVIII. RECOGNITION


Lucy and Mrs. Jasher were having a confidential conversation in the
small pink drawing-room. True to her promise, Miss Kendal had come to
readjust matters between the fiery little Professor and the widow. But
it was not an easy task, as Mrs. Jasher was righteously indignant at the
rash words used to her.

“As if I knew anything about the matter,” she repeated again and again
in angry tones. “Why, my dear, he as good as told me I had murdered--”

Lucy did not let her finish.

“There! there!” she said, speaking as she would have done to a fretful
child, “you know what my father is.”

“It seems to me that I am just beginning to learn,” said the widow
bitterly, “and knowing how ready he is to believe ill of me, I think it
is better we should part for ever.”

“But you'll never be Lady Braddock.”

“Even if I married him, I am not sure that I should be, since I learn
that his brother is singularly healthy and comes of a long-lived family.
And it will not be pleasant to live with your father when he has such a
temper.”

“That was only because he was excited. Think of your salon, and of the
position you wish to hold in, London.”

“Ah, well,” said Mrs. Jasher, visibly softening, “there is something to
be said there. After all, one can never find a man who is perfection.
And a very amiable man is usually a fool. One can't expect a rose to
be without thorns. But really, my dear,” she surveyed Lucy with mild
surprise, “you appear to be very anxious that I should marry your
father.”

“I want to see my father made comfortable before I marry Archie,”
 said the girl with a blush. “Of course my father is quite a child in
household affairs and needs everything done for him. Archie--I am glad
to say--is now in a position to marry me in the spring. I want you to be
married about the same time, and then you can live in Gartley, and--”

“No, my dear,” said Mrs. Jasher firmly, “if I marry your father, he
wishes us to go at once to Egypt in search of this tomb.”

“I know that he wants you to help with the money left to you by your
late brother. But surely you will not go up the Nile yourself?”

“No, certainly not,” said the widow promptly. “I shall remain in Cairo
while the Professor goes on his excursion into Ethiopia. I know that
Cairo is a very charming place, and that I shall be able to enjoy myself
there.”

“Then you have decided to forgive my father for his rash words?”

“I must,” sighed Mrs. Jasher. “I am so tired of being an unprotected
widow without a recognized position in the world. Even with my brother's
money,--not that it is so very much--I shall still be looked upon
askance if I go into society. But as Mrs. Braddock, or Lady Braddock,
no one will dare to say a word against me. Yes, my dear, if your father
comes and, asks my pardon he shall have it. We women are so weak,” ended
the widow virtuously, as if she was not making a virtue of necessity.

Things being thus settled, the two talked on amiably for some time, and
discussed the chances of Random marrying Donna Inez. Both acknowledged
that the Peruvian lady was handsome enough, but had not a word to say
for herself.

While thus chattering, Professor Braddock trotted into the room, looking
brisk and bright from his stroll in the cold frosty air. Gifted as he
was with scientific assurance, the little man was not at all taken aback
by the cold reception of Mrs. Jasher, but rubbed his hands cheerfully.

“Ah, there you are, Selina,” said he, looking like a bright-eyed robin.
“I hope you are feeling well.”

“How can you expect me to feel well after what you said?” remarked Mrs.
Jasher reproachfully, and anxious to make a virtue of forgiveness.

“Oh, I beg pardon: I beg pardon. Surely, Selina, you are not going to
make a fuss over a trifle like that?”

“I did not give you permission to call me Selina.”

“Quite so. But as we are to be married, I may as well get used to your
Christian name, my dear.”

“I am not so sure that we will be married,” said Mrs. Jasher stiffly.

“Oh, but we must,” cried Braddock in dismay. “I am depending upon your
money to finance my expedition to Queen Tahoser's tomb.”

“I see,” observed the widow coldly, while Lucy sat quietly by and
allowed the elder woman to conduct the campaign, “you want me for my
money. There is no love in the question.”

“My dear, as soon as I have the time--say during our voyage to Cairo,
whence we start inland up the Nile for Ethiopia--I shall make love
whenever you like. And, confound it, Selina, I admire you no end--to
use a slang phrase. You are a fine woman and a sensible woman, and I
am afraid that you are throwing yourself away on a snuffy old man like
myself.”

“Oh no! no! Pray do not say that,” cried Mrs. Jasher, visibly moved
by this flattery. “You will make a very good husband if you will only
strive to govern your temper.”

“Temper! temper! Bless the woman--I mean you, Selina--I have the very
best temper in the world. However, you shall govern it and myself also
if you like. Come,” he took her hand, “let us be friends and fix the
wedding day.”

Mrs. Jasher did not withdraw her hand.

“Then you do not believe that I have anything to do with this terrible
murder?” she asked playfully.

“No! no! I was heated last night. I spoke rashly and hastily. Forgive
and forget, Selina. You are innocent--quite innocent, in spite of
the mummy being in your confounded garden. After all, the evidence is
stronger against Random than against you. Perhaps he put it there: it's
on his way to the Fort, you see. Never mind. He has exonerated himself,
and no doubt, when confronted with Hervey, will be able to silence that
blackguard. And I am quite sure that Hervey is a blackguard,” ended
Braddock, rubbing his bald head.

The two ladies looked at one another in amazement, not knowing what
to say. They were ignorant of the theft of the emeralds and of the
accusation of Sir Frank by the Yankee skipper. But, with his usual
absentmindedness, Braddock had forgotten all about that, and sat in his
chair rubbing his head quite pink and rattling on cheerfully.

“I went down with Hope to the embankment,” he continued, “but neither
of us could see any sign of a boat. There's the rude, short jetty, of
course, and if a boat came, a boat could go away without leaving any
trace. Perhaps that is so. However, we must wait until we see Don Pedro
and Hervey again, and then--”

Lucy broke in desperately.

“What are you talking about, father? Why do you bring in Sir Frank's
name in that way?”

“What do you expect me to say?” retorted the little man. “After all, the
manuscript was found in his room, and the emeralds are gone. I saw that
for myself, as did Hope and Don Pedro, in whose presence I opened the
mummy case.”

Mrs. Jasher rose in her astonishment.

“Are the emeralds gone?” she gasped.

“Yes! yes! yes!” cried Braddock irritably. “Am I not telling you so?
I almost believe in Hervey's accusation of Random, and yet the boy
exonerated himself very forcibly--very forcibly indeed.”

“Will you explain all that has happened, father?” said Lucy, who was
becoming more and more perplexed by this rambling chatter. “We are quite
in the dark.”

“So am I: so is Hope: so is every one,” chuckled Braddock. “Ah, yes: of
course, you were not present when these events took place.”

“What events?--what events?” demanded Mrs. Jasher, now quite
exasperated.

“I am about to tell you,” snapped her future husband, and related all
that had taken place since the arrival of Captain Hervey in the museum
at the Pyramids. The women listened with interest and with growing
astonishment, only interrupting the narrator with a simultaneous
exclamation of indignation when they heard that Sir Frank was accused.

“It is utterly and wholly absurd,” cried Lucy angrily. “Sir Frank is the
soul of honor.”

“So I think, my dear,” chimed in Mrs. Jasher. “And what does he say
to--?”

Braddock interrupted.

“I am about to tell you, if you will stop talking,” he cried crossly.
“That is so like a woman. She asks for an explanation and then prevents
the man from giving it. Random offers a very good defense, I am bound to
say,” and he detailed what Sir Frank had said.

When the history was finished, Lucy rose to go.

“I shall see Archie at once,” she said, moving hastily, towards the
door.

“What for?” demanded her father benignly.

Lucy turned.

“This thing can't go on,” she declared resolutely. “Mrs. Jasher was
accused by you, father--”

“Only in a heated moment,” cried the Professor, excusing himself.

“Never mind, she was accused,” retorted Lucy stubbornly, “and now
this sailor accuses Sir Frank. Who knows who will be charged next with
committing the crime? I shall ask Archie to take the matter up, and hunt
down the real criminal. Until the guilty person is found, I foresee that
we shall never have a moment's peace.”

“I quite agree with you,” said Mrs. Jasher earnestly. “For my own sake
I wish the matter of this mystery to be cleared up. Why don't you help
me?” she added, turning to Braddock, who listened placidly.

“I am helping,” said Braddock quietly. “I intend to set Cockatoo on the
trail at once. He shall take up his abode in the Sailor's Rest on some
pretext, and no doubt will be able to find a clue.”

“What?” cried the widow incredulously, “a savage like that?”

“Cockatoo is much cleverer than the average white man,” said Braddock
dryly, “especially in following a trail. He, if any one, will learn the
truth. I would much rather trust the Kanaka than young Hope.”

“Nonsense!” cried Lucy, standing up for her lover. “Archie is the one to
discover the assassin. I'll see him at once. And you, father?”

“I, my dear,” said the Professor calmly, “shall remain here and make my
peace with the future Mrs. Braddock.”

“You have made it already,” said the widow graciously, and extended her
hand, which the Professor kissed unexpectedly, and then sat back in his
chair, looking quite abashed at his outburst of gallantry.

Seeing that everything was going well, Lucy left the elderly couple
to continue their courting, and hurried to Archie's lodgings in the
village. However, he happened to be out, and his landlady did not know
when he would return. Rather annoyed by this, since she greatly desired
to unbosom herself, Miss Kendal walked disconsolately towards the
Pyramids. On the way she was stopped by Widow Anne, looking more dismal
and funereal than ever, and garrulous with copious draughts of gin. Not
that she was intoxicated, but her tongue was loose, and she wept freely
for no apparent reason. According to herself, she had stopped Lucy to
demand back from Mr. Hope through the girl certain articles of attire
which had been borrowed for artistic purposes. These, consisting of a
shawl and a skirt and a bodice, were of extraordinary value, and Mrs.
Bolton wanted them back or their equivalent in value. She mentioned that
she would prefer the sum of five pounds.

“Why do you not ask Mr. Hope yourself?” said Lucy who was too impatient
to bear with the old creature's maunderings. “If you gave him the things
he will no doubt return them.”

“If they aren't spiled with paint,” wailed Widow Anne. “He told my Sid
as he wanted them for a model to wear while being painted. Sid asked
me, and I gave 'em to Sid, and Sid, he passed 'em along to your good
gentleman. There was a skirt, as good as new, and a body of the dress
trimmest beautiful, and a tartan shawl as I got from my mother. But no,”
 the old woman corrected herself, “it was a dark shawl with red spots
and--”

“Ask Mr. Hope, ask Mr. Hope,” cried Miss Kendal impatiently. “I know
nothing about the things,” and she tore her dress from Widow Anne's
detaining hand to hurry home. Mrs. Bolton wailed aloud at this
desertion, and took her way to Hope's lodgings, where she declared her
determination to remain until the artist restored her apparel.

Lucy for the moment thought little of this interview; but on reflection
she thought it strange that Archie should borrow clothes from Mrs.
Bolton through Sidney. Not that there was anything strange in Archie's
procuring such garments, since he may have wanted them to clothe a model
with. But he could easily have got such things from his landlady, or,
if from Widow Anne, could have borrowed them direct without appealing to
Sidney. Why, then, had the dead man acted as an intermediate party? This
question was hard to answer, yet Lucy greatly wished for a reply, since
she suddenly remembered how a woman in a dark dress and with a dark
shawl over her head had been seen by Eliza Flight, the housemaid of the
Sailor's Rest, talking to Bolton through the window. Were the garments
borrowed as a disguise, and did the person who had borrowed them desire
that it should be supposed that Widow Anne was talking to her son? There
was a chill hand clutching Lucy's heart as she went home, for the words
of Mrs. Bolton seemed indirectly to implicate Hope in the mystery. She
determined to ask him about the matter straight out, when he came in
that night to pay his usual visit.

At dinner the Professor was in excellent spirits, and actually became so
human as to compliment Lucy on her housekeeping. He also mentioned that
he hoped Mrs. Jasher would cater as excellently. Over coffee he informed
his step-daughter that he had entirely won the widow's heart by abasing
himself at her feet and withdrawing the accusation. They had arranged to
be married in May, one or two weeks after Lucy became Mrs. Hope. In the
autumn they would start for Egypt, and would remain abroad for a year or
more.

“In fact,” said the Professor, setting down his cup and preparing to
take his departure, “everything is now settled excellently. I marry Mrs.
Jasher: you, my dear, marry Hope, and--”

“And Sir Frank marries Donna Inez,” finished Lucy quickly.

“That,” said Braddock stiffly, “entirely depends upon what De Gayangos
says to this accusation of Hervey's.”

“Sir Frank is innocent.”

“I hope so, and I believe so. But he will have to prove his innocence.
I shall do my best, and I have sent round to Don Pedro to come here. We
can then talk it over.”

“Can Archie and I come in also?” asked Miss Kendal anxiously.

Somewhat to her surprise, the Professor yielded a ready assent.

“By all means, my dear. The more witnesses we have, the better it will
be. We must do all in our powers to bring this matter to a successful
issue.”

So things were arranged, and when Archie came up to the drawing-room,
Lucy informed him that Braddock was in the museum with Don Pedro,
telling all that had happened. Hope was glad to hear that Lucy had
secured the Professor's consent that they should be present, for the
mystery of Bolton's terrible death was piquing him, and he dearly
desired to learn the truth. As a matter of fact, although he was unaware
of it, he was suffering from an attack of detective fever, and wished
to solve the mystery. He therefore went gladly into the museum with his
sweetheart. Oddly enough--as Lucy recollected when it was too late to
speak--she quite forgot to relate what Widow Anne had said about the
borrowed clothes.

Don Pedro, looking more stiff and dignified than ever, was in the
museum with Braddock. The two men were seated in comfortable chairs, and
Cockatoo, some distance away, was polishing with a cloth the green mummy
case of the fatal object which had brought about all the trouble. Lucy
had half expected to see Donna Inez, but De Gayangos explained that
he had left her writing letters to Lima in the Warrior Inn. When
Miss Kendal and Hope were seated, the Peruvian expressed himself much
surprised at the charge which had been brought against Sir Frank.

“If I can speak of such things in the presence of a lady,” he remarked,
bowing his head to Lucy.

“Oh yes,” she answered eagerly. “I have heard all about the charge. And
I am glad that you are here, Don Pedro, for I wish to say that I do not
believe there is a word of truth in the accusation.”

“Nor do I,” asserted the Peruvian decisively.

“I agree--I agree,” cried Braddock, beaming. “And you, Hope?”

“I never believed it, even before I heard Random's defense,” said Archie
with a dry smile. “Did you not see Captain Hervey yourself, sir?” he
added, turning to Don Pedro; “he started for Pierside to look you up.”

“I have not seen him,” said De Gayangos in his stately way, “and I am
very sorry, as I desire to examine him about the accusation he had dared
to bring against my very good friend, Sir Frank Random. I wish he were
here at this very minute, so that I could tell him what I think of the
charge.”

Just as Don Pedro spoke the unexpected happened, as though some genie
had obeyed his commands. As though transported into the room by magic,
the American skipper appeared, not through the floor, but by the door. A
female domestic admitted him and announced his name, then fled to avoid
the anger of her master, seeing she had violated the sacred precincts of
the museum.

Captain Hervey, amused by the surprise visible on every face, sauntered
forward, hat on head and cheroot in mouth as usual. But when he saw Lucy
he removed both with a politeness scarcely to be expected from so rude
and ready and rough a mariner.

“I beg pardon for coming here uninvited,” said Hervey awkwardly, “but
I've been chasing the Don all over Pierside and through this village.
They told me at the police office that you”--he spoke to De Gayangos
“had doubled on your trail, so here I am for a little private
conversation.”

The Peruvian looked gravely at Hervey's face, which was clearly revealed
in the powerful light of the many lamps with which the museum was
filled, and rose to bow.

“I am glad to see you, sir,” he said politely, and with a still more
searching glance. “With the permission of our host I shall ask you to
take a chair,” and he turned to Braddock.

“Certainly! certainly!” said the Professor fussily. “Cockatoo?”

“Pardon, allow me,” said De Gayangos, and brought forward a chair,
still keeping his eyes on the skipper, who was rather confused by the
courtesy. “Will you be seated, senor: then we can talk.”

Hervey sat down quietly close to the Peruvian; who then leaned forward
to address him.

“You will have a cigarette?” he asked, offering a silver case.

“Thanks, no. I'll smoke a cheroot if the lady don't mind.”

“Not at all,” replied Lucy, who, along with Archie and the Professor,
was puzzled by Don Pedro's manner. “Please smoke!”

In taking back the case Don Pedro allowed it to drop. As he made no
motion of picking it up, Hervey, although annoyed with himself for
his politeness towards a yellow-stomach, as he called De Gayangos, was
compelled to stretch for it. As he handed it back to Don Pedro, the
Peruvian's eyes lighted up and he nodded gravely.

“Thank you, Vasa,” said De Gayangos, and Hervey, changing color, leaped
from his seat as though touched by a spear-point.




CHAPTER XIX. NEARER THE TRUTH


For a few moments there was silence. Lucy and Archie sat still, as they
were too much surprised by Don Pedro's recognition of Captain Hervey as
the Swedish sailor Vasa to move or speak. But the Professor did not seem
to be greatly astonished, and the sole sound which broke the stillness
was his sardonic chuckle. Perhaps the little man had progressed beyond
the point of being surprised at anything, or, like, Moliere's hero, was
only surprised at finding virtue in unexpected places.

As for the Peruvian and the skipper, they were both on their feet,
eyeing one another like two fighting dogs. Hervey was the first to find
his very useful tongue.

“I guess you've got the bulge on me,” said he, trying to outstare
the Peruvian, for which nationality, from long voyaging on the South
American coast, he entertained the most profound contempt.

But in De Gayangos he found a foeman worthy of his steel.

“I think not,” said Don Pedro quietly, and facing the pseudo-American
bravely. “I never forget faces, and yours is a noticeable one. When you
first spoke I fancied that I remembered your voice. All that business
with the chair was to get close to you, so that I could see the scar
on your right temple. It is still there, I notice. Also, I dropped my
cigarette case and forced you to pick it up, so that, when you stretched
your arm, I might see what mark was on your left wrist. It is a serpent
encircling the sun, which Lola Farjados induced you to have tattooed
when you were in Lima thirty years ago. Your eyes are blue and full of
light, and as you were twenty when I knew you, the lapse of years has
made you fifty--your present age.”

“Shucks!” said Hervey coolly, and sat down to smoke.

Don Pedro turned to Archie and Braddock.

“Mr. Hope! Professor!” he remarked, “if you remember the description I
gave of Gustav Vasa, I appeal to you to see if it does not exactly fit
this man?”

“It does,” said Archie unhesitatingly, “although I cannot see the
tattooed left wrist to which you refer.”

Hervey, still smoking, made no offer to show the symbol, but Braddock
unexpectedly came to the assistance of Don Pedro.

“The man is Vasa right enough,” he remarked abruptly. “Whether he is
Swedish or American I cannot say. But he is the same man I met when I
was in Lima thirty years ago, after the war.”

Hervey slowly turned his blue eyes on the scientist with a twinkle in
their depths.

“So you recognized me?” he observed, with his Yankee drawl.

“I recognized you at the moment I hired you to take The Diver to Malta
to bring back that mummy,” retorted Braddock, “but it didn't suit my
book to let on. Didn't you recognize me?”

“Wal, no,” said Hervey, his drawl more pronounced than ever. “I haven't
got the memory for faces that you and the Don here seem to possess.
Huh!” He wheeled his chair and faced Braddock squarely. “I'd have
thought you wiser not to back up the Don, sir.”

Braddock's little eyes sparkled.

“I am not afraid of you,” said he with great contempt. “I never did
anything for which you could get money out of me for, Captain Hervey or
Gustav Vasa, or whatever your name might be.”

“You were always a mighty spry man,” assented the skipper coolly, “but
spry men, I take it, make mistakes from being too almighty smart.”

Braddock shrugged his shoulders, and Don Pedro intervened.

“This is all beside the point,” he remarked angrily. “Captain Hervey, do
you deny that you are Gustav Vasa in the face of this evidence?”

Hervey drew up the left sleeve of his reefer jacket, and showed on his
bared wrist the symbol of the sun and the encircling serpent.

“Is that enough?” he drawled, “or do you want to look at this?” and he
turned his head to reveal his scarred right temple.

“Then you admit that you are Vasa?”

“Wal,” drawled the captain again, “that's one of my names, I guess,
though I haven't used it since I traded that blamed mummy in Paris,
thirty years ago. There's nothing like owning up.”

“Are you not Swedish?” asked Lucy timidly.

“I am a citizen of the world, I guess,” replied Hervey with great
politeness for him, “and America suits me for headquarters as well as
any other nation. I might be Swedish or Danish or a Dago for choice.
Vasa may be my name, or Hervey, or anything you like. But I guess I'm a
man all through.”

“And a thief!” cried Don Pedro, who had resumed his seat, but was
keeping quiet with difficulty.

“Not of those emeralds,” rejoined the skipper coolly: “Lord, to think
of the chance I missed! Thirty years ago I could have looted them,
and again the other day. But I never knew--I never knew,” cried Hervey
regretfully, with his vividly blue eyes on the mummy. “I could jes' kick
myself, gentlemen, when I think of the miss.”

“Then you didn't steal the manuscript along with the emeralds?”

“Wal, I did,” cried Hervey, turning to Archie, who had spoken, “but it
was in a furren lingo, to which I didn't catch on. If I'd known I'd have
learned about those blamed emeralds.”

“What did you do with the copy of the manuscript you stole?” asked Don
Pedro sharply. “I know there was a copy, as my father told me so. I have
the original myself, but the transcript--and not a translation, as I
fancied--appeared in Sir Frank Random's room to-day, hidden behind some
books.”

Hervey made no move, but smoked steadily, with his eyes on the carpet.
However, Archie, who was observing keenly, saw that he was more startled
than he would admit. The explanation had taken him by surprise.

“Explain!” cried the Peruvian sharply.

Hervey looked up and fixed a pair of very evil eyes on the Don.

“See here,” he remarked, “if the lady wasn't present, I'd show you that
I take no orders from any yellow--that is, from any low-down Don.”

“Lucy, my dear, leave us,” said Braddock, rising, much excited; “we must
have this matter sifted to the bottom, and if Hervey can explain better
in your absence, I think you should go.”

Although Miss Kendal was very anxious to hear all that was to be heard,
she saw the advisability of taking this advice, especially as Hope gave
her arm a meaning nudge.

“I'll go,” she said meekly, and was escorted by her lover to the door.
There she paused. “Tell me all that takes place,” she whispered, and
when Archie nodded, she vanished promptly. The young man closed the door
and returned to his seat in time to hear Don Pedro reiterate his request
for an explanation.

“And 'spose I can't oblige,” said the skipper, now more at his ease
since the lady was out of the room.

“Then I shall have you arrested,” was the quick reply.

“For what?”

“For the theft of my mummy.”

Hervey laughed raucously.

“I guess the law can't worry me about that after thirty years, and in
a low-down country like Peru. Your Government has shifted fifty times
since I looted the corpse.”

This was quite true, and there was absolutely no chance of the skipper
being brought to book. Don Pedro looked rather disconsolate, and his
gaze dropped under the glare of Hervey's eyes, which seemed unfair,
seeing that the Don was as good as the captain was evil.

“You can't expect me to condone the theft,” he muttered.

“I reckon I don't expect anything,” retorted Hervey coolly “I looted the
corpse, I don't deny, and--”

“After my father had treated you like a son,” said Don Pedro bitterly.
“You were homeless and friendless, and my father took you in, only to
find that you robbed him of his most precious possession.”

The skipper had the grace to blush, and shifted uneasily in his chair.

“You can't say truer than that,” he grumbled, averting his eyes. “I
guess I'm a bad lot all through. But a friend of mine wanted the corpse,
and offered me a heap of dollars to see the business through.”

“Do you mean to say that some one asked you to steal it?”

“No,” put in Braddock unexpectedly, “for I was the friend.”

“You!” Don Pedro swung round in great astonishment, but the Professor
faced him with all the consciousness of innocence.

“Yes,” he remarked quietly, “as I told you, I was in Peru thirty years
ago. I was then hunting for specimens of Inca mummies. Vasa--this man
now called Hervey--told me that he could obtain a splendid specimen of
a mummy, and I arranged to give him one hundred pounds to procure what
I wanted. But I swear to you, De Gayangos,” continued the little man
earnestly, “that I did not know he proposed to steal the mummy from
you.”

“You knew it was the green mummy?” asked Don Pedro sharply.

“No, I only knew that it was a mummy.”

“Did Vasa get it for you?”

“I guess not,” said the gentleman who confessed to that name. “The
Professor went to Cuzco and got into trouble--”

“I was carried off to the mountains by some Indians,” interpolated the
Professor, “and only escaped after a year's captivity. I did not mind
that, as it gave me the opportunity of studying a decaying civilization.
But when I returned a free man to Lima, I found that Vasa had left the
country with the mummy.”

“That's so,” assented Hervey, waving his hand. “I got a berth as second
mate on a wind-jammer sailing to Europe, and as the country wasn't
healthy for me since I'd looted the green mummy, I took it abroad and
yanked it to Paris, where I sold it for a couple of hundred pounds. With
that, I changed my name and had a high old time. I never heard of the
blamed thing again until the Professor here turned up with Mr. Bolton
at Pierside, asking me to bring it in The Diver from Malta. It was what
you'd call a coincidence, I reckon,” added Hervey lazily; “but I did cry
small when I heard the Professor here had paid nine hundred for a thing
I'd let slip for two hundred. Had I known of those infernal emeralds,
I'd have ripped open the case on board and would have recouped myself.
But I knew nothing, and Bolton never told me.”

“How could he,” asked Braddock quietly, “when he did not know that any
jewels were buried with the dead? I did not know either. And I have
explained why I wanted the mummy. But it never struck me until I hear
what you say now, that this mummy,” he nodded towards the green case,
“was the one which you had stolen at Lima from De Gayangos. But you
must do me the justice, Captain Hervey, to tell Don Pedro that I never
countenanced the theft.”

“No! you were square enough, I guess. The sin is on my own blessed
shoulders, and I don't ask it to be shifted.”

“What did you do with the copy of the manuscript?” asked Don Pedro.

Hervey ruminated.

“I can't think,” he mused. “I found a screed of Latin along with the
mummy, when I looted it from your Lima house, but it dropped out of my
mind as to what became of it. Maybe I passed it along to the Paris man,
and he sold it along with the corpse to the Maltese gent.”

“But I tell you this copy was found in Sir Frank's room,” insisted De
Gayangos. “How did it come to be there?”

Captain Hervey rose and took a turn up and down the room. When Cockatoo
came in his way he calmly kicked him aside.

“What do you think, Mr. Hope?” he asked, coming to a full stop before
Archie, while Cockatoo crept away with a very dark scowl.

“I don't know what to think,” replied that young gentleman promptly,
“save that Sir Frank is my very good friend, and that I take his word
that he knows nothing of how the manuscript came to be hidden in his
bookcase.”

“Huh!” said Hervey scornfully, and took another turn up and down the
room in silence. “I surmise that your friend isn't a white man.”

Hope leaped to his feet.

“That's a lie,” he said distinctly.

“I'd have shot you for that down Chili way,” snapped the skipper.

“Possibly,” retorted the artist dryly, “but I happen to be handy with my
revolver also. I say again that you lie. Random is not the man to commit
so foul a crime.”

“Then how did the manuscript get into his room?” questioned Hervey.

“He is trying to learn, and, when he does, will come here to let us all
know, Captain Hervey. But I ask you on what grounds you accuse him? Oh I
know all you said to-day,” added Hope scornfully, waving his hand; “but
you can't prove that Random got the manuscript.”

“If it's in his room, as you acknowledge, I can,” said Hervey, speaking
in a much more cultivated tone. “See here. As I said before, that copy
must have been passed along with the corpse to the Maltese man. Well,
then, the Professor here bought the corpse, and with it the manuscript.”

“No,” contradicted the little man, prodigiously excited. “Bolton
wrote to me full particulars of the mummy, but said nothing about any
manuscript.”

“Well, he wouldn't,” replied Hervey calmly, “seeing that he'd know
Latin.”

“He did know Latin,” admitted Braddock uneasily; “I taught him myself.
But do you mean to say that he got that manuscript and read it and
intended to keep the fact of the emeralds secret?”

Hervey nodded three times, and twisted his cheroot in his mouth.

“How else can you figure the business out?” he demanded quietly, and
with his eyes fixed on the excited Professor. “Bolton must have got that
manuscript, as I can't remember what I did with it, save pass it along
with the corpse. He--as you admit--doesn't tell you about it when
he writes. Well, then, I reckon he calculated getting this corpse to
England, and intended to steal the emeralds when safely ashore.”

“But he could have done that on the boat,” said Archie quickly.

“I guess not, with me about,” said Hervey coolly. “I'd have spotted his
game and would have howled for shares.”

“You dare to say that?” demanded De Gayangos fiercely.

“Keep your hair on. I dare to say anything that comes up my darned back,
you bet. I'm not going to knuckle down to a yellow-stomach--”

Out flew Don Pedro's long arm, and Hervey slammed against the wall. He
slipped his hand around to his hip pocket with an ugly smile, but before
he could use the revolver he produced, Hope dashed up his arm, and the
ball went through the ceiling. “Lucy!” cried the young man, knowing
that the drawing-room was overhead, and in a moment was out of the
door, racing up the stairs at top speed. Some sense of shame seemed to
overpower Hervey as he thought that he might have shot the girl, and he
replaced the revolver in his pocket with a shrug.

“I climb down and apologize,” he said to Don Pedro, who bowed gravely.

“Hang you, sir; you might have shot my daughter,” cried Braddock. “The
drawing-room, where she is sitting, is right overhead, and-”

As he spoke the door opened, and Lucy came in on Archie's arm. She
was pale with fright, but had sustained no damage. It seemed that the
revolver bullet had passed through the floor some distance away from
where she was sitting.

“I offer my humble apologies, miss,” said the cowed Hervey.

“I'll break your neck, you ruffian!” growled Hope, who looked, and was,
dangerous. “How dare you shoot here and--”

“It's all right,” interposed Lucy, not wishing for further trouble. “I
am all safe. But I shall remain here for the rest of your interview,
Captain Hervey, as I am sure you will not shoot again in the presence of
a lady.”

“No, miss,” muttered the captain, and when again invited by the angry
Professor to speak, resumed his discourse in low tones. “Wal, as I was
saying,” he remarked, sitting down with a dogged look, “Bolton intended
to clear with the emeralds, but I guess Sir Frank got ahead of him and
packed him in that blamed case, while he annexed the emeralds. He then
took the manuscript, which he looted from Bolton's corpse, and hid
it among his books, as you say, while he left the blamed mummy in the
garden of the old lady you talked about. I guess that's what I say.”

“It's all theory,” said Don Pedro in vexed tones.

“And there isn't a word of truth in it,” said Lucy indignantly, standing
up for Frank Random.

“It ain't for me to contradict you, miss,” said Hervey, who was still
humble, “but I ask you, if what I say ain't true, how did that copy of
the manuscript come to be in that aristocrat's room?”

There was no reply made to this, and although every one present, save
Hervey, believed in Random's innocence, no one could explain. The reply
came after some further conversation, by the appearance of the soldier
himself in mess kit. He walked unexpectedly into the room with Donna
Inez on his arm, and at once apologized to De Gayangos.

“I called to see you at the inn, sir,” he said, “and as you were not
there, I brought your daughter along with me to explain about the
manuscript.”

“Ah, yes. We talk of that now. How did it come into your room, sir?”

Random pointed to Hervey.

“That rascal placed it there,” he said firmly.




CHAPTER XX. THE LETTER


At this second insult Archie quite expected to see the skipper again
draw his revolver and shoot. He therefore jumped up rapidly to once more
avert disaster. But perhaps the fiery American was awed by the presence
of a second lady--since men of the adventurous type are often shy when
the fair sex is at hand--for he meekly sat where he was and did not even
contradict. Don Pedro shook hands with Sir Frank, and then Hervey smiled
blandly.

“I see you don't believe in my theory,” said he scoffingly.

“What theory is that?” asked Random hastily.

“Hervey declares that you murdered Bolton, stole the manuscript from
him, and concealed it in your room,” said Archie succinctly.

“I can't suggest any other reason for its presence in the room,”
 observed the American with a grim smile. “If I'm wrong, perhaps this
almighty aristocrat will correct me.”

Random was about to do so, and with some pardonable heat, when he was
anticipated by Donna Inez. It has been mentioned before that this young
lady was of the silent order. Usually she simply ornamented any company
in which she found herself without troubling to entertain with her
tongue. But the accusation against the baronet, whom she apparently
loved, changed her into a voluble virago. Brushing aside the little
Professor, who stood in her way, she launched herself forward and spoke
at length. Hervey, cowering in the chair, thus met with an antagonist
against whom he had no armor. He could not use force; she dominated him
with her eye and when he ventured to open his mouth his few feeble words
were speedily drowned by the torrent of speech which flowed from the
lips of the Peruvian lady. Every one was as astonished by this outburst
as though a dog had spoken. That the hitherto silent Donna Inez de
Gayangos should speak thus freely and with such power was quite as great
a miracle.

“You--are a dog and a liar,” said Donna Inez with great distinctness,
and speaking English excellently. “What you say against Sir Frank
is madness and foolish talk. In Genoa my father did not speak of the
manuscript, nor did I, who tell you this. How, then, could Sir Frank
kill this poor man, when he had no reason to slay him--”

“For the emeralds,” faltered Hervey weakly.

“For the emeralds!” echoed the lady scornfully. “Sir Frank is rich. He
does not need to steal to have much money. He is a gentleman, who does
not murder, as you have done.”

Hervey started to his feet, dismayed but defiant, and saw that he was
ringed with unfriendly faces.

“As I have done. Why, I am--”

Donna Inez interrupted.

“You are a murderer. I truly believe that you--yes, that you” she
pointed a scornful finger at him “killed this poor man who was bringing
the mummy to the Professor. If you were in my own country, I should have
you lashed like the dog you are. Pig of a Yankee, vile scum of the--”

“That will do, Inez,” said De Gayangos imperiously. “We wish to make
this gentleman tell the truth, and this is not the way to go about the
matter.”

“Gentleman,” echoed the angry Peruvian, “he is none. Truth! There is no
truth in him, the pig of pigs!” and then, her English failing, she took
refuge in Spanish, which is a fairly comprehensive language for swearing
in a polite way. The words fairly poured from her mouth, and she looked
as fierce as Bellona, the goddess of war.

Archie, listening to her words and watching her beautiful face distorted
out of all loveliness, secretly congratulated himself upon the fact that
he was not her prospective bridegroom. He wondered how Sir Frank, who
was a mild, good-tempered man himself, could dare to make such a fiery
female Lady Random.

Perhaps the young man thought himself that she was going a trifle too
far, for he touched her nervously on the arm. At once the anger of Donna
Inez died down, and she submitted to be led to a chair, whispering as
she went, “It was for your sake, my angel, that I was angry,” she said,
and then relapsed into silence, watching all future proceedings with
flashing eyes but compressed mouth.

“Wal,” muttered Hervey with his invariable drawl, “now that the lady has
eased her mind, I should like to know why this aristocrat says I placed
that manuscript in his room.”

“You shall know, and at once,” said Random promptly. “Did you not call
to see me a day or so ago?”

“I did, sir. I wished to tell you what I had discovered, so that you
might pay me to shut my mouth if you felt so inclined. I asked where
your room was, sir, and walked right in, since your flunky was not at
the door.”

“Quite so. You were in my room for a few minutes--”

“Say five,” interpolated the American imperturbably.

“And then came down. You met my servant, who told you that I would not
be back for five or six hours.”

“That's just as you state, sir. I was sorry to miss you, but, my time
being valuable, I had to get back to Pierside. Failing you, I later came
to see the Professor here, and told him what I had discovered.”

“You merely discovered a mare's nest,” said Random contemptuously; “but
this is not the point. I believe that you, and you only, could have
hidden that manuscript among my books, intending that it should be
discovered, so that I might be implicated in this crime.”

“Did your flunky tell you that much?” inquired Hervey coolly.

“My servant told me nothing, save that you had been in my room, where
you had no right to be.”

“Then,” said the American quietly and decisively, “I can't see, sir, how
you can place the ticket on me.”

“You accuse me, so why should I not accuse you?” retorted Random.

“Because you are guilty, and I ain't,” snapped the American.

“You join issue: you join issue,” murmured Braddock, rubbing his hands.

Random took no notice of the interruption.

“I have heard from Mr. Hope and Professor Braddock of the grounds upon
which you base your accusation, and I have explained to them how I came
to be on board your ship and both in and out of the Sailor's Rest.”

“And the explanation is quite satisfactory,” said Hope smartly.

“I agree,” Donna Inez nodded with very bright eyes. “Sir Frank has
explained to me also. He knew nothing of the manuscript.”

“And you, sir,” said Don Pedro quietly to Captain Hervey, “apparently
did, since you stole it along with the mummy from Lima.”

“I confess the theft, but I didn't know what the manuscript contained,”
 said the skipper dryly, “or I reckon you wouldn't have to ask who stole
the emeralds. No, sir, I should have looted them.”

“I believe you did, and murdered Bolton,” cried Random hotly.

“Shucks!” retorted Hervey, rising with a shrug, “if I had wished to get
rid of Bolton, I'd have yanked him overboard and then would have written
`accident' in my blamed log-book.”

Braddock looked at Don Pedro, and Archie at Sir Frank. What the skipper
said was plausible enough. No man would have been such a fool as to have
murdered Bolton ashore, when he could have done so without suspicion on
board the tramp. Moreover, Hervey spoke with genuine regret, since he
had missed the emeralds and assuredly would not have hesitated to
steal them even at the cost of Bolton's life, had he known of their
whereabouts. So far he had made a good defense, and, seeing the
impression produced, he strolled to the door. There he halted.

“If you gents want to lynch me,” he said leisurely, “I'll be found at
the Sailor's Rest for the next week. Then I'm going as skipper of The
Firefly steamer, Port o' London, to Algiers. You can send the sheriff
along whenever you choose. But I mean to have my picnic first, and
to-morrow I'm going to Inspector Date with my yarn. Then I guess that
almighty aristocrat wilt find himself in quod.”

“Wait a moment,” cried Braddock, running to the door. “Let me talk to
you and arrange what is best to be done. If you will--”

He proceeded no further, for without vouchsafing him a reply, Hervey,
now quite master of the situation, passed through the door, and the
Professor hastily followed him. Those who remained looked at one
another, scarcely knowing what to say, or how to act.

“They will arrest thee, my angel,” cried Donna Inez, clasping Random's
arm.

“Let them,” retorted the young man defiantly. “They can prove nothing.
With all my heart and soul I believe Hervey to be the guilty person.
Hope, what do you say?--and you, Miss Kendal?”

“Hervey has certainly made an excellent defense,” said Archie
cautiously. “He wouldn't have been such a fool as to murder Bolton
ashore when he could have done it so easily when on the narrow seas.”

“I agree with you there,” said Random quickly. “But if he is innocent;
if he did not bring the manuscript into my room, who did?”

“I wonder if Widow Anne herself is guilty?” said Lucy in a musing tone.

All present turned and looked at the girl.

“Who is Widow Anne?” asked Don Pedro with a puzzled air.

“She is the mother of Sidney Bolton, the man who was murdered,” said
Hope quickly. “My dear Lucy, why do you say that?”

Lucy paused before replying and then answered the question by asking
another one.

“Did you ask Sidney to get you some clothes from his mother to clothe a
model?”

“Never in my life,” said Hope promptly, and, as Lucy, saw, truly.

“Well, I accidentally met Mrs. Bolton to-day, and she insisted that her
son had borrowed from her a dark shawl and a dark dress for you.”

“That is not true,” said Hope hotly. “Why should the woman tell such a
lie?”

“Well,” said Lucy slowly, “it struck me that the woman who spoke with
Sidney through the Sailor's Rest window might be Widow Anne herself, and
that she has invented this story of the clothes being lent to account
for their being worn, should she be discovered.”

“It's certainly odd she should speak like this,” said Random
thoughtfully; “but you forget, Miss Kendal, that she proved an alibi.”

“What of that?” cried Don Pedro hurriedly, “alibis can be manufactured.”

“It will be best to see this woman and question her,” suggested Donna
Inez.

Archie nodded.

“I shall do so to-morrow. By the way, does she ever come to your room in
the Fort, Random?”

“Oh yes, she is my laundress, you know, and at times brings back the
clothes herself. My servant is usually in, though. I see what you mean.
That she might have received the manuscript from Bolton, and have left
it in my room.”

“Yes, I think that,” said Archie slowly. “I should not be at all
surprised to learn that a portion of Hervey's theory is correct. Bolton
may have found the manuscript packed up in the mummy, amongst the
graveclothes, in fact. If he read it--as he would and could, seeing
that he was an excellent Latin scholar, thanks to Professor Braddock's
training--he might have formed a design to steal the emeralds when he
was in the Sailor's Rest. Then someone saved him the trouble, and packed
him off to Gartley instead of the mummy.”

“But why should Widow Anne leave the manuscript in my room?” argued
Random.

“Can't you see? Bolton knew that you wanted the mummy for Don Pedro,
and was aware how you had--so to speak--used threats in the presence of
witnesses, since you spoke out aloud on the deck.”

“Only to warn Bolton against the Indians,” pleaded Random.

“Exactly; but your words were capable of being twisted as Hervey has
twisted them. Well, if Widow Anne really went to see her son--and from
the lie about the borrowed clothes it looks like it--he may have given
her the manuscript, so as to throw the blame on you.”

“The murder?”

“No, no,” said Archie testily. “Bolton did not expect to be murdered.
But I really believe that he intended to fly with the emeralds, and
hoped that when the manuscript was found in your room you would be
accused. The idea was suggested to him, I believe, by your visit to The
Diver.”

“What do you think, Miss Kendal?” asked Random nervously.

“I fancy that it is possible.”

Sir Frank turned to the Peruvian.

“Don Pedro,” he said proudly, “you have heard what Hervey says; do you
believe that I am guilty?”

For answer De Gayangos took his daughter's hand and placed it in that of
the young soldier.

“That will show you what I think,” he said gravely.

“Thank you, sir,” said Random, moved, and shook his future father-in-law
heartily by the hand, while Donna Inez, throwing all restraint to the
winds, kissed her lover exultingly on the check. In the midst of this
scene Professor Braddock returned, looking very pleased.

“I have induced Hervey to hold his tongue for a few days until we can
look into this matter,” he said, rubbing his hands “that is, if you
think it wise, all of you. Otherwise, I am quite willing to go myself
to-morrow and tell the police.”

“No,” said Archie rapidly, “let us thresh out the matter ourselves. We
will save Sir Frank's name from a police court slur at all events.”

“I do not think there is any chance of Sir Frank being arrested,” said
Don Pedro politely; “the evidence is insufficient. And at the worst he
can provide an alibi.”

“I am not so sure of that,” said Random anxiously. “I went to London
certainly, but I did not go to any place where I am known. However,” he
added cheerfully, “I daresay I'll be able to defend myself. Still, the
fact remains that we are no nearer to learning who killed Bolton than we
were.”

“I am sending Cockatoo to Pierside to-morrow to stop at the Sailor's
Rest for a time,” said Braddock quickly. “He will watch Hervey, and if
there is anything suspicious about his movements, we shall soon know.”

“And I turn amateur detective to-morrow and question Widow Anne,” said
Hope, after which remark he had to explain matters to Braddock, who
had been out of the room when Mrs. Bolton's strange request had been
discussed.

Meanwhile Donna Inez had been whispering to her lover and pointing to
the mummy. Don Pedro followed her thoughts and guessed what she was
saying. Random proved the truth of his guess by, turning to him.

“Do you really want to take back the mummy to Peru, sir?” he asked
quietly.

“Certainly. Inca Caxas was my forefather. I do not wish to leave him in
this place. His body must be restored to its tomb. All the Indians, who
look upon me as their present Inca expect me to bring the body back.
Although,” added De Gayangos gravely, “I did not come to Europe to look
for the mummy, as you know.”

“Then I shall buy the mummy,” said Random impetuously. “Professor, will
you sell it to me?”

“Now that I have examined it thoroughly I shall be delighted,” said the
little man, “say for two thousand pounds.”

“Not at all,” interposed Don Pedro; “you mean one thousand.”

“Of course he does,” said Lucy quickly; “and the check must be paid to
Archie, Sir Frank.”

“To me! to me!” cried Braddock indignantly. “I insist.”

“The money belongs to Archie,” said Lucy obstinately. “You have seen
what you desired to see, father and as Archie only lent you the money,
it is only fair that he should have it again.”

“Oh, let the Professor have it,” said Hope good-naturedly.

“No! no! no!”

Random laughed.

“I shall make the check payable to you, Miss Kendal, and you can give
it to whomsoever you choose,” he said; “and now, as everything has been
settled so far, I suggest that we should retire.”

“Come to my rooms at the inn,” said Don Pedro, opening the door. “I
have much to say to you. Good night, Professor; to-morrow let us go to
Pierside and see if we cannot get at the truth.”

“And to-morrow,” cried Random, “I shall send the check, sir.”

When the company departed, Lucy had another wrangle with her father
about the check. As Archie had gone away, she could speak freely, and
pointed out that he was enjoying her mother's income and was about to
marry Mrs. Jasher, who was rich.

“Therefore,” argued Lucy, “you certainly do not want to keep poor
Archie's money.”

“He paid me that sum on condition that I consented to the wedding.”

“He did nothing of the sort,” she cried indignantly. “I am not going
to be bought and sold in this manner. Archie lent you the money, and it
must be returned. Don't force me to think you selfish, father.”

The upshot of the argument was that Lucy got her own way, and the
Professor rather unwillingly agreed to part with the mummy and restore
the thousand pounds. But he regretted doing so, as he wished to get all
the money he could to go towards his proposed Egyptian expedition, and
Mrs. Jasher's fortune, as he assured his step-daughter, was not so large
as might be thought. However, Lucy overruled him, and retired to bed,
congratulating herself that she would soon be able to marry Hope. She
was beginning to grow a trifle weary of the Professor's selfish nature,
and wondered how her mother had put up with it for so long.

Next day Braddock did not go with Don Pedro to Pierside, as he was
very busy in his museum. The Peruvian went alone, and Archie, after a
morning's work at his easel, sought out Widow Anne to ask questions.
Lucy and Donna Inez paid an afternoon visit to Mrs. Jasher and found
her in bed, as she had caught a mild sort of influenza. They expected to
find Sir Frank here, but it seemed that he had not called. Thinking that
he was detained by military business, the girls thought nothing more of
his absence, although Donna Inez was somewhat downcast.

But Random was detained in his quarters by a letter which had arrived by
the mid-day host, and which surprised him not a little. The postmark
was London, and the writing, evidently a disguised hand, was almost
illegible in its crudeness. The contents ran as follows, and it will be
noticed that there is neither date nor address, and that it is written
in the third person:

“If Sir Frank Random wants his character to be cleared and all suspicion
of murder to be removed from him, he can be completely exonerated by
the writer, if he will pay the same five thousand pounds. If Sir Frank
Random is willing to do this, let him appoint a meeting-place in London,
and the writer will send a messenger to receive the money and to hand
over the proofs which will clear Sir Frank Random. If Sir Frank Random
plays the writer false, or communicates with the police, proofs will be
forthcoming which will prove him to be guilty of Sidney Bolton's death,
and which will bring him to the scaffold without any chance of escape.
A couple of lines in the Agony Column of The Daily Telegraph, signed
`Artillery,' and appointing a meeting-place, will suffice; but beware of
treachery.”




CHAPTER XXI. A STORY OF THE PAST


Mrs. Jasher's influenza proved to be very mild indeed.

When Donna Inez de Gayangos and Lucy paid a visit to her on the
afternoon of the day succeeding the explanations in the museum, she
was certainly in bed, and explained that she had been there since the
Professor's visit on the previous day. Lucy was surprised at this, as
she had left Mrs. Jasher perfectly well, and Braddock had not mentioned
any ailment of the widow. But influenza, as Mrs. Jasher observed, was
very rapid in its action, and she was always susceptible to disease from
the fact that in Jamaica she had suffered from malaria. Still, she was
feeling better and intended to rise from her bed on that evening, if
only to lie on the couch in the pink drawing-room. Having thus detailed
her reasons for being ill, the widow asked for news.

As no prohibition had been placed upon Lucy with regard to Hervey's
visit and as Mrs. Jasher would be one of the family when she married the
Professor, Miss Kendal had no hesitation in reporting all that had taken
place. The narrative excited Mrs. Jasher, and she frequently interrupted
with expressions of wonder. Even Donna Inez grew eloquent, and told the
widow how she had defended Sir Frank against the American skipper.

“What a dreadfully wicked man!” said Mrs. Jasher, when in possession of
all the facts. “I really believe that he did kill poor Sidney.”

“No,” said Lucy decisively, “I don't think that. He would have murdered
him on board had he intended the crime, as he could have done so with
more safety. He is as innocent as Sir Frank.”

“And no one dare say a word against him,” cried Donna Inez with flashing
eyes.

“He has a good defender, my dear,” said the widow, patting the girl's
hand.

“I love him,” said Donna Inez, as if that explained everything, and
perhaps it did, so far as she was concerned.

Mrs. Jasher smiled indulgently, then turned for further information to
Lucy.

“Can it be possible,” she said, “that Widow Anne is guilty?”

“Oh, I don't think so. She would not murder her own son, especially when
she was so very fond of him. Archie told me, just before we came here,
that he had called to see her. She still insists that Sidney borrowed
the clothes, saying that Archie wanted them.”

“What do you make of that, my dear?”

“Well,” said Miss Kendal, pondering, “either Widow Anne herself was the
woman who talked to Sidney through the Sailor's Rest window, and has
invented this story to save herself, or Sidney did get the clothes and
intended to use them as a disguise when he fled with the emeralds.”

“In that case,” said Mrs. Jasher, “the woman who talked through the
window still remains a problem. Again, if Sidney Bolton intended to
steal the emeralds, he could have done so in Malta, or on board the
boat.”

“No,” said Lucy decisively. “The mummy was taken directly from the
seller's house to the boat, and perhaps Sidney did not find the
manuscript until he looked at the mummy. Then Captain Hervey kept an eye
on Sidney, so that he could not open the mummy to steal the emeralds.”

“Still, according to your own showing, Sidney looked at the actual
mummy--he opened the mummy case, that is, else he could not have got the
manuscript.”

Lucy nodded.

“I think so, but of course we cannot be sure. But the packing case in
which the mummy was stowed was placed in the hold of the steamer, and
if Sidney had wished to steal the emeralds, he could not have done so
without exciting Captain Hervey's suspicions.”

“Then let us say that Sidney robbed the mummy when in the Sailor's Rest,
and took the clothes he borrowed from his mother in order to fly in
disguise. But what of the woman?”

Lucy shook her head.

“I cannot tell. We may learn more later. Don Pedro has gone to Pierside
to search, and my father says that he will send Cockatoo there also to
search.”

“Well,” sighed Mrs. Jasher wearily, “I hope that all this trouble will
come to an end. That green mummy has proved most unlucky. Leave me now,
dear girls, as I feel somewhat tired.”

“Good-bye,” said Lucy, kissing her. “I hope that you will be better this
evening. Don't get up unless you feel quite able.”

“Oh, I shall take my ease in the drawing-room.”

“I thought you always called it the parlor,” laughed the girl.

“Ah,” Mrs. Jasher smiled, “you see I am practicing against the time
when I shall be mistress of the Pyramids, You can't call that large room
there a parlor,” and she laughed weakly.

Altogether, Mrs. Jasher impressed both Lucy and Donna Inez with the fact
that she was very weak and scarcely able, as she put it, to draw one leg
after the other. Both the girls would have been surprised to see what a
hearty meal Mrs. Jasher made that evening, when she was up and dressed.
Perhaps she felt that her strength needed keeping up, but she certainly
partook largely of the delicate dinner provided by Jane, who was a most
excellent cook.

After dinner, Mrs. Jasher lay on a pink couch in the pink parlor by a
splendid fire, for the night was cold and raw with a promise of rain.
The widow had a small table at her elbow, on which stood a cup of
coffee and a glass of liquor. The rose-colored curtains were drawn, the
rose-shaded lamps were lighted, and the whole interior of the cottage
looked very comfortable indeed. Mrs. Jasher, in a crocus-yellow tea-gown
trimmed with rich black lace, reclined on her couch like Cleopatra in
her barge. In the pink light she looked very well preserved, although
her face wore an anxious expression. This was due to the fact that the
mail had come in and the three letters brought by the postman had to do
with creditors. Mrs. Jasher was always trying to make both ends meet,
and had a hard struggle to keep her head above water. Certainly, since
she had inherited the money of her brother, the Pekin merchant, she need
not have looked so worried. But she did, and made no disguise of it,
seeing that she was quite alone.

After a time she went to her desk and took out a bundle of bills and
some other letters, also an account book and a bank book. Over these she
pored for quite an hour. The clock struck nine before she looked up from
this unpleasant task, and she found her financial position anything but
satisfactory. With a weary sigh she rose and stared at herself in the
mirror over the fireplace, frowning as she did so.

“Unless I can marry the Professor at once, I don't know what will happen
to me,” she mused gloomily. “I have managed very well so far, but things
are coming to a crisis. These devils,” she alluded to her creditors,
“will not keep off much longer, and then the crash will come. I shall
have to leave Gartley as poor as when I came, and there will be nothing
left but the old nightmare life of despair and horror. I am getting
older every day, and this is my last chance of getting married. I must
force the Professor to have a speedy marriage. I must! I must!” and
she began to pace the tiny room in a frenzy of terror and well-founded
alarm.

As she was trying to calm herself and succeeding very badly, Jane
entered the room with a card. It proved to be that of Sir Frank Random.

“It is rather a late hour for a visit,” said Mrs. Jasher to the servant.
“However, I feel so bored, that perhaps he will cheer me up. Ask him to
come in.”

When Jane left, she stood still for a moment or so, trying to think why
the young man had called at so untoward an hour. But when his footsteps
were heard approaching the door, she swept the books and the bills and
the letters into the desk and locked it quickly. When Random appeared at
the door, she was just leaving the desk to greet him, and no one would
have taken the smiling, plump, well-preserved woman for the creature who
lately had looked so haggard and careworn.

“I am glad to see you, Sir Frank,” said Mrs. Jasher, nodding in a
familiar manner. “Sit down in this very comfortable chair, and Jane
shall bring you some coffee and kummel.”

“No, thank you,” said Random in his usual stiff way, but very politely.
“I have just left the mess, where I had a good dinner.”

Mrs. Jasher nodded, and sank again on the couch, which was opposite the
chair which she had selected for her visitor.

“I see you are in mess kit,” she said gayly; “quite a glorified creature
to appear in my poor little parlor. Why are you not with Donna Inez? I
have heard all about your engagement from Lucy. She was here to-day with
Senorita De Gayangos.”

“So I believe,” said Random, still stiffly; “but you see I was anxious
to come and see you.”

“Ah!” said Mrs. Jasher equably, “you heard that I was ill. Yes; I have
been in bed ever since yesterday afternoon, until a couple of hours
ago. But I am now better. My dinner has done me good. Pass me that fan,
please. The fire is so hot.”

Sir Frank did as he was told, and she held the feather fan between her
face and the fire, while he stared at her, wondering what to say.

“Don't you find this atmosphere very stuffy?” he remarked at length. “It
would be a good thing to have the windows open.”

Mrs. Jasher shrieked.

“My dear boy, are you mad? I have a touch of the influenza, and an
open window would bring about my death. Why, this room is delightfully
comfortable.”

“There is such a strong perfume about it,” sniffed Random pointedly.

“I should think you knew that scent by this time, Sir Frank. I use no
other and never have done. Smell!” and she passed a flimsy handkerchief
of lace.

Random took the handkerchief and placed it to his nostrils. As he did so
a strange expression of triumph crept into his eyes.

“I think you told me once that it was a Chinese perfume,” he said,
returning the handkerchief.

Mrs. Jasher nodded, well pleased.

“I get it from a friend of my late husband who is in the British Embassy
at Pekin. No one uses it but me.”

“But surely some other person uses it?”

“Not in England; and I do not know why you should say so. It is a
specialty of mine. Why,” she added playfully, “if you met me in the dark
you should know me, by this scent.”

“Can you swear that no one else has ever used this perfume?” asked
Random.

Mrs. Jasher lifted her penciled eyebrows.

“I do not know why you should ask me to swear,” she said quietly, “but
I assure you that I keep this perfume which comes from China to myself.
Not even Lucy Kendal has it, although she greatly desired some. We women
are selfish in some things, my dear man. It's a most delicious perfume.”

“Yes,” said Sir Frank, staring at her, “and very strong.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“Nothing. Only I should think that such a perfume would be good for the
cold you contracted by going to London last night.”

Mrs. Jasher turned suddenly pale under her rouge, and her hand clenched
the fan so tightly as to break the handle.

“I have not been to London for quite a month,” she faltered. “What a
strange remark!”

“A true one,” said the baronet, fumbling in the pocket of his jacket.
“You went to London last night by the seven o'clock train to post this,”
 and he held out the anonymous letter.

The widow, now quite pale, and looking years older, sat up on the couch
with a painful effort, which suggested old age.

“I don't understand,” she said, trying to speak calmly. “I was not in
London, and I did not post any letter. If you came here to insult me--”

“There can be no insult in asking a few questions,” said Random,
throwing aside his stiffness and speaking decisively. “I received
this letter, which bears a London postmark, by the mid-day post. The
handwriting is disguised, and there is neither address nor signature nor
date. You manufactured your communication very cleverly, Mrs. Jasher,
but you forgot that the Chinese perfume might betray you.”

“The perfume! the perfume!” Mrs. Jasher gasped and saw in a moment how
the late conversation had led her to fall into a trap.

“The letter retains traces of the perfume you use,” went on the baronet
relentlessly. “I have a remarkably keen sense of smell, and, as scent is
a most powerful aid to memory, I speedily recollected that you used this
especial perfume. You told me a few moments ago that no one else
used it, and so you have proved the truth of my statement that this
letter”--he tapped it--“is written by you.”

“It's a lie--a mistake,” stuttered Mrs. Jasher, now at bay and looking
dangerous. Her society veneer was stripped off, and the adventuress pure
and simple came to the surface.

Indignant at the way in which she had deceived everyone, and having much
at stake, Random did not spare her.

“It is not a mistake,” he insisted; “neither is it a lie. When I became
aware that you must have written the letter, I drove at once to Jessum
to see if you had gone to London, as you had posted it there. I learned
from the station master and from a porter that you went to town by the
seven o'clock train and returned by the midnight.”

Mrs. Jasher leaped to her feet.

“They could not recognize me. I wore--” Then she stopped, confused at
having so plainly betrayed herself.

“You wore a veil. All the same, Mrs. Jasher, you are too well known
hereabouts for anyone to fail to recognize you. Besides, your remark
just now proves that I am right. You wrote this blackmailing letter, and
I demand an explanation.”

“I have none to give,” muttered the woman fiercely, and fighting every
inch.

“If you refuse to explain to me you shall to the police,” said Sir
Frank, rising and making for the door.

Mrs. Jasher flung herself forward and clung to him.

“For God's sake, don't!”

“Then you will explain? You will tell me?”

“Tell you what?”

“Who murdered Sidney Bolton.”

“I do not know. I swear I do not know,” she cried feverishly.

“That is ridiculous,” said Random coldly. “You say in this letter that
you can hang me or save me. As you know that I am innocent, you must be
aware who is guilty.”

“It's all bluff. I know nothing,” said Mrs. Jasher, releasing his arm
and throwing herself on the couch. “I only wished to get money.”

“Five thousand pounds--eh? Rather a large order,” sneered Random,
replacing the letter in his pocket. “You would not ask that sum for
nothing: you must be aware of the truth. I suspected many people, Mrs.
Jasher, but never you.”

The woman rose and flung out her arms.

“No,” she said in a deep voice, and fighting like a rat in a corner. “I
tricked you all down here. Sir Frank, I will tell you the truth.”

“About the murder?”

“I know nothing of that. About myself.”

Random shrugged his shoulders.

“I'll hear about yourself first,” he said. “I can learn details
concerning the murder later. Go on.”

“I know nothing of the murder or of the theft of the emeralds--”

“Yet you hid the mummy in this house, and afterwards placed it in your
arbor to be found by the Professor, for some reason.”

“I know nothing about that either,” muttered Mrs. Jasher doggedly, and
with very white lips. “That letter you have traced to me is all bluff.”

“Then you admit having written it?”

“Yes,” she said sullenly. “You know too much, and it is useless for me
to deny the truth in the face of the evidence you bring against me. I
would fight though,” she added, raising her head like a snake its crest,
“if I was not sick and tired of fighting.”

“Fighting?”

“Yes, against trouble and worry and money difficulties and creditors.
Oh,” she struck her breast, “what do you know of life, you rich,
easy-going man? I have been in the depths, and not through my own fault.
I had a bad mother, a bad husband. I was dragged in the mire by those
who should have helped me to rise. I have starved for days; I have wept
for years; in all God's earth there is no more miserable a creature than
I am.”

“Kindly talk without so much melodrama,” said Random cruelly.

“Ah,” Mrs. Jasher sat down and locked her hands together, “you don't
believe me. I daresay you don't understand, for life, real life, is a
sealed book to you. It is useless for me to appeal to your sympathy,
for you are so very ignorant. Let us stick to facts. What do you wish to
know?”

“Who killed Sidney Bolton: who has the emeralds.”

“I can't tell you. Listen! With my past life you have nothing to do.
I will commence from the time I came down here. I had just lost my
husband, and I managed to scrape together a few hundred pounds--oh,
quite in a respectable way, I assure you,” she added scoffingly, on
seeing her listener wince. “I came here to try and live quietly, and,
if possible, to secure a rich husband. I knew that the Fort was here and
thought that I might marry an officer. However, the Professor's position
attracted me, and I decided to marry him. I am engaged, and but for your
cleverness in tracing that letter I should be Mrs. Braddock within a
very short time. I have exhausted all my money. I am deeply, in debt. I
cannot hold out longer.”

“But the money you inherited--”

“That is all bluff also. I never had a brother. I inherit no money. I
know nothing of Pekin, save that a friend of mine sends that scent to me
as a yearly Christmas present. I am an adventuress, but perhaps not so
bad as you think me. Lucy and Donna Inez have heard no wickedness from
my lips. I have always been a good woman in one sense--a moral woman,
that is--and I did wish to marry the Professor and live a happy life.
Seeing that I was at the end of my resources, and that Professor
Braddock expected a legacy with me before marriage, I looked round to,
see how I could get the money. I heard that you were accused by Captain
Hervey, and so last night I wrote that letter and posted it in London,
thinking that you would yield to save yourself from arrest.”

Random laughed cynically.

“You must have thought me weak,” he muttered.

“I did,” said Mrs. Jasher frankly. “To tell you the truth, I thought
that you were a fool. But by tracing that letter and withstanding my
demand, you have proved yourself to be more clever than I took you to
be. Well, that is all. I know nothing of the murder. My letter is sheer
bluff to extort from you five thousand pounds. Had you paid I should
have passed it off to the Professor as the money left to me by my
brother. But now--”

“Now,” said Random, rising to go, “I shall tell what you have told me to
the Professor, and--”

“And hand me over to the police,” said Mrs. Jasher, shrugging her plump
shoulders, “Well, I expected that. Yet I fancied for old times' sake
that you might have been more lenient.”

“We were never anything but acquaintances, Mrs. Jasher,” said Random
coldly, “so I fail to see why you should expect mercy after the way in
which you have behaved. You expect to blackmail me, and yet go free.
I must punish you somehow, so I shall tell Professor Braddock, as
you certainly cannot marry him. But I shall not hand you over to the
police.”

“You won't?” Mrs. Jasher stared, scarcely able to believe her ears.

“No. Give me a day to think over matters, and I shall arrange what to do
with you. I think there is some good in you, Mrs. Jasher, and so I shall
see if I can't assist you. In the meantime I shall have your cottage
watched, so that you may not run away.”

“In that case, you may as well hand me over to the police,” she said
bitterly.

“Not at all,” rejoined Random coolly. “I can trust my servant, who is
stupid but honest and is devoted to me. I'll see that everything is
kept quiet. But if you attempt to run away I shall have you arrested for
blackmail. You understand?”

“Yes. You are treating me very well,” she gasped. “When shall I see
you?”

“To-morrow evening. I must talk the matter over with Braddock. To-morrow
I shall arrange what to do, and probably I shall give you a chance of
leading a new life in some other part of the world. What do you say?”

“I accept. Indeed, there is nothing else left for me to do.”

“That is an ungrateful speech,” said Random severely.

“I daresay. However, we can talk of gratitude to-morrow. Meanwhile,
please leave me.”

Sir Frank went to the door and there paused.

“Remember,” he said distinctly, “that your cottage is being watched. Try
to escape and I shall have you arrested.”

Mrs. Jasher groaned and buried her face in the sofa cushion.




CHAPTER XXII. A WEDDING PRESENT


Mrs. Jasher had thought Random exceedingly clever in acting as he had
done to trap her. She would have thought him still more clever had she
known that he trusted to the power of suggestion to prevent her from
trying to escape. Sir Frank had not the slightest intention of setting
his soldier-servant to watch, as such was not the duty for which such
servants are hired. But having impressed firmly on the adventuress's
mind that he would act in this way, he departed, quite certain that the
woman would not attempt to run away. Although no one was watching the
cottage, Mrs. Jasher, believing what had been told her, would think that
sharp eyes were on her doors and windows day and night, and would firmly
believe that if she tried to get away she would be captured forthwith
by the Pierside police, or perhaps by the village constable. Like an
Eastern enchanter, the baronet had placed a spell on the cottage, and
it acted admirably. Mrs. Jasher, although longing to escape and hide
herself, remained where she was, cowed by a spy who did not exist.

The next day Random went to the Pyramids as soon as his duties permitted
and saw the Professor. To the prospective bridegroom he explained all
that had happened, and displayed the anonymous letter, with an account
of how he had proved Mrs. Jasher to be the writer. Braddock's hair could
not stand on end, as he had none, but he lost his temper completely, and
raged up and down the museum in a way which frightened Cockatoo out of
his barbaric wits. When more quiet he sat down to discuss the matter,
and promptly demanded that Mrs. Jasher should be handed over to the
police. But he might have guessed that Sir Frank would refuse to follow
this extreme advice.

“She has acted badly, I admit,” said the young man. “All the same, I
think she is a better woman than you may think, Professor.”

“Think! think! think!” shouted the fiery little man, getting up once
more to trot up and down like an infuriated poodle. “I think she is a
bad woman, a wicked woman. To deceive me into thinking her rich and--”

“But surely, Professor, you wished to marry her also for love?”

“Nothing of the sort, sir: nothing of the sort. I leave love and
such-like trash to those like yourself and Hope, who have nothing else
to think about.”

“But a marriage without love--”

“Pooh! pooh! pooh! Don't argue with me, Random. Love is all moonshine.
I did not love my first wife--Lucy's mother--and yet we were very happy.
Had I made Mrs. Jasher my second, we should have got on excellently,
provided the money was forthcoming for my Egyptian expedition. What am
I to do now, I ask you, Random? Even the thousand pounds you pay for the
mummy goes back to that infernal Hope because of Lucy's silly ideas.
I have nothing--absolutely nothing, and that tomb is amongst those
Ethiopian hills, I swear, waiting to be opened. Oh, what a chance I have
missed!--what a chance! But I shall see Mrs. Jasher myself. She knows
about this murder.”

“She declares that she does not.”

“Don't tell me! don't tell me!” vociferated the Professor. “She would
not have written that letter had she known nothing.”

“That was bluff. I explained all that.”

“Bluff be hanged!” cried Braddock, only he used a more vigorous word.
“I do not believe that she would have dared to act on such a slight
foundation. I shall see her myself this very afternoon and force her to
confess. In one way or another I shall find the assassin and make him
disgorge those emeralds under the penalty of being hanged. Then I can
sell them and finance my Egyptian expedition.”

“But you forget, Professor, that the emeralds, when found, belong to Don
Pedro.”

“They don't,” rasped the little man, turning purple with rage. “I refuse
to let him have them. I bought the mummy, and the contents of the mummy,
including those emeralds. They are mine.”

“No,” said Random sharply. “I buy the mummy, from you, so they pass into
my possession and belong to De Gayangos. I shall give them to him.”

“You'll have to find them first,” said Braddock savagely; “and as to the
mummy, you shan't have it. I decline to sell it. So there!”

“If you don't,” said Random very distinctly, “Don Pedro will bring an
action against you, and Captain Hervey will be called as a witness to
prove that the mummy was stolen.”

“Don Pedro hasn't the money,” said Braddock triumphantly; “he can't pay
lawyer's fees.”

“But I can,” rejoined the young man very dryly. “As I am going to marry
Donna Inez, it is only just that I should help my future father-in-law
in every way. He has a romantic feeling about this relic of poor
humanity and wishes to take it back to Peru. He shall do so.”

“And what about me?--what about me?”

“Well,” said Random, speaking slowly with the intention of still further
irritating the little man, whose selfishness annoyed him, “if I were you
I should marry Mrs. Jasher and settle down quietly in this house to live
on what income you have.”

Braddock turned purple again and spluttered.

“How dare you make a proposition like that to me, sir?” he
bellowed. “You ask me to marry this low woman, this adventuress,
this--this--this--” Words failed him.

Of course Random had no intention of advising such a marriage, although
he did not think so badly of Mrs. Jasher as did the Professor. But the
little man was so venomous that the young man took a delight in stirring
him up, using the widow's name as a red rag to this particular bull.

“I do not think Mrs. Jasher is a bad woman,” he remarked.

“What! what! what! After what she has done? Blackmail! blackmail!
blackmail!”

“That is bad, I admit, but she has failed to get what she wanted, and,
after all, you indirectly are the cause of her writing that blackmailing
letter.”

“I am?--I am? How dare you?”

“You see, she wanted to get five thousand out of me as her dowry.”

“Yes, and told me lies about her damned brother who was a Pekin
merchant, when after all he never existed.”

“Oh, I don't defend that,” said Random coolly. “Mrs. Jasher has behaved
badly on the whole. Still, Professor, I think there is good in her, as
I said before. She evidently had bad parents and a bad husband; but, so
far as I can gather, she is not an immoral woman. The poor wretch only
came here to try and drag herself out of the mire. If she had married
you I feel sure that she would have made you a most excellent wife.”

The Professor was in such a rage that he suddenly became calm.

“Of course you talk absolute rubbish,” he said caustically. “Had I my
way this woman would be whipped at a cart's tail for the shameful way in
which she has deceived us all. However, I shall see her to-day and make
her confess who murdered Bolton.”

“Don Pedro will be greatly obliged if you do. He wants those emeralds.”

“So do I, and if I get them I shall keep them,” snapped Braddock; “and
if you haven't anything more to say you can leave me. I'm busy.”

As there was nothing more to be done with the choleric little man, Sir
Frank took the hint and departed. He went forthwith to the Warrior Inn
to see Don Pedro and also Donna Inez. But it so happened that the girl
had gone to the Pyramids on a visit to Miss Kendal, and Random was sorry
that he had missed her. However, it was just as well, as he could now
talk freely to De Gayangos. To him he related the whole story of Mrs.
Jasher, and discovered that the Peruvian also, as Braddock had done,
insisted that Mrs. Jasher knew the truth.

“She would not have written that letter if she did not know it,” said
Don Pedro.

“Then you think that she should be arrested?”

“No. We can deal with this matter ourselves. At present she is quite
safe, as she certainly will not leave her cottage, seeing that she
thinks it is being watched. Let us permit Braddock to interview her,
and see what he can learn. Then we can discuss the matter and come to a
decision.”

Random nodded absently.

“I wonder if Mrs. Jasher was the woman who talked to Bolton through the
window?” he remarked.

“It is not impossible. Although that does not explain why Bolton
borrowed a female disguise from this mother.”

“Mrs. Jasher might have worn it.”

“That would argue some understanding between Bolton and Mrs. Jasher, and
a knowledge of the manuscript before Bolton left for Malta. We know that
he could only have seen the manuscript for the first time at Malta. It
was evidently stowed away in the swathings of the mummy by my father,
who forgot all about it when he gave me the original.”

“Hervey forgot also. I wonder if that is true?”

“I am certain it is,” said Don Pedro emphatically, “for, if Hervey, or
Vasa, or whatever you like to call him, had found that manuscript and
had got it translated, he certainly would have opened the mummy and have
secured the emeralds. No, Sir Frank, I believe that his theory is partly
true. Bolton intended to run away with the emeralds, and send the empty
mummy to Professor Braddock; for, if you remember, he arranged that the
landlord of the Sailor's Rest should forward the case next morning,
even if he happened to be away. Bolton intended to be away--with the
emeralds.”

“Then you do not believe that Hervey placed the manuscript in my room?”

“He declared most emphatically that he did not,” said Don Pedro, “when
at Pierside yesterday I went to the Sailor's Rest and saw him. He told
Braddock only the other day that he had lost his chance of a sailing
vessel, and, as yet, had not got another one. But when he returned
to Pierside he found a letter waiting him--so he told me--giving him
command of a four thousand ton tramp steamer called The Firefly. He is
to sail at once--to-morrow, I believe.”

“Then what is he going to do about this murder business?”

“He can do nothing at present, as, if he remains in Pierside, he will
lose his new command. To-morrow he drops down stream, but meantime he
intends to write out the whole story of the theft of the mummy. I have
promised to give him fifty pounds for doing so, as I want to get back
the mummy, free of charge, from Braddock.”

“I think Braddock will stick to the mummy in any event,” said Random
grimly.

“Not when Hervey writes out his evidence. He will not have it completed
by the time he sails, as he is very busy. But he has promised to send
off a boat to the jetty near the Fort to-morrow evening, when he is
dropping down stream. I shall be there with fifty pounds in gold.”

“Supposing he fails to stop or send the boat?”

“Then he will not get his fifty pounds,” retorted Don Pedro. “The man
is a rascal, and deserves prison rather than reward, but since the mummy
was stolen by him thirty years back, he alone can prove my ownership.”

“But why take all this trouble?” argued the baronet. “I can buy the
mummy from Braddock.”

“No,” said Don Pedro. “I have a right to my own property.”

Random lingered until late in the afternoon and until darkness fell,
as he was anxious to see Donna Inez. But she did not appear until late.
Meanwhile Archie Hope put in an appearance, having come to see Don Pedro
with an account of his interview with Widow Anne. Before coming to the
inn he had called on Professor Braddock, and from him had heard all
about the wickedness of Mrs. Jasher. His surprise was very great.

“I should not have believed it,” he declared. “Poor woman!”

“Ah,” said Random, rather pleased, “you are more merciful than the
Professor, Hope. He calls her a bad woman.”

“Humph! I don't think that Braddock is so good that he can afford to
throw a stone,” said Archie rather sourly. “Mrs. Jasher has not behaved
well, but I should like to hear her complete story before judging. There
must be a lot of good in her, or Lucy, who has been with her a great
deal, would have found her out long ago. I go by a woman's judgment of a
woman. But Mrs. Jasher must have been anxious to marry.”

“She was; as Professor Braddock knows,” said Random quickly.

“I am not thinking of that so much as of what Widow Anne told me.”

“Oh,” said Don Pedro, looking up from where he was seated, “so you have
seen that old woman? What does she say about the clothes?”

“She sticks to her story. Sidney, she declares, borrowed the clothes to
give to me for a model. Now, I never asked Bolton to do this, so I fancy
the disguise must have been intended for himself, or for Mrs. Jasher.”

“But what had Mrs. Jasher to do with him?” demanded Random sharply.

“Well, it's odd,” replied Hope slowly, “but Mrs. Bolton declares that
her son was in love with Mrs. Jasher, and when he returned from Malta
intended to marry her.”

“Impossible!” cried Sir Frank. “She engaged herself to Braddock.”

“But only after Bolton's death, remember.”

Don Pedro nodded.

“That is true. But what you say, Mr. Hope, proves the truth of Hervey's
theory.”

“In what way?”

“Mrs. Jasher, as we know from what Random told us, wanted money. She
would not marry a man who was poor. Bolton was poor, but of course the
emeralds would make him wealthy, as they are of immense value. Probably
he intended to steal them in order to marry this woman. This implicates
Mrs. Jasher in the crime.”

“Yes,” assented Sir Frank, nodding. “But as Bolton did not know that the
emeralds existed before he bought the mummy in Malta, I do not see why
he should borrow a disguise beforehand for Mrs. Jasher to meet him at
the Sailor's Rest.”

“The thing is easily settled,” said Hope impatiently. “Let us both go to
Mrs. Jasher's this evening, and insist upon the truth being told. If she
confesses about her secret engagement to Sidney Bolton, she may admit
that the clothes were borrowed for her.”

“And she may admit also that she placed the manuscript in my room,” said
Sir Frank after a pause. “Hervey did not place it there, but it is just
possible that Mrs. Jasher, having got it from Bolton when she talked to
him through the window, may have done so.”

“Nonsense!” said Hope with vigorous commonsense. “Mrs. Jasher would be
spotted in a moment if she had gone to your quarters. She had to pass
the sentry, remember. Then, again, we have not yet proved that she was
the woman in Mrs. Bolton's clothes who spoke through the window. That
can all be settled if we speak to her this evening.”

“Very good.” Random glanced at his watch. “I must get back. Don Pedro,
will you tell Inez that I shall come in this evening? We can then talk
further about these matters. Hope?”

“I shall stop here, as I wish to consult Don Pedro.”

Random nodded and took a reluctant departure. He dearly wished, as an
engaged lover should, to remain on the chance that Donna Inez might
return, but duty called him and he was forced to obey.

The night was very dark, although it was not particularly late. But
there was no rain, and Random walked rapidly through the village and
down the road to the Fort. He caught a glimpse of the lights of Mrs.
Jasher's cottage twinkling in the distance, and smiled grimly as he
thought of the invisible spell he had placed thereon. No doubt Mrs.
Jasher was shivering in her Louis Quinze shoes at the idea of being
watched. But then, she deserved that much punishment at least, as Random
truly thought.

When entering the Fort, the sentry saluted as usual, and Random was
about to pass, when the man stepped forward, holding out a brown paper
package.

“Please, sir, I found this in my sentry box,” he said, saluting.

Sir Frank took the packet.

“Who placed it there? and why do you give it to me?” he demanded in
surprise.

“Please, sir, it's directed to you, sir, and I don't know who put it in
my box, sir. I was on duty, sir, and I 'spose someone must have dropped
it on the floor of the box, sir, when I was at the other end of my beat,
sir. It was as dark as this, sir, and I saw nothing and heard nothing.
When I come back, sir, I stepped into the box out of the rain and felt
it with my feet. I struck a light, sir, and found it was for you.”

Sir Frank slipped the package into his pocket and went away after a grim
word or so to the sentry, advising him to be more on the alert. He was
puzzled to think who had left the packet in the sentry box, and curious
to know what it contained. As soon as he got to his own room, he cut
the string which bound loosely the brown paper. Then, in the lamplight,
there rolled out from the carelessly-tied parcel a glorious sea-green
emerald of great size, radiating light like a sun. A scrap of white
paper lay in the brown wrapping. On it was written, “A wedding gift for
Sir Frank Random.”




CHAPTER XXIII. JUST IN TIME


Of all the surprises in connection with the tragedy of the green
mummy, this was surely the greatest. Sidney Bolton had undoubtedly been
murdered for the sake of the emeralds, and the assassin had escaped
with the spoil, for which he had sold his soul. Yet here was one of the
jewels returned anonymously to Random, who could pass on the same to its
rightful owner. In the midst of his amazement Sir Frank could not help
chuckling when he thought how enraged Professor Braddock would be at Don
Pedro's good fortune. At the eleventh hour, as it were, the Peruvian had
got back his own, or at least a portion of his own.

Placing the emerald in his drawer, Random gave orders to his servant
that the sentry, when off duty, should be brought before him. Just as
Random finished dressing for mess--and he dressed very early, so as to
devote his entire attention to solving this new problem--the soldier who
had been on guard appeared. But he could tell nothing more than he had
already related. When doing sentry-go immediately outside the gate of
the Fort, the packet had been slipped into the box, while the man was at
the far end of his beat. It was quite dark when this was done, and the
soldier confessed that he had not heard a sound, much less had he seen
anyone. The person who had brought the glorious gem had watched his
opportunity, and, soft-footed as a cat, had stolen forward in the
darkness to drop the precious parcel on the floor of the sentry box.
There the man had found it by the feel of his feet, when he stepped in
some time later to escape a shower. But what time had elapsed from the
placing of the parcel to its discovery by the sentry it was impossible
to say. It must, however, as Random calculated, have been within the
hour, since, before then, it would not have been dark enough to hide
the approach of the person, whether male or female, who carried a king's
ransom in the brown paper parcel.

At first Random was inclined to place the sentry under arrest for having
failed so much in his duty as to allow anyone to approach so near the
Fort; but, as he had already reprimanded the man, and, moreover, wished
to keep the fact of the recovered jewel quiet, he simply dismissed him.
When alone, he sat down before the fire, wondering who could have dared
so very greatly, and for what reason the emerald had been handed to
him. If it had been sent to Don Pedro, or even to Professor Braddock, it
would have been much more reasonable.

It first occurred to him that Mrs. Jasher, out of gratitude for the way
in which he had treated her, had sent him the jewel. Remembering his
former experience, he smelt the parcel, but could detect no sign of the
famous Chinese scent which had proved a clue to the letter. Of course
the direction on the packet and the inscribed slip of paper were in
feigned handwriting, so he could gather nothing from that. Still, he
did not think that Mrs. Jasher had sent the emerald. She was desperately
hard up, and if she had become possessed of the gem by murder--presuming
her to have been the woman who talked to Bolton through the window--she
assuredly would have sold it to supply her own needs. Certainly, if
guilty, she would still possess the other emerald, of equal value; but
undoubtedly, had she risked her neck to gain a fortune, she would
have kept the entire plunder which was likely to cost her so dear. No;
whomsoever it was who had repented at the eleventh hour, Mrs. Jasher was
not the person.

Perhaps Widow Anne was the woman who had talked through the window, and
who had restored the emerald. But that was impossible, since Mrs. Bolton
habitually took more liquor than was good for her, and would not have
the nerve to deliver the jewel, much less commit the crime, the more
especially as the victim was her own son. Of course she might have
found out Sidney's scheme to run away with the jewels, and so would have
claimed her share. But if she had been in Pierside on that evening--and
her presence in Gartley had been sworn to by three or four cronies--she
would have guessed who had strangled her boy. If so, not all the jewels
in the world would have prevented her denouncing the criminal. With
all her faults--and they were many--Mrs. Bolton was a good mother, and
looked upon Sidney as the pride and joy of her somewhat dissipated life.
Mrs. Bolton was certainly as innocent as Mrs. Jasher.

There remained Hervey. Random laughed aloud when the name came into
his puzzled head. That buccaneer was the last person to surrender his
plunder or to feel compunction in committing a crime. Once the skipper
got his grip on two jewels, worth endless money, he would never let them
go--not even one of them. Arguing thus, it seemed that Hervey was out of
the running, and Random could think of no one else. In this dilemma he
remembered that two heads were better than one, and, before going into
dinner, he sent a note to Archie Hope, asking him to come to the Fort as
speedily as possible.

Sir Frank was somewhat dull at dinner on that evening, and scarcely
responded to the joking remarks of his brother officers. These jocularly
put his preoccupation down to love, for it was an open secret that the
baronet admired the fair Peruvian, although no one as yet knew that
Random was legally engaged with Don Pedro's consent. The young man
good-humoredly stood all the chaff hurled at him, but seized the
opportunity to slip away to his quarters as soon as coffee came on the
table and the smoking began. It was nine o'clock before he returned to
his room, and here he found Hope waiting for him impatiently.

“I see you have been dining at the Pyramids,” said Random, seeing that
Hope was in evening dress.

Archie nodded.

“Yes. I don't put on this kit to have my humble chop at my lodgings. But
the Professor asked me to dinner to talk over matters.”

“What does he say?” asked Random, looking for the cigarette box.

“Oh, he is very angry with Mrs. Jasher, and considers that she has
swindled him. He called to see her this afternoon, and--so he says--had
a stormy interview with her.”

“I don't wonder at that, if he speaks as he generally does,” said the
other grimly, and pushing along the cigarettes, “There you are! The
whisky and soda are on yonder table. Make yourself comfortable, and tell
me what the Professor intends to do.”

“Well,” said Archie, turning half round from the side table where he
was pouring out the whisky, “he had already started action, by sending
Cockatoo to live at the Sailor's Rest and spy on Hervey.”

“What rubbish! Hervey is, going away to-morrow in The Firefly, bound for
Algiers. Nothing is to be learned from him.”

“So I told the Professor,” said Hope, returning to the armchair near the
fire, “and I mentioned that Don Pedro had induced the skipper to write
out a full account of the theft of the mummy from Lima thirty years
ago. I also said that the signed paper would be handed in at the Gartley
jetty when The Firefly came down stream to-morrow night.”

“Humph! And what did Braddock say to that?”

“Nothing much. He merely stated that whatever Hervey said toward proving
the ownership of your future father-in-law, that he intended to stick
to the embalmed corpse of Inca Caxas, and also that he intended to claim
the emeralds when they turned up.”

Random rose and went to the drawer of his desk.

“I am afraid he has lost one emerald, at all events,” he said, unlocking
the drawer.

“What's that?” said Hope sharply. “Why did you--oh, gosh!” He jumped up
with an amazed look as Random held up the magnificent gem, from which
streamed vividly green flames in the mellow lamplight. “Oh, gosh!”
 gasped the artist again. “Where the devil did you get that?”

“I sent for you to tell you,” said Sir Frank, giving the jewel into his
friend's hand and coming back to his seat. “It was found in the sentry
box.”

Hope stared at the great jewel and then at the soldier.

“What do you mean by that?” he demanded. “How the dickens could it be
found in a sentry box? You must be making a mistake.”

“Not a bit of it. It was found on the floor of the box by the sentry, as
I tell you, and I have sent to consult with you as to how the deuce it
got there.”

“Hervey,” muttered Archie, fascinated by the gem.

Random shrugged his square shoulders.

“Catch that Yankee Shylock returning anything he got his grip on, even
as a wedding present.”

“A wedding present,” said Hope, more at sea than ever. “If you don't
mind giving me details, old chap, my head would buzz less.”

“I rather think that it will buzz more,” said Random dryly, and,
producing the brown paper in which the gem had been wrapped, and the
inscribed paper found within, he related all that had happened.

Archie listened quietly and did not interrupt, but the puzzled look on
his face grew more pronounced.

“Well,” ended Random, seeing that no remark was made when he had
finished, “what do you think?”

“Lord knows! I'll go out of my mind if these sort of things come along.
I am a simple sort of chap, and have no use for mysteries which beat all
the detective stories I have ever read. That sort of thing is all very
well in fiction, but in real life--humph! What are you going to do?”

“Give back the emerald to Don Pedro.”

“Of course, though, it is given to you for a wedding present. And then?”

“Then”--Random stared into the fire--“I don't know. I asked you in to
assist me.”

“Willingly; but how?”

Random pondered for a few moments.

“Who sent that emerald to me, do you think?” he asked, looking squarely
at the artist.

Hope meditatively turned the jewel in his long fingers.

“Why not ask Mrs. Jasher?” he suggested suddenly.

“No!” Sir Frank shook his head. “I fancied it might be her, but it
cannot be. If she is guilty--as she must be, should she have sent the
emerald--she would not part with her plunder when she is so hard up.
I am beginning to believe, Hope, that what she said was true about the
letter.”

“How do you mean exactly?”

“That the letter was mere bluff and that she really knows nothing about
the crime. By the way, did Braddock learn anything?”

“Not a thing. He merely said that the two of them fought. I expect
Braddock stormed and Mrs. Jasher retorted. Both of them have too much
tongue-music to come to any understanding. By the way--to echo, your own
phrase--you had better put away this gem or I shall be strangling
you myself in order to gain possession of it. The mere sight of that
gorgeous color tempts me beyond my strength.”

Random laughed and locked the jewel in his drawer. Hope suggested that
with such a flimsy lock it was unsafe, but the baronet shook his head.

“It is safer here than in a woman's jewel case,” he asserted. “No one
looks to my drawer, and certainly no one would expect to find a crown
jewel of this description in my quarters. Well,” he came back to his
seat, slipping his keys into his trouser pocket, “the whole thing
puzzles me.”

“Why not do as I suggest and go to Mrs. Jasher? In any case you are
going there to-night, are you not?”

“Yes. I want to decide what to do about the woman. I had intended to go
alone, but as you are here you may as well come also.”

“I shall be delighted. What do you intend to do?”

“Help her,” said Random briefly.

“She doesn't deserve it,” replied Hope, lighting a fresh cigarette.

“Does anyone ever deserve anything?” asked Sir Frank cynically. “What
does Miss Kendal think of the business? I suppose Braddock told her. He
has too long a tongue to keep anything to himself.”

“He told her at dinner, when I was present. Lucy is quite on your side.
She says that she had known Mrs. Jasher for months and that there is
good in her, although I am bound to say that Lucy was a trifle shocked.”

“Does she want Mrs. Jasher to marry her father now?”

“Her step-father,” corrected Archie immediately. “No, that is out of
the question. But she would like Mrs. Jasher to be helped out of
her difficulties and have a fair start. It was only by the greatest
diplomacy that I prevented Lucy going to see the wretched woman this
evening.”

“Why did you prevent her?”

Archie colored.

“I daresay I am a trifle prudish,” he replied, “but after what has
happened I do not wish Lucy to associate with Mrs. Jasher. Do you blame
me?”

“No, I don't. All the same, I don't think that Mrs. Jasher is an immoral
woman by any means.”

“Perhaps not; but we needn't discuss her character, as we know precious
little of her past, and she no doubt told you the story that best suited
herself. I think it will be best to make her tell all she knows this
evening, and then send her away with a sum of money in her pocket to
begin a new life.”

“I shall help her certainly,” said Random, with his eyes on the fire,
“but can't say exactly how. It is my opinion that the poor wretch is
more sinned against than sinning.”

“You are a soldier with a conscience, Random.”

The other laughed.

“Why shouldn't a soldier have a conscience? Do you take your idea
of officers from the lady novelist, who makes us out to be all idle
idiots?”

“Not exactly. All the same, many a man would not take the trouble to
behave as you are doing to this unlucky woman.”

“Any man, who was a man, whether soldier or civilian, would help such a
poor creature. And I believe, Hope, that you will help her also.”

The artist leaped to his feet impulsively.

“Of course. I'm with you right along, as Hervey would say. But first,
before deciding what we shall do to set Mrs. Jasher on her legs again,
let us hear what she has to say.”

“She can say nothing more than she has said,” remonstrated Random.

“I don't believe that,” replied Hope, reaching for his overcoat. “You
may choose to believe that the letter was the outcome of bluff. But I
really and truly think that Mrs. Jasher is in the know. What is more,
I believe that Bolton got her those clothes, and that she was the
woman who talked to him--went there to see how the little scheme was
progressing.”

“If I thought that,” said Random coldly, “I would not help Mrs. Jasher.”

“Oh, yes, you would. The greater the sinner the more need she or he
has of help, you know, my dear fellow. But get your coat on, and let us
toddle. I don't suppose we need pistols.”

Sir Frank laughed, as, aided by the artist, he struggled into his
military greatcoat.

“I don't suppose that Mrs. Jasher will be dangerous,” he remarked.
“We'll get what we can out of her, and then arrange what is best to be
done to recoup her fallen fortunes. Then she can go where she chooses,
and we can,--as the French say--return to our muttons.”

“I think Donna Inez and Lucy would be annoyed to hear themselves called
muttons,” laughed Archie, and the two men left the room.

The night was darker than ever, and a fine rain was falling incessantly.
When they left the dimly lighted archway of the fort through the
smaller, gate set in the larger one they stepped into midnight blackness
such as must have been spread over the land of Egypt. In accordance
with the primitive customs of Gartley inhabitants, one of them at least
should have been furnished with a lantern, as it was no easy task
to pick a clean way through the mud.---However, Archie, knowing the
surroundings better even than Random, led the way, and they walked
slowly through the iron gate on the hard high road which led to the
Fort. Immediately beyond this they turned towards the narrow cinder path
which led through the marshes to Mrs. Jasher's cottage, and toiled on
cautiously through the misty rain, which fell continuously. The fog was
drifting up from the mouth of the river and was growing so thick that
they could not see the somewhat feeble lights of the cottage. However,
Archie's instincts led him aright, and they blundered finally upon the
wooden gate. Here they paused in shocked surprise, for a woman's scream
rang out wildly and suddenly.

“What, in heaven's name, is that?” asked Hope, aghast.

“We must find out,” breathed Random, and raced through the white
cotton-wool of the fog up the path. As he reached the veranda the door
opened and a woman came running out screaming. But other screams inside
the cottage still continued.

“What is the matter?” cried Random, seizing the woman.

She proved to be Jane.

“Oh, sir, my mistress is being murdered--”

Hope plunged past her into the corridor, not waiting to hear more. The
cries had died down to a low moaning, and he dashed into the pink parlor
to find it in smoky darkness. Striking a match, he held it above his
head. It showed Mrs. Jasher prone on the floor, and a dark figure
smashing its way through the flimsy window. There was a snarl and the
figure vanished as the match went out.




CHAPTER XXIV. A CONFESSION


Jane was still being held by Sir Frank at the floor, and was still
screaming, fully convinced that her captor was a burglar, in spite of
having recognized him by his voice. Random was so exasperated by her
stupidity that he shook her.

“What is the matter, you fool?” he demanded. “Don't you know that I am a
friend?”

“Y-e-s, s-i-r,” gasped Jane, fetching her breath again after the
shaking; “but go for the police. My mistress is being murdered.”

“Mr. Hope is looking after that, and the screams have ceased. Who was
with your mistress?”

“I don't know, sir,” sobbed the servant. “I didn't know anyone had
called, and then I heard the screaming. I looked into the parlor to see
what was the matter, but the lamp had been thrown over and had gone
out, and there was a dreadful struggle going on in the darkness, so I
screamed and ran out and then I--oh--oh” Jane showed symptoms of renewed
hysteria, and clutched Random tightly, as a man came cautiously round
the corner.

“Are you there, Random?” asked Hope's voice.

“It's so infernally dark and foggy that I have missed him.”

“Missed who?”

“The man who was trying to murder Mrs. Jasher, He got her down when I
entered and struck a match. Then he dashed through the window before I
could catch him or even recognize him. He's vanished in the mist.”

“It's no use looking for him anyhow,” said Random, peering into the
dense blackness, which was thick with damp. “We had better see after
Mrs. Jasher.”

“Whom have you got there?”

“Jane--who seems to have lost her head.”

“It's a mercy I haven't lost my life, sir, with burglars and murderers
all about the place,” sobbed the girl, dropping on to the veranda.

Random promptly hauled her to her feet.

“Go and get a candle, and keep calm if you can,” he said in an abrupt
military voice. “This is no time to play the fool.”

His sharpness had great effect on the girl, and she became much more her
usual self. Hope lighted another match, and the trio proceeded through
the passage towards the kitchen, where Jane had left a lamp burning.
Seizing this from its bracket, Sir Frank retraced his way along the
passage to the pink parlor, followed closely by Hope and timorously
by Jane. A dreadful scene presented itself. The dainty little room
was literally smashed to pieces, as though a gigantic bull had been
wallowing therein. The lamp lay on the floor, surrounded by several
extinguished candles. It was a mercy that all the lights had been put
out when overturned, else the gim-crack cottage would have been long
since in a blaze. Chairs and tables and screens were also overturned,
and the one window had its rose-hued curtains torn down and its glass
broken, showing only too clearly the way in which the murderer had
escaped. And that the man who had attacked Mrs. Jasher was a murderer
could be seen from the stream of blood that ran slowly from Mrs.
Jasher's breast. Apparently she had been stabbed in the lungs, for the
wound was on the right side. There she lay, poor woman, in her tawdry
finery, crumpled up, battered and bruised, dead amongst the ruins of her
home. Jane immediately began to scream again.

“Stop her, Hope,” cried Random, who was kneeling by the body and feeling
the heart. “Mrs. Jasher is not dead. Hold your noise, woman, and go
for a doctor.” This was to Jane, who, prevented from screaming, took to
whimpering.

“I had better go,” said Hope quickly; “and I'll go to the Fort and alarm
the men. Perhaps they may catch the man.”

“Can you describe him?”

“Of course not,” said Archie indignantly. “I only caught a glimpse of
him by the feeble light of a lucifer match. Then he leaped through the
window and I after him. I made a grab at him, but lost him in the mist.
I don't know in the least what he is like.”

“Then how can anyone arrest him?” snapped Random, raising Mrs. Jasher's
head. “Give what alarm you like, but race for Robinson up the village.
We must save this poor woman's life, if only to learn who killed her.”

“But she isn't dead yet--she isn't dead yet,” wailed Jane, clapping her
hands, while Hope, knowing the value of time, promptly ran out of the
house to get further assistance.

“She soon will be,” said Sir Frank, whose temper was not of the best at
so critical a moment in dealing with a fool. “Go and bring me brandy at
once, and afterwards linen and hot water. We must do our best to staunch
this wound and revive her.”

For the next quarter of an hour the man and the woman labored hard to
save Mrs. Jasher's life. Random bound up the wound in a rough and ready
fashion, and Jane fed the pale lips of her mistress with sips of brandy.
Mrs. Jasher gradually became more alive, and a faint sigh escaped from
her lips, as her wounded bosom rose and fell with recovered breath. When
Sir Frank was in hopes that she would speak, she suddenly relapsed again
into a comatose state. Luckily at that moment Archie returned with young
Dr. Robinson at his heels, and also was followed by Painter, the village
constable, who had luckily been picked up in the fog.

Robinson whistled as he looked at the insensible woman.

“She's had a narrow squeak,” he muttered, lifting the body with the
assistance of Random.

“Will she recover?” questioned Hope anxiously.

“I can't tell you yet,” answered the doctor; and with Sir Frank he
carried the heavy body of the widow into her bedroom. “How did it
happen?”

“That is my business,” said Painter, who had followed, and who was now
filled with importance. “You look after the body, sir, and I'll question
these gentlemen and the servant.”

“Servant yourself! Such sauce!” muttered Jane, with an angry toss of her
cap at the daring young policeman. “I know nothing. I left my mistress
in the parlor writing letters, and never heard anyone come in. The bell
didn't sound anyhow. The first thing I knew that anything was wrong was
on hearing the screams. When I looked into the parlor the candles and
the lamp were out, and there was a struggle going on in the dark. Then
I cried out, very naturally, I'm sure, and ran straight into the arms of
these gentlemen, as soon as I could get the front door open.”

After delivering this address, Jane was called away to assist the doctor
in the bedroom, and along with Archie and Random the constable repaired
to the pink parlor to hear what they had to say. Of course they could
tell him even less than Jane had told, and Archie protested that he was
quite unable to describe the man who had dashed out of the window.

“Ah,” said Painter sapiently, “he got out there; but how did he enter?”

“No doubt by the door,” said Random sharply.

“We don't know that, sir. Jane says she did not hear the bell.”

“Mrs. Jasher might have let the man in, whomsoever he was, secretly.”

“Why should she, sir?”

“Ah! now you are asking more than I can tell you. Only Mrs. Jasher can
explain, and it seems to me that she will die.”

Meanwhile, in some mysterious way the news of the crime had spread
through the village, and although it was growing late--for it was past
ten o'clock--a dozen or so of villagers came along. Also there arrived
a number of soldiers under a smart sergeant, and to him Sir Frank
explained what had happened. In the fainthearted way--for the mist was
now like cotton-wool--the military and the civilians hunted through the
marshes round the cottage, hoping to come across the assassin hiding
in a ditch. Needless to say, they found no one and nothing, for it was
worse than looking for a needle in a bundle of hay. The man had come out
of the mist, and, after executing the deed, had vanished into the mist,
and there was not the very slightest chance of finding him. Gradually,
as it drew towards midnight, the soldiers went back to the Fort, and the
villagers to their homes. But, along with the doctor and the constable,
Hope and his military friend stopped on. They were determined to get at
the root of the mystery, and when Mrs. Jasher became sensible she would
be able to reveal the truth.

“It's all of a piece with the sending of the emerald,” said Random
to the artist, “and that is connected, as we know, with the death of
Bolton.”

“Do you think that this man who has struck down Mrs. Jasher is the same
one who strangled Sidney Bolton?”

“I should think so. Perhaps Mrs. Jasher sent the emerald after all, and
this man killed her out of revenge.”

“But how would he know that she had the emerald?”

“God knows! She may have been his accomplice.”

Archie knit his brows.

“Who the devil can this mysterious person be?”

“I can only reply as you have done, my friend. God knows.”

“Well, I am certain that God will not let him escape this time. This
will bring Gartley once more into notoriety,” went on Hope. “By the way,
I saw one of the servants from the Pyramids here. I hope the fool won't
go home and frighten Lucy's life out of her.”

“Go to the Pyramids and see her,” suggested Sir Frank. “Mrs. Jasher is
still unconscious, and will be for hours, the doctor tells me.”

“It is too late to go to the Pyramids, Random.”

“If they know of this new tragedy there, I'll bet they are not in bed.”

Hope nodded.

“All the same, I'll remain here until Mrs. Jasher can speak,” he said,
and sat smoking with Random in the dining-room, as the most comfortable
room in the house.

Constable Painter camped, so to speak, in the drawing-room, keeping
guard over the scene of the crime, and had placed the Chinese screen
against the broken window to keep out the cold. In the bedroom Jane and
Dr. Robinson looked after the dying woman. And dying she was, according
to the young physician, for he did not think she would live much longer.
Round the lonely cottage the sea-mist drifted white and thick, and the
darkness deepened, until--as the saying goes--it could have been cut
with a knife. Never was there so eerie and weary and sinister a vigil.

Towards four o'clock Hope fell into a doze, while resting in an
arm-chair; but he was suddenly aroused from this by an exclamation from
Sir Frank, who had remained wide awake, smoking cigar after cigar. In a
moment the artist was on his feet, alert and quick-brained.

“What is it?”

Random made for the dining-room door rapidly.

“I thought I heard Painter call out,” he declared, and hastily sought
the parlor, followed by Hope.

The room was empty, but the screen before the broken window had been
thrown down, and they could see Painter's bulky form immediately
outside.

“What the deuce is the matter?” demanded Random, entering. “Did you call
out, Painter. I fancied I heard something.”

The constable came in again.

“I did call out, sir,” he confessed. “I was half asleep in that chair,
when I suddenly became wide awake, and believed I saw a face looking at
me round the corner of the screen. I jumped up, calling for you, sir,
and upset the screen.”

“Well? well?” demanded Sir Frank impatiently, and seeing that the man
hesitated.

“I saw no one, sir. All the same, I had an idea, and I have still, that
a man came through the window and peered at me from behind the screen.”

“The man who attacked Mrs. Jasher?”

“I can't say, sir. But there was someone. At any rate he's gone again,
if he really did come, and there is no chance of finding him. It's like
pea-soup outside.”

Hope and Random simultaneously stepped through the window, but could not
see an inch before them, so thick was the sea-fog and so dense was the
darkness. Returning, they replaced the screen, and, telling Painter
to be more on the alert, went back shivering to the fire in the
dining-room. When they were seated again, Archie put a question.

“Do you think that policeman was dreaming?” he asked meditatively.

“No,” replied Random sharply. “I believe that the man who assaulted Mrs.
Jasher is hanging about, and ventured back into the room, relying on the
fog as a means of escape, should he be spotted.”

“But the man wouldn't be such a fool as to return into danger.”

“Not unless he wanted something very badly,” said Random significantly.

Hope let the cigarette he was lighting fall.

“What do you mean?”

“I may be wrong, of course. But it is my impression that there is
something in the parlor which this man wants, and for which he tried
to murder Mrs. Jasher. We interrupted him, and he was forced to flee.
Hidden in the fog, he is lurking about to see if he can't obtain what he
has risked his neck to secure.”

“What can it be?” murmured Archie, struck by the feasibility of this
theory.

“Perhaps the second emerald,” remarked Sir Frank grimly.

“What! You don't think that--”

“I don't think anything. I am too tired to think at all. However,
Painter will keep his eyes open, and in the morning we can search the
room. The man has been in the house twice to get what he wanted. He
won't risk another attempt, now that he is aware we are on the alert.
I'm going to try and get forty winks. You keep watch, as you have had
your sleep.”

Hope was quite agreeable, but just as Random composed himself to uneasy
slumber, Jane, haggard and red-eyed, came hastily into the dining-room.

“If you please, gentlemen, the doctor wants you to come and see
mistress. She is sensible, and--”

The two waited to hear no more, but went hastily but softly into the
room wherein lay the dying woman. Robinson sat by the bedside, holding
his patient's hand and feeling her pulse. He placed his finger on his
lips as the men entered gently, and at the same moment Mrs. Jasher's
voice, weak from exhaustion, sounded through the room, which was
dimly illuminated by one candle. The newcomers halted in obedience to
Robinson's signal.

“Who is there?” asked Mrs. Jasher weakly, for, in spite of the care
exercised, she had evidently heard the footsteps.

“Mr. Hope and Sir Frank Random,” whispered the doctor, speaking into the
dying woman's ear. “They came in time to save you.”

“In time to see me die,” she murmured; “and I can't die, unless I tell
the truth. I am glad Random is there; he is a kind-hearted boy, and
treated me better than he need have done. I--oh--some brandy--brandy.”

Robinson gave her some in a spoon.

“Now lie quietly and do not attempt to speak,” he commanded. “You need
all your strength.”

“I do--to tell that which I wish to tell,” gasped Mrs. Jasher, trying
to raise herself. “Sir Frank! Sir Frank!” Her voice sounded hoarse and
weak.

“Yes, Mrs. Jasher,” said the young man, coming softly to the bedside.

She thrust out a weak hand and clutched him.

“You must be my father-confessor, and hear all. You got the emerald?”

“What!” Random recoiled in astonishment, “Did you--”

“Yes, I sent it to you as a wedding present. I was sorry and I was
afraid; and I--I--” She paused again, gasping.

The doctor intervened and gave her more brandy.

“You must not talk,” he insisted severely, “or I shall turn Sir Frank
and Mr. Hope out of the room.”

“No! no! Give me more brandy--more--more.” and when the doctor placed a
tumbler to her lips, she drank so greedily that he had to take the glass
away lest she should do herself harm. But the ardent spirit put new life
into her, and with a superhuman effort she suddenly reared herself in
the bed.

“Come here, Hope--come here, Random,” she said in a much stronger voice.
“I have much to tell you. Yes, I took the emerald after dark and threw
it into the sentry box when the man wasn't looking. I escaped your spy,
Random, and I escaped the notice of the sentry. I walked like a cat, and
like a cat I can see in the dark. I am glad you have got the emerald.”

“Where did you get it?” asked Random quietly.

“That's a long story. I don't know that I have the strength to tell it.
I have written it out.”

“You have written it out?” said Hope quickly, and drawing near.

“Yes. Jane thought that I was writing letters, but I was writing out the
whole story of the murder. You were good to me, Random, you dear boy,
and on the impulse of the moment I took the emerald to you. I was sorry
when I got back, but it was too late then to repent, as I did not dare
to go near the Fort again. Your spy who watched might have discovered me
the second time. I then thought that I would write out the story of the
murder, so as to exonerate myself.”

“Then you are not guilty of Bolton's death?” asked Sir Frank, puzzled,
for her confession was somewhat incoherent.

“No. I did not strangle him. But I know who did. I have written it all
down. I was just finishing when I heard the tapping at the window. I
let him in and he tried to get the confession, for I told him what I had
done.”

“Who did you tell?” asked Hope, much excited.

Mrs. Jasher took no notice.

“The confession is lying on my desk--all the sheets of paper are loose.
I had no time to bind them together, for he came in. He wanted the
emerald, and the confession. I told him that I had given the emerald to
you, Random, and that I had confessed all in writing. Then he went mad
and flew at me with a dreadful knife. He knocked over the candles and
the lamp. Everything went out and all was darkness, and I lay crying for
help, with that devil stabbing--stabbing--ah--”

“Who, in heaven's name, is the man?” demanded Random, standing up in his
eagerness. But Mrs. Jasher had fallen back in a faint, and Robinson was
again supplying her with brandy.

“You had better leave the room, you two,” he said, “or I can't be
answerable for her life.”

“I must stay and learn the truth,” said Random determinedly, “and you,
Hope, go into the parlor and find that confession. It is on the desk, as
she said, all loose sheets. No doubt it was the confession which the man
she refers to tried to secure when he came back the second time. He may
make another attempt, or Painter may go to sleep. Hurry! hurry!”

Archie needed no second telling, as he realized what hung on the
securing of the confession. He stole swiftly out of the room, closing
the door after him. Faint as was the sound, Mrs. Jasher heard it and
opened her eyes.

“Do not go, Random,” she said faintly. “I have yet much to say, although
the confession will tell you all. I am half sorry I wrote it out--at
least I was--and perhaps should have burnt it had I not met with this
accident.”

“Accident!” echoed Sir Frank scornfully. “Murder you mean.”

The sinister word galvanized the dying woman in sudden strong life, and
she reared herself again on the bed.

“Murder! Yes, it is murder,” she cried loudly. “He killed Sidney Bolton
to get the emeralds, and he killed me to make me close my mouth.”

“Who stabbed you? Speak! speak!” cried Random anxiously.

“Cockatoo. He is guilty of my death and Bolton's,” and she fell back,
dead.



CHAPTER XXV. THE MILLS OF GOD


In the cold gray hours of the morning, Hope and his friend left the
cottage wherein such a tragedy had taken place. The dead woman was lying
stiff and white on her bed under a winding sheet, which had already been
strewn with many-hued chrysanthemums taken from the pink parlor by the
weeping Jane. The wretched woman who had led so stormy and unhappy a
life had at least one sincere mourner, for she had always been kind to
the servant, who formed her entire domestic staff, and Jane would not
hear a word said against the dead. Not that anyone did say anything; for
Random and Hope kept the contents of the confession to themselves. There
would be time enough for Mrs. Jasher's reputation to be smirched when
those same contents were made public.

When the poor woman died, Random left the doctor and the servant to look
after the corpse, and went into the parlor. Here he met Hope with the
confession in his hand. Luckily, Painter was not in the room at the
moment, else he would have prevented the artist from taking away the
same. Hope--as directed by Mrs. Jasher--had found the confession,
written on many sheets, lying on the desk. It broke off abruptly towards
the end, and was not signed. Apparently at this point Mrs. Jasher had
been interrupted--as she had said--by the tapping of Cockatoo at the
window. Probably she had admitted him at once, and on her refusal to
give him the emerald, and on her confessing what she had written, he had
overturned the lights for the purpose of murdering her. Only too well
had the Kanaka succeeded in his wickedness.

Archie slipped the confession into his pocket before the policeman
returned, and then left the cottage with Random and the doctor, since
nothing else could now be done. It was between seven and eight, and the
chilly dawn was breaking, but the sea-mist still lay heavily over the
marshes, as though it were the winding sheet of the dead. Robinson went
to his own house to get his trap and drive into Jessum, there to catch
the train and ferry to Pierside. It was necessary that Inspector Date
should be informed of this new tragedy without delay, and as Constable
Painter was engaged in watching the cottage, there was no messenger
available but Dr. Robinson. Random indeed offered to send a soldier,
or to afford Robinson the use of the Fort telephone, but the doctor
preferred to see Date personally, so as to detail exactly what had
happened. Perhaps the young medical man had an eye to becoming better
known, for the improvement of his practice; but he certainly seemed
anxious to take a prominent part in the proceedings connected with the
murder of Mrs. Jasher.

When Robinson parted from them, Random and Hope went to the lodgings of
the latter, so as to read over the confession and learn exactly to what
extent Mrs. Jasher had been mixed up in the tragedy of the green mummy.
She had declared herself innocent even on her death-bed, and so far
as the two could judge at this point, she certainly had not actually
strangled Sidney Bolton. But it might be--and it appeared to be more
than probable--that she was an accessory after the fact. But this they
could learn from the confession, and they sat in Hope's quiet little
sitting-room, in which the fire had been just lighted by the artist's
landlady, with the scattered sheets neatly ranged before them.

“Perhaps you would like a cup of coffee, or a whisky and soda,”
 suggested Archie, “before starting to read?”

“I should,” assented Random, who looked weary and pale. “The events of
the night have somewhat knocked me up. Coffee for choice--nice, black,
strong, hot coffee.”

Hope nodded and went to order the same. When he returned he sat down,
after closing the door carefully, and proceeded to read. But before he
could speak Random raised his hand.

“Let us chat until the coffee comes in,” he said; “then we shall not be
interrupted when reading.”

“All right,” said Hope. “Have a cigar!”

“No, thanks. I have been smoking all the night. I shall sit here by the
fire and wait for the coffee. You look chippy yourself.”

“And small wonder,” said Archie wearily. “We little thought when we left
the Fort last night what a time we were going to have. Fancy Mrs. Jasher
having sent you the emerald after all!”

“Yes. She repented, as she said, and yet I dare say--as she also
said--she was sorry that she acted on her impulse. If she had not been
stabbed by that damned Cockatoo, she would no doubt have destroyed that
confession. I expect she wrote that also on the impulse of the moment.”

“She confessed as much,” said Hope, leaning his head on his hand and
staring into the fire. “She must have been cognizant of the truth all
along. I wonder if she was an accessory before or after the fact?”

“What I wonder,” said Random, after a moment's thought, “is, what
Braddock has to do with the matter?”

Hope raised his head in surprise.

“Why, nothing. Mrs. Jasher did not say a word against Braddock.”

“I know that. All the same, Cockatoo was completely under the thumb of
the Professor, and probably was instructed by him to strangle Bolton.”

“That is impossible,” cried the artist, much agitated. “Think of what
you are saying, Random. What a terrible thing it would be for Lucy if
the Professor were guilty in such a way as you suggest!”

“Really, I fail to see that. Miss Kendal is no relation to Braddock save
by marriage. His iniquities have nothing to do with her, or with you.”

“But it's impossible, I tell you, Random. Throughout the whole of this
case Braddock has acted in a perfectly innocent way.”

“That's just it,” said Sir Frank caustically; “he has acted. In spite
of his pretended grief for the loss of the emeralds, I should not be
surprised to learn from that,” he nodded towards the confession on the
table, “that he was in possession of the missing gem. Cockatoo had no
reason to steal the emeralds himself, setting aside the fact that he
probably would not know their value, being but a semi-civilized savage.
He acted under orders from his master, and although Cockatoo strangled
Bolton, the Professor is really the author and the gainer and the moving
spirit.”

“You would make Braddock an accessory before the fact.”

“Yes, and Mrs. Jasher an accessory after the fact. Cockatoo is the link,
as the actual criminal, who joins the two in a guilty partnership. No
wonder Braddock intended to make that woman his wife even though he
did not love her, for she knew a jolly sight too much for his peace of
mind.”

“This is horrible,” murmured Hope desperately; “but it is mere theory.
We cannot be sure until we read the confession.”

“We'll be sure soon, then, for here comes the coffee.”

This last remark Random made when a timid knock came to the door, and a
moment later the landlady entered with a tray bearing cups, saucers, and
a jug of steaming coffee. She was a meek, reticent woman who entered and
departed in dismal silence, and in a few moments the two young men were
quite alone with the door closed. They drank a cup of coffee each, and
then Hope proceeded to read the confession.

The story told by Mrs. Jasher commenced with a short account of her
early life. It appeared that her father was a ruined gentleman and a
gambler, and that her mother had been an actress. She was dragged up in
a Bohemian sort of way until she attained a marriageable age, when her
mother, who seemed to have been both wicked and hard-hearted, forced
her to marry a comparatively wealthy man called Jasher. The elderly
husband--for Jasher was not young--treated his wife very badly, and,
infected with the spirit of gambling by her father, lost all his money.
Mrs. Jasher then went with him to America and performed on the stage in
order to keep the home together. She had one child, but it died, much
to her grief, yet also much to her relief, as she was so miserable and
poor. Mrs. Jasher gave a scanty account of sordid years of trouble
and trial, of failure and sorrow. She and her husband roamed all over
America, and then went to Australia and New Zealand, where they lived
a wretched existence for many years. Finally the husband died of strong
drink at an advanced age, leaving Mrs. Jasher a somewhat elderly widow.

The poor woman again took to the stage and tried to earn her bread,
but was unsuccessful. Afterwards she lectured. Then she kept a boarding
establishment, and finally went out as a nurse. In every way, it would
seem, she tried to keep her head above water, and roamed the world like
a bird of passage, finding rest nowhere for the sole of her foot. Yet
throughout her story both the young men could see that she had always
aspired to a quiet and decent, respectable existence, and that only
force of circumstances had flung her into the whirlpool of life.

“As I said,” remarked Random at this stage, “the miserable creature was
more sinned against than sinning.”

“Her moral sense seemed to have become blunted, however,” said Archie
doubtfully.

“And small wonder, amidst such surroundings; but it seems to me that she
was much better under the circumstances than many another woman would
have been. Go on.”

In Melbourne Mrs. Jasher made a lucky speculation in mines, which
brought her one thousand pounds. With this she came to England, and
resolved to make a bid for respectability. Chance led her into the
neighborhood of Gartley, and thinking that if she set up her tent in
this locality she might manage to marry an officer from the Fort--since
amidst such dismal surroundings a young man might be the more easily
fascinated by a woman of the world--she took the cottage amidst the
marshes at a small rent. Here she hoped to eke out what money she had
left--a few hundreds--until the coveted marriage should take place.
Afterwards she met Professor Braddock and determined to marry him, as
a man more easy to manage. She was successful in enlisting Lucy on her
side, and until the green mummy brought its bad luck to the Pyramids
everything went capitally.

It was in connection with the name of Bolton that the first mention was
made of the green mummy. Sidney was a clever young man, although
very lowly born, and having been taken up by Professor Braddock as
an assistant, could hope some day to make a position. Braddock was
educating him, although he paid him very little in the way of wages.
Sidney fell in love with Mrs. Jasher, and in some way--she did not
mention how--gained her confidence. Perhaps the lonely woman was glad
to have a sympathetic friend. At all events she told her past history
to Sidney, and mentioned that she desired to marry Braddock. But Sidney
insisted that she should marry him, and promised to make enough money
to satisfy her that he was a good match, setting aside his humble birth,
for which Mrs. Jasher cared nothing.

It was then that Sidney related what he had discovered. Braddock, when
in Peru many years before, had tried to get mummies for some scientific
reason. When Hervey--then known as Vasa--promised to procure him the
mummy of the last Inca, Braddock was extremely pleased. Hervey stole the
mummy and also the copy of the manuscript which was written in Latin.
He sent this latter to Braddock--who was then at Cuzco--as an earnest of
his success in procuring the mummy, and when the Professor returned
to Lima the mummy was to be handed to him. Unfortunately, Braddock
was carried into captivity for one year, and when he escaped Vasa had
disappeared with the mummy. As the Professor had deciphered the Latin
manuscript, he knew of the emeralds, and for years had been hunting for
the mummy--sure to be recognized from its peculiar green color--in order
to get the jewels, and thus secure money for his Egyptian expedition.
All through, it seems, the Professor was actuated by purely scientific
enthusiasm, as in the abstract he cared very little for hard cash.
Bolton told Mrs. Jasher that Braddock explained how much he desired to
get the mummy, but he did not mention about the jewels. For a long time
Sidney was under the impression that his master merely wanted the
mummy to see the difference between the Egyptian and Peruvian modes of
embalming.

Then one day Sidney chanced on the Latin manuscript, and learned that
Braddock's real reason for getting the mummy was to procure the emeralds
which were held in the grip of the dead. Sidney kept this knowledge to
himself, and Braddock never guessed that his assistant knew the truth.
Then unexpectedly Braddock stumbled across the advertisement describing
the green mummy for sale in Malta. From the color he made sure that it
was that of Inca Caxas, and so moved heaven and earth to get money
to buy it. At length he did, from Archie Hope, on condition that he
consented to the marriage of his step-daughter with the young man.
Thinking that Sidney was ignorant of the jewels, he sent him to bring
the mummy home.

Sidney told Mrs. Jasher that he would try and steal the jewels in Malta
or on board the tramp steamer. Failing that, he would delay the delivery
of the mummy to Braddock on some excuse and rob it at Pierside. To make
sure of escaping, he borrowed a disguise from his mother, alleging that
Hope wanted the same to clothe a model. Sidney intended to take these
clothes with him, and, after stealing the jewels, to escape disguised as
an old woman. As he was slender and clean-shaven and a capital actor, he
could easily manage this.

Then he arranged that Mrs. Jasher should join him in Paris, and they
would sell the emeralds, and go to America, there to marry and live
happily ever afterwards, like a fairy tale.

Unfortunately for the success of this plan, Mrs. Jasher thought that the
Professor would make a more distinguished husband, so she betrayed all
that Sidney, had arranged.

“What a beastly thing to do!” interrupted Random, disgusted. “It is not
as if she wanted to help Braddock. I think less of Mrs. Jasher than ever
I did. She might have remembered that there is honor amongst thieves.”

“Well, she is dead, poor soul!” said Hope with a sigh. “God knows that
if she sinned, she has paid cruelly for her sin,” after which remark, as
Sir Frank was silent, he resumed his reading.

Braddock was furious when he learned of his assistant's projected
trickery, and he determined to circumvent him. He agreed to marry Mrs.
Jasher, as, if he had not done so, she could have warned Sidney and he
could have escaped with both the mummy and the jewels by conniving with
Hervey. The Professor could not risk that, as, remembering Hervey
as Gustav Vasa, he was aware how clever and reckless he was. Whether
Braddock ever intended to marry the widow in the end it is hard to
say, but he certainly pretended to consent to the engagement, which was
mainly brought about by Lucy. Then came the details of the murder so far
as Mrs. Jasher knew.

One evening--in fact on the evening when the crime was committed--the
woman was walking in her garden late. In the moonlight she saw Braddock
and Cockatoo go down along the cinderpath to the jetty near the Fort.
Wondering what they were doing, she waited up, and heard and saw
them--for it was still moonlight--come back long after midnight. The
next day she heard of the murder, and guessed that the Professor and his
slave--for Cockatoo was little else--had rowed up to Pierside in a boat
and there had strangled Sidney and stolen the mummy. She saw Braddock
and accused him. The Professor had then opened the case, and had
pretended astonishment when discovering the corpse of the man whom
Cockatoo had strangled, as he knew perfectly well.

Braddock at first denied having been to Pierside, but Mrs. Jasher
insisted that she would tell the police, so he was forced to make a
clean breast of it to the woman.

“Now for it,” said Random, settling himself to hear details of the
crime, for he had often wondered how it had been executed.

“Braddock,” read Archie from the confession, for Mrs. Jasher did not
trouble herself with a polite prefix--“Braddock explained that when he
received a letter from Sidney stating that he would have to remain
with the mummy for a night in Pierside, he guessed that his treacherous
assistant intended to effect the robbery. It seems that Sidney by
mistake had left behind the disguise in which he intended to escape.
Aware of this through me”--Mrs. Jasher referred to herself--“he made
Cockatoo assume the dress and row up the river to the Sailor's Rest. The
Kanaka easily could be mistaken for a woman, as he also, like Sidney,
was slender and smooth-chinned. Also, he wore the shawl over his head to
disguise his mop of frizzy hair as much as possible, and for the purpose
of concealing his tattooed face. In the darkness--it was after nine
o'clock--he spoke to Sidney through the window, as he had seen him there
earlier, when searching for him. Cockatoo said that Sidney was much
afraid when he heard that his purpose had been discovered by the
Professor. He offered a share of the plunder to the Kanaka, and Cockatoo
agreed, saying he would come back late, and that Sidney was to admit him
into the bedroom so that they could open the mummy and steal the
jewels. Sidney quite believed that Cockatoo was heart and soul with him,
especially as the cunning Kanaka swore that he was weary of his master's
tyranny. It was when Cockatoo was talking thus that he was seen by Eliza
Flight, who mistook him--very naturally--for a woman. Cockatoo then
returned by boat to the Gartley jetty and told his master. Afterwards,
the Professor, at a much later hour, went down to the jetty and was
rowed up to Pierside by the Kanaka.”

“That was when Mrs. Jasher saw them,” said Random, much interested.

“Yes,” said Archie. “And then, if you remember; she watched for the
return of the couple.”

“It was nearly midnight when the boat was brought alongside the sloping
stone bank of the alley which ran past the Sailor's Rest. No one was
about at that hour, not even a policeman, and there was no light in
Sidney Bolton's window. Braddock was much agitated as he thought that
Sidney had already escaped. He waited in the boat and sent Cockatoo to
knock at the window. Then a light appeared and the window was silently
opened. The Kanaka slipped in and remained there for some ten minutes
after closing the window. When he returned, the light was extinguished.
He whispered to his master that Sidney had opened the packing case and
the mummy coffin, and had ripped the swathings to get the jewels. When
Sidney would not hand over the jewels to the Kanaka, as the latter
wanted him to, Cockatoo, already prepared with the window cord, which he
had silently taken from the blind, sprang upon the unfortunate assistant
and strangled him. Cockatoo told this to his horrified master, and
wanted him to come back to hide the corpse in the packing case.
Braddock refused, and then Cockatoo told him that he would throw the
jewels--which he had taken from Sidney's body--into the river. The
position of master and servant was reversed, and Braddock was forced to
obey.

“The Professor slipped silently ashore and into the room. The two men
relighted the candle and pulled down the blind. They then placed the
corpse of Sidney in the packing case, and screwed the same down in
silence. When this was completed, they were about to carry the mummy in
its coffin--the lid of which they had replaced--to the boat, when they
heard distant footsteps, probably those of a policeman on his beat.
At once they extinguished the candle, and--as Braddock told Mrs.
Jasher--he, for one, sat trembling in the dark. But the policeman--if
the footsteps were those of a policeman--passed up another street, and
the two were safe. Without relighting the candle, they silently slipped
the mummy through the window, Cockatoo within and Braddock without. The
case and its contents were not heavy, and it was not difficult for
the two men to take it to the boat. When it was safely bestowed,
Cockatoo--who was as cunning as the devil, according to his master
returned to the bedroom, and unlocked the door. He afterwards passed a
string through the joining of the upper and lower windows, and managed
to shut the snib. Afterwards he came to the boat and rowed it back
to Gartley. On the way Cockatoo told his master that Sidney had left
instructions that the packing case should be taken next morning to the
Pyramids, so there was nothing to fear. The mummy was hidden in a hole
under the jetty and covered with grass.”

“Why didn't they take it up to the house?” asked Random, on hearing
this.

“That would have been dangerous,” said Hope, looking up from the
manuscript, “seeing that the mummy was supposed to have been stolen by
the murderer. It was easier to hide it amongst the grasses under
the jetty, as no one ever goes there. Well”--he turned over a few
pages--“that is practically all. The rest is after events.”

“I want to hear them,” said Random, taking another cup of coffee.

Hope ran his eyes swiftly over the remaining portion of the paper, and
gave further details rapidly to his friend.

“You know all that happened,” he said, “the Professor's pretended
surprise when he found the corpse he had himself helped to pack and--”

“Yes! yes! But why was the mummy placed in Mrs. Jasher's garden?”

“That was Braddock's idea. He fancied that the mummy might be found
under the jetty and that inconvenient inquiries might be made. Also,
he wished if possible to implicate Mrs. Jasher, so as to keep her from
telling to the police what he had told her. He and Cockatoo went down
to the river one night and removed the mummy to the arbor silently.
Afterwards he pretended to be astonished when I found it. I must say
he acted his part very well,” said Hope reflectively, “even to accusing
Mrs. Jasher. That was a bold stroke of genius.”

“A very dangerous one.”

“Not at all. He swore to Mrs. Jasher that if she said anything, he would
tell the police that she had taken the clothes provided by Sidney from
the Pyramids and had gone to speak through the window, in order to fly
with Sidney and the emeralds. As the fact of the mummy being found in
Mrs. Jasher's garden would lend color to the lie, she was obliged to
hold her tongue. And after all, as she says, she didn't mind, since
she was engaged to the Professor, and possessed at least one of the
emeralds.”

“Ah! the one she passed along to me. How did she get that?”

Hope referred again to the manuscript.

“She insisted that Braddock should give it to her as a pledge of good
faith. He had to do it, or risk her splitting. That was why he placed
the mummy in her garden, so as to bring her into the matter, and render
it more difficult for her to speak.”

“What of the other emerald?”

“Braddock took that to Amsterdam, when he went to London that time--if
you remember, when Don Pedro arrived. Braddock sold the emerald for
three thousand pounds, and it is now on its way to an Indian rajah. I
fear Don Pedro will never set eyes on that again.”

“Where is the money?”

“He banked it in a feigned name in Amsterdam, and intended to account
for it when he married Mrs. Jasher by saying it was left to her by that
mythical Pekin merchant brother of hers. Savvy!”

“Yes. What an infernal little villain! And I expect he sent Cockatoo
down last night for the other emerald.”

“That is not related in the manuscript,” said Archie, laying down the
last sheet and taking up his coffee. “The confession ends abruptly--at
the time Cockatoo tapped at the window, I expect. But she said, when
dying, that the Kanaka asked for the second emerald. If she had not sent
it to you in a fit of weakness, I expect she would have passed it along.
I can't make out,” added Archie musingly, “why Mrs. Jasher confessed
when everything was so safe.”

“Well,” said Random, nursing his chin, and staring into the fire, “she
made a mistake in trying to blackmail me, though why she did so I can't
tell, seeing she had the whiphand of Braddock. Perhaps she wanted the
five thousand to spend herself, knowing that the Professor's plunder
would be wasted on his confounded expedition. At any rate she gave
herself away by the blackmail, and I expect she grew frightened. If the
house had been searched--and it might have been searched by the police,
had I arrested her for blackmail the emerald would have been found and
she would have been incriminated. She therefore got rid of it cleverly,
by passing it along to me as a wedding gift. Then she again grew afraid
and wrote out this confession to exonerate herself.”

“But it doesn't,” insisted Hope. “She makes herself out plainly as an
accessory after the fact.”

“A woman doesn't understand these legal niceties. She wrote that out to
clear herself in case she was arrested for the blackmail, and perhaps
in case Braddock refused to help her--as he certainly did, if you
remember.”

“He was hard on her,” confessed Archie slowly.

“Being such a villain himself,” said Random grimly. “However, Cockatoo
arrived unluckily on the scene, and when he found she had parted with
the emerald, and had written out the truth, he stabbed her. If we hadn't
come just in the nick of time, he would have annexed that confession,
and the truth would never have become known. No one,” ended Random,
rising and stretching himself, “would connect Braddock or Cockatoo with
the death of Mrs. Jasher.”

“Or with the death of Sidney Bolton either,” said Hope, also rising and
putting on his cap. “What an actor the man is!”

“Where are you going?” demanded Sir Frank, yawning.

“To the Pyramids. I want to see how Lucy is.”

“Will you tell her about that confession?”

“Not until later. I shall give this to Inspector Date when he arrives.
The Professor has made his bed, so he must lie on it. When I marry Lucy,
I'll take her away from this damned place.”

“Marry her at once, then,” advised Random, “while the Professor is doing
time, and while Cockatoo is being hanged. Meanwhile, I think you had
better put on your overcoat, unless you want to walk through the village
in crumpled evening dress, like a dissipated undergraduate.”

Archie laughed in spite of his weariness, and assumed his greatcoat at
the same moment as Random slipped into his. The two young men walked
out into the village and up to the Pyramids, for Random wished to see
Braddock before returning to the Fort. They found the door of the great
house open and the servants in the hall.

“What is all this?” demanded Hope, entering. “Why are you here, and not
at work? Where is your master?”

“He's run away,” said the cook in a shrill voice. “Lord knows why, sir.”

“Archie! Archie!” Lucy came running out of the museum, pale-faced and
white, “my father has gone away with Cockatoo and the green mummy. What
does it mean? And just when poor Mrs. Jasher is murdered too.”

“Hush, darling! Come in, and I'll explain,” said Hope gently.




CHAPTER XXVI. THE APPOINTMENT


Poor Lucy Kendal was terribly grieved and shocked when the full account
of her step-father's iniquity was revealed to her. Archie tried to break
the news as delicately as possible, but no words could soften the sordid
story. Lucy, at first, could not believe it possible that a man, whom
she had known for so long, and to whom she was related, would behave
in such a base way. To convince her Hope was forced to let her read the
account in Mrs. Jasher's handwriting. When acquainted with the contents,
the poor girl's first desire was to have the matter hushed up, and she
implored her lover with tears to suppress the damning document.

“That is impossible,” said Hope firmly; “and if you think again, my
dear, you will not repeat such a request. It is absolutely necessary
that this should be placed in the hands of the police, and that the
truth should become as widely known as possible. Unless the matter is
settled once and for all, someone else may be accused of this murder.”

“But the disgrace,” wept Lucy, hiding her face on her lover's shoulder.

He slipped his arm round her waist.

“My darling, the disgrace exists whether it be public or private. After
all, the Professor is no relation.”

“No. But everyone knows that I am his step-daughter.”

“Everyone,” echoed Archie, with an assumed lightness. “My dear, everyone
in this instance only means the handful of people who live in this
out-of-the-way village. Your name will not appear in the papers. And
even if by chance it does, you will soon be changing it for mine. I
think the best thing that can be done is for you to come with me to
London next week and marry me. Then we can go to the south of France
for the rest of the winter, until you recover. When we return and set up
house in London--say in a year--the whole affair will be forgotten.”

“But how can you bear to marry me, when you know that I come of such a
bad stock?” wept Lucy, a trifle more comforted.

“My dear, must I remind you again that you are no relation to Professor
Braddock; you have not a drop of his wicked blood in your veins. And
even if you had, I should still marry you. It is you I love, and you I
marry, so there is no more to be said. Come, darling, say that you will
become my wife next week.”

“But the Professor?”

Archie smiled grimly. He found it difficult to forgive Braddock for the
disgrace he had brought on the girl.

“I don't think we'll ever be troubled again with the Professor,” he
said, after a pause. “He has bolted into the unknown with that infernal
Kanaka.”

“But why did he fly, Archie?”

“Because he knew that the game was up. Mrs. Jasher wrote out this
confession, and told Cockatoo, when he entered the room to get the
emerald, that she had written it. To save his master the Kanaka stabbed
the wretched woman, and, had Random and I not arrived, he would have
secured the confession. I really believe he came back again out of the
mist in the small hours of the morning to steal it. But when he found
that all was vain, he returned here and told the Professor that the
story of the murder had been written out. Therefore there was
nothing left to Braddock but to fly. Although,” added Hope, with an
afterthought, “I can't imagine why those two fugitives should drag that
confounded mummy with them.”

“But why should the Professor fly?” asked Lucy again. “According to what
Mrs. Jasher writes, he did not strangle poor Sidney.”

“No. And I will do him the justice to say that he had no idea of having
his assistant murdered. It was Cockatoo's savage blood which came out in
the deed, and maybe it can be explained by the Kanaka's devotion to the
Professor. It was the same way in the murder of Mrs. Jasher. By killing
Bolton, the Kanaka hoped to save the emeralds for Braddock: in stabbing
Mrs. Jasher, he hoped to save the Professor's life.”

“Oh, Archie, will they hang my father?”

Hope winced.

“Call him your step-father,” he said quickly. “No, dear, I do not think
he will be hanged; but as an accessory after the fact he will certainly
be condemned to a long term of imprisonment. Cockatoo, however,
assuredly will be hanged, and a good job too. He is only a savage, and
as such is dangerous in a civilized community. I wonder where they have
gone? Did anyone hear them going?”

“No,” said Lucy unhesitatingly. “Cook came up this morning to my room,
and said that my father--I mean my step-father--had gone away with
Cockatoo and with the green mummy. I don't know why she should have said
that, as the Professor often went away unexpectedly.”

“Perhaps she heard rumors in the village and put two and two together.
I cannot tell. Some instinct must have told her. But I daresay Braddock
and his accomplice fled under cover of the mist and in the small hours
of the morning. They must have known that the confession would bring the
officers of the law to this house.”

“I hope they will escape,” murmured Lucy.

“Well, I am not sure,” said Hope hesitatingly. “Of course, I should like
to avoid a scandal for your sake, and yet it is only right that the two
of them should be punished. Remember, Lucy dear, how Braddock has acted
all along in deceiving us. He knew all, and yet not one of us suspected
him.”

While Archie was thus comforting the poor girl, Gartley village was in
an uproar. Everyone was talking about this new crime, and everyone was
wondering who had stabbed the unlucky woman. As yet the confession of
Mrs. Jasher had not been placed in the hands of the police and everyone
was ignorant that Cockatoo was the criminal who had escaped in the fog.
Inspector Date speedily arrived with his myrmidons on the scene and made
the cottage his headquarters. Later in the day, Hope, having taken a
cold bath to freshen himself up, came with the confession. This he gave
to the officer and explained the whole story of the previous night.

Date was more than astonished: he was astounded. He read the confession
and made notes; then he sent for Sir Frank Random, and examined him
in the same strict way as he had examined the artist. Jane was also
questioned. Widow Anne was put in the witness box, so as to report
about the clothes, and in every way Date gathered material for another
inquest. At the former one he had only been able to place scanty
evidence before the jury, and the verdict had been unsatisfactory to the
public. But on this occasion, seeing that the witnesses he could bring
forward would solve the mystery of the first death as well as the
second, Inspector Date exulted greatly. He saw himself promoted and
his salary raised, and his name praised in the papers as a zealous and
clever officer. By the time the inquest came to be held, the inspector
had talked himself into believing that the whole mystery had been solved
by himself. But before that time came another event happened which
astonished everyone, and which made the final phase of the green mummy
crime even more sensational than it had been. And Heaven knows that from
beginning to end there had been no lack of melodrama of the most lurid
description.

Don Pedro de Gayangos was exceedingly amazed at the unexpected turn
which the case had taken. That he should have been trying to solve a
deep mystery for so long, and that the solution, all the time, had been
in the hands of the Professor, startled him exceedingly. He admitted
that he had never liked Braddock, but explained that he had not expected
to hear that the fiery little scientist was such a scoundrel. But, as
Don Pedro confessed, it was an ill wind which blew him some good, when
the upshot of the whole mysterious tragic business was the restoration
of at least one emerald. Sir Frank brought the gem to him on the
afternoon of the day succeeding Mrs. Jasher's death, and while the whole
village was buzzing with excitement. It was Random who gave all details
to Donna Inez and her father, leading from one revelation to another,
until he capped the whole extraordinary story by producing the splendid
gem.

“Mine! mine!” said Don Pedro, his dark eyes glittering. “Thanks be to
the Virgin and the Saints,” and he bowed his head to make the sign of
the cross devoutly on his breast.

Donna Inez clapped her hands and her eyes flashed, for, like every
woman, she had a profound love for jewels.

“Oh, how lovely, Frank! It must be worth no end of money.”

“Professor Braddock sold the other to some Indian rajah in
Amsterdam--through an agent, I presume for three thousand pounds.”

“I shall get more than that,” said Don Pedro quickly. “The Professor
sold his jewel in a hurry and had no time to bargain. But sooner or
later I shall get five thousand pounds for this.” He held the gem in the
sunlight, where it glowed like an emerald sun. “Why, it is worthy of a
king's crown.”

“I fear you will never get the other gem,” said Random regretfully. “I
believe that it is on its way to India, if Mrs. Jasher can be trusted.”

“Never mind. I shall be content with this one, senor. I have simple
tastes, and this will do much to restore the fortunes of my family. When
I go back with this and the green mummy, all those Indians who know
of my descent from the ancient Incas will be delighted and will pay me
fresh reverence.”

“But you forget,” said Random, frowning, “the green mummy has been taken
away by Professor Braddock.”

“They cannot have gone far with it,” said Donna Inez, shrugging.

“I don't know so much about that, dearest,” said Sir Frank. “Apparently,
since they handled it at the time of the murder, it is easier carried
about than one would think. And then they fled last night, or rather in
the small hours of this morning, under cover of a dense fog.”

“It is clear enough now,” said De Gayangos, peering through the window,
where a pale winter sun shone in a clear steel-hued sky. “They are bound
to be caught in the long run.”

“Do you wish them to be caught?” asked Random abruptly.

“Not the Professor. For Miss Lucy's sake I hope he will escape; but I
trust that the savage who killed these two unfortunate people will be
brought to the gallows.”

“So do I,” said Random. “Well, Don Pedro, it seems to me that your task
in Gartley is ended. All you have to do is to wait for the inquest and
see Mrs. Jasher buried, poor soul! Then you can go to London and remain
there until after Christmas.”

“But why should I remain in London?” asked the Peruvian, surprised.

Random glanced at Donna Inez, who blushed.

“You forget that you have given your consent to my marriage with--”

“Ah, yes,” Don Pedro smiled gravely. “I return with the jewel to Lima,
but I leave my other jewel behind.”

“Never mind,” said the girl, kissing her father; “when Frank and I are
married we will come to Callao in his yacht.”

“Our yacht,” said Random, smiling.

“Our yacht,” repeated Donna Inez. “And then you will see, father, that I
have become a real English lady.”

“But don't entirely forget that you are a Peruvian,” said Don Pedro
playfully.

“And a descendant of Inca Caxas,” added Donna Inez. Then she flirted her
fan, which she was rarely without, and laughed in her English lover's
face. “Don't forget, senor, that you marry a princess.”

“I marry the most charming girl in the world,” he replied, catching her
in his arms, rather to the scandal of De Gayangos, who had stiff Spanish
notions regarding the etiquette of engaged couples.

“There is one thing you must do for me, senor,” he said quietly, “before
we leave this most unhappy case of murder and theft for ever.”

“What is that?” asked Sir Frank, turning with Inez in his arms.

“To-night at eight o'clock, Captain Hervey--the sailor Gustav Vasa, if
you prefer the name--steams down the river in his new boat The Firefly.
I received a note from him”--he displayed a letter--“stating that he
will pass the jetty of Gartley at that hour, and will burn a blue light.
If I fire a pistol, he will send off a boat with a full account of the
theft of the mummy of Inca Caxas, written by himself. Then I will hand
his messenger fifty gold sovereigns, which I have here,” added Don
Pedro, pointing to a canvas bag on the table, “and we will return. I
wish you to go with me, senor, and also I wish your friend Mr. Hope to
come.”

“Do you anticipate treachery from Captain Hervey?” asked Random.

“I should not be surprised if he tried to trick me in some way, and I
wish you and your friend to stand by me. Were this man alone, I would go
alone, but he will have a boat's crew with him. It is best to be safe.”

“I agree with you,” said Random quickly. “Hope and I will come, and we
will take revolvers with us. It doesn't do to trust this blackguard. Ho!
ho! I wonder if he knows of the Professor's flight.”

“No. Considering the terms upon which the Professor stood with Hervey,
I should think he would be the last person he would trust. I wonder what
has become of the man.”

More people than Don Pedro wondered as to the whereabouts of Braddock
and his servant, for everyone was inquiring and hunting. The marshes
round the cottage were explored: the great house itself was searched, as
well as many cottages in the village, and inquiries were made at all the
local stations. But all in vain. Braddock and Cockatoo, along with the
cumbersome mummy in its case, had vanished as completely as though the
earth had swallowed them up. Inspector Date's idea was that the pair had
taken the mummy to Gartley Pier, after the search made by the soldiers,
and there had launched the boat, which Cockatoo--judging from his visit
to Pierside--apparently kept hidden in some nook. It was probable, said
Date, the two had rowed down the river, and had managed to get on board
some outward-bound tramp. They could easily furbish up some story, and
as Braddock doubtless had money, could easily buy a passage for a large
sum. The tramp being outward-bound, her captain and crew would know
nothing of the crime, and even if the fugitives were suspected, they
would be shipped out of England if the bribe was sufficiently large.
So it was apparent that Inspector Date had not much opinion of
tramp-steamer skippers.

However, as the day wore on to night, nothing was heard of Braddock or
Cockatoo or the mummy, and when night came the village was filled
with local reporters and with London journalists asking questions.
The Warrior Inn did a great trade in drink and beds and meals, and the
rustics reaped quite a harvest in answering questions about Mrs. Jasher
and the Professor and the weird-looking Kanaka. Some reporters dared
to invade the Pyramids, where Lucy was weeping in sorrow and shame, but
Archie, reinforced by two policemen, sent to his aid by Date, soon sent
them to the right about. Hope would have liked to remain with Lucy all
the evening, but at half-past seven he was forced to meet Don Pedro and
Random outside the Fort in order to go to Gartley Jetty.




CHAPTER XXVII. BY THE RIVER


As the hunt for the fugitives had continued all day, everyone, police,
villagers and soldiers, were weary and disheartened. Consequently, when
the three men met near the Fort, there seemed to be few people about.
This was just as well, as they would have been followed to the jetty,
and obviously it was best to keep the strange meeting with Captain
Hervey as secret as possible. However, Don Pedro had taken Inspector
Date into his confidence, as it was impossible to get past the cottage
of the late Mrs. Jasher, in which the officer had taken up his quarters,
without being discovered. Date was quite willing that the trio should
go, but stipulated that he should come also. He had heard all about
Captain Hervey in connection with the mummy, and thought that he would
like to ask that sailor a few leading questions.

“And if I see fit I shall detain him until the inquest is over,” said
Date, which was mere bluff, as the inspector had no warrant to stop The
Firefly or arrest her skipper.

The three men therefore were joined by Date, when they came along the
cinder path abreast of the cottage, and the quartette proceeded further
immediately, walking amongst the bents and grasses to the rude old
wooden jetty, near which Hervey intended to stop his ship. The night was
quite clear of fog, strange to say, considering the late sea-mist; but
a strong wind had been blowing all day and the fog-wreaths were entirely
dispersed. A full moon rode amongst a galaxy of stars, which twinkled
like diamonds. The air was frosty, and their feet scrunched the earth
and grasses and coarse herbage under foot, as they made rapidly for the
embankment.

When they reached the top they could see the jetty clearly almost below
their feet, and in the distance the glittering lights of Pierside. Vague
forms of vessels at anchor loomed on the water, and there was a stream
of light where the moon made a pathway of silver. After a casual glance
the three men proceeded down the slope to the jetty. Three of them at
least had revolvers, since Hervey was an ill man to tackle; but probably
Date, who was too dense to consider consequences, was unarmed. Neither
did Don Pedro think it necessary to tell the officer that he and his two
companions were prepared to shoot if necessary. Inspector Date, being a
prosy Englishman, would not have understood such lawless doings in his
own sober, law-abiding country.

When they reached the jetty Don Pedro glanced at his watch, illuminating
the dial by puffing his cigar to a ruddy glow. It was just after eight
o'clock, and even as he looked an exclamation from Date made him raise
his head. The inspector was pointing out-stream to a large vessel which
had steamed inshore as far as was safe. Probably Hervey was watching
for them through a night-glass, for a blue light suddenly flared on the
bridge. Don Pedro, according to his promise, fired a pistol, and it was
then that Date learned that his companions were armed.

“What the devil did you do that for?” he inquired angrily. “It will
bring my constables down on us.”

“I do not mind, since you can control them,” said De Gayangos coolly. “I
had to give the signal.”

“And we all have revolvers,” said Random quickly. “Hervey is not a very
safe man to tackle, inspector.”

“Do you expect a fight?” said Date, while they all watched a boat being
lowered. “If so, you might have told me, and I should have brought a
revolver also. Not that I think it is needed. The sight of my uniform
will be enough to show this man that I have the law behind me.”

“I don't think that will matter to Hervey,” said Archie dryly. “So much
as I have seen of him suggests to me that he is a singularly lawless
man.”

Date laughed good-humoredly.

“It seems to me, gentlemen, that you have brought me on a filibustering
expedition,” he said, and seemed to enjoy the novel situation. Date had
been wrapped up in the cotton-wool of civilization for a long time, but
his primitive instincts rose to the surface, now that he had to face a
probable rough-and-tumble fight. “But I don't expect there will be any
scrap,” he said regretfully. “My uniform will settle the matter.”

It certainly seemed to annoy Captain Hervey considerably, for, as the
boat approached the shore, and the moonlight revealed a distinctly
official overcoat, he gave an order. The man stopped rowing and the boat
rocked gently, some distance from the jetty.

“You've got a high old crowd with you, Don Pedro,” sang out Hervey, in
great displeasure. “Is that angel in the military togs, with the brass
buttons, the almighty aristocrat!”

“No. I am here,” cried out Random, laughing at the description, which
he recognized. “My friend Hope is with me, and Inspector Date. I suppose
you have heard what has happened?”

“Yes, I've taken it all in,” said Hervey sourly. “I guess the news is
all over Pierside. Well, it's none of my picnic, I reckon. So chuck that
gold over here, Don Pedro, and I'll send along the writing.”

“No,” said Don Pedro, prompted by Date. “You must come ashore.”

“I guess not,” said Hervey vigorously. “You want to run me in.”

“For that theft of thirty years ago,” laughed De Gayangos. “Nonsense!
Come along. You are quite safe.”

“Shan't take your damned word for it,” growled Hervey. “But if those two
gents can swear that there's no trickery, I'll come. I can depend on the
word of an English aristocrat, anyhow.”

“Come along. You are quite safe,” said Sir Frank, and Hope echoed his
words.

Thus being made certain, Hervey gave an order and the boat was rowed
right up to the beach, immediately below the jetty. The four men
were about to descend, but Hervey seemed anxious to avoid giving them
trouble.

“Hold on, gents,” said he, leaping ashore. “I'll come up 'longside.”

Date, ever suspicious, thought it queer that the skipper should
behave so politely, as he had gathered that Hervey was not usually a
considerate man. Also, he saw that when the captain was climbing the
bank, the boat, in charge of a mate--as the inspector judged from his
brass-bound uniform--backed water to the end of the jetty, where it
swung against one of the shell-encrusted piles. Hervey finally reached
the jetty level, but refused to come on to the same. He beckoned to Don
Pedro and his companions to walk forward to the ground upon which he
was standing. Also, he seemed exceedingly anxious to take time over the
transaction, as even after he had handed the scroll of writing to
the Peruvian, and had received the gold in exchange, he engaged in
quarrelsome conversation. Pretending that he doubted if De Gayangos had
brought the exact sum, he opened the canvas bag and insisted on counting
the money. Don Pedro naturally lost his temper at this insult, and swore
in Spanish, upon which Hervey responded with such volubility that
anyone could see he was a pastmaster in Castilian swearing. The row
was considerable, especially as Random and Hope were laughing at
the quarrel. They thought that Hervey was the worse for drink, but
Date--clever for once in his life--did not think so. It appeared to him
that the boat had gone to the end of the jetty for some reason connected
with the same reason which induced the skipper to spin out the time of
the meeting by indulging in an unnecessary quarrel.

The skipper also kept his eyes about him, and insisted that the four men
should keep together at the head of the pier.

“I daresay you're trying to play low down on me,” he said with a scowl,
after satisfying himself that the money was correct, “but I've got my
shooter.”

“So have I,” cried Don Pedro indignantly, and slipped his hand round to
his hip pocket, “and if you talk any further so insulting I shall--”

“Oh, you bet, two can play at that game,” cried Hervey, and ripped out
his own weapon before the Spaniard could produce his Derringer. “Hands
up or I shoot.”

But he had reckoned without his host. While covering De Gayangos, he
overlooked the fact that Random and Hope were close at hand. The next
moment, and while Don Pedro flung up his hands, the ruffian was covered
by two revolvers in the hands of two very capable men.

“Great Scott!” cried Hervey, lowering his weapon. “Only my fun, gents.
Here, you get back!”

This was to Inspector Date, who had been keeping his ears and eyes
open, and who was now racing for the end of the jetty. Peering over, he
uttered a loud cry.

“I thought so--I thought so. Here's the nigger and the mummy!”

Hervey uttered a curse, and, plunging past the trio, careless of the
leveled weapons, ran down to the end of the jetty, and, throwing his
arms round Date, leaped with him into the sea. They fell just beside
the boat, as Random saw when he reached the spot. A confused volley of
curses arose, as the boat pushed out from the encrusted pile, the mate
thrusting with a boat-hook. Hervey and Date were in the water, but as
the boat shot into the moonlight, Random--and now Hope and De Gayangos,
who had come up--saw a long green form in amongst the sailors; also,
very plainly, Cockatoo with his great mop of yellow hair.

“Shoot! shoot!” yelled Date, who was struggling with the skipper in the
shallow water near shore. “Don't let them escape.”

Hope ran up the jetty and fired three shots in the air, certain that
the firing would attract the attention of the four or five constables on
guard at the cottage, which was no very great distance away. Random sent
a bullet into the midst of the boatload, and immediately the mate fired
also. The bullet whistled past his head, and, crazy with rage, he felt
inclined to jump in amongst the ruffians and have a hand-to-hand fight.
But De Gayangos stopped him in a voice shrill with anger. Already the
shouts and noise of the approaching policemen could be heard. Cockatoo
gripped the green mummy case desperately, while the sailors tried to row
towards the ship.

Then De Gayangos gave a shout, and leaped, as the boat swung past the
jetty. He landed right on Cockatoo, and although a cloud drifted across
the moon, Random heard the shots coming rapidly from his revolver.
Meanwhile Hervey got away from Date, as the constables came pounding
down the jetty and on to the beach.

“Chuck the mummy and nigger overboard and make for the ship,” he yelled,
swimming with long strokes towards the boat.

This order was quite to the sailors' minds, as they had not reckoned on
such a fight. Half a dozen willing hands clutched both Cockatoo and the
case, and, in spite of the Kanaka's cries, both were hurled overboard.
As the case swung overside, De Gayangos, balancing himself at the end of
the boat, fired at Cockatoo. The shot missed the Kanaka, and pierced the
mummy case. Then from it came a piercing yell of agony and rage.

“Great God!” shouted Hope, who was watching the battle, “I believe
Braddock is in that damned thing.”

The next moment De Gayangos was swung overboard also, and the sailors
were lifting Hervey into the boat. It nearly upset, but he managed to
get in, and the craft rowed for the vessel, which was again showing a
flaring blue light. Random sent a shot after the boat, and then with the
policemen ran down to help De Gayangos, who was struggling in the water.
He managed to pull him out, and when he had him safe and breathless on
shore, he saw that the boat was nearing the ship, and that Date, torn
and wet and disheveled, with three policemen, was up to his waist in
water, struggling to bring ashore Cockatoo and the mummy case, to which
he clung like a limpet. Hope ran down to give a hand, and in a few
minutes they had the Kanaka ashore, fighting like the demon he was.
Random and De Gayangos joined the breathless group, and Cockatoo was
held in the grasp of two strong men--who required all their strength to
hold him--while Date, warned by Hope's cry of what was in the case, tore
at the lid. It was but lightly fastened and soon came off. Then those
present saw in the moonlight the dead face of Professor Braddock, who
had been shot through the heart. As they looked at the sight, Cockatoo
broke from those who held him, and, throwing himself on his master,
howled and wept as though his heart would break. At the same moment
there came a derisive whistle from The Firefly, and they saw the great
tramp steamer slowly moving down stream, increasing her speed with
almost every revolution of the screw. Braddock had been captured, but
Hervey had escaped.

At the inquest on the Professor and on the body of Mrs. Jasher, it was
proved that Cockatoo had warned his master that the game was up, and had
suggested that Braddock should escape by hiding in the mummy case. The
corpse of Inca Caxas was placed in an empty Egyptian sarcophagus--in
which it was afterwards found--and Braddock, assisted by his faithful
Kanaka, wheeled the case down to the old jetty. Here, in a nook where
Cockatoo had formerly kept the boat, the Professor concealed himself all
that night and all next day. Cockatoo, having got rid of his boat long
since (lest it might be used in evidence against him and his master),
ran through the dense mist and the long night up to Pierside, where he
saw Captain Hervey and bribed him with a promise of one thousand pounds
to save his master. Hervey, having assured himself that the money was
safe, since it was banked in a feigned name in Amsterdam, agreed, and
arranged to ship the Professor in the mummy case.

Thus it was that Hervey kept the four men talking up the jetty, as he
knew that Cockatoo with his own sailors was shipping the Professor in
the mummy case underneath, and well out of sight. Cockatoo had come
down stream with The Firefly, and in this way had not been discovered.
Throughout that long day the miserable Braddock had crouched like a toad
in its hole, trembling at every sound of pursuit, as he knew that the
whole of the village was looking for him. But Cockatoo had hidden him
well in the case, in the lid of which holes had been bored. He had
brandy to drink and food to eat, and he knew that he could depend upon
the Kanaka. Had Date not been suspicious, the ruse might have been
successful, but to save himself Hervey had to sacrifice the wretched
Professor, which he did without the slightest hesitation. Then came
the unlucky shot from the revolver of De Gayangos, which had ended
Braddock's wicked life. It was Fate.

At the inquest a verdict of “wilful murder” was brought against the
Kanaka, but a verdict of “justifiable homicide” was given in favor of
the Peruvian. Thus Cockatoo was hanged for the double murder and Don
Pedro went free. He remained long enough in London to see his daughter
married to the man of her choice, and then returned to Lima.

Of course the affair caused more than a nine days' wonder, and the
newspapers were filled with accounts of the murder and the projected
escape. But Lucy was saved from all this publicity, as, in the first
place, her name was kept out of print as much as possible, and, in
the second, Archie promptly married her, and within a fortnight of her
step-father's death took her to the south of France, and afterwards
to Italy. What with his own money and the money she inherited from her
mother--in which Braddock had a life interest--the young couple had
nearly a thousand a year.

Six months later Sir Frank came into the small San Remo where Mr. and
Mrs. Hope lived, with his wife on his arm. Lady Random looked singularly
charming and was assuredly more conversational. This was the first time
the two sets of lovers had met since the tragedy, and now each girl had
married the man she loved. Therefore there was great joy.

“My yacht is over at Monte Carlo,” said Random, “and I am, going with
Inez to South America. She wants to see her father.”

“Yes, I do,” said Lady Random; “and we want you to come also, Lucy--you
and your dear husband.”

Archie and his wife looked at one another, but declined unanimously.

“We would rather stay here in San Remo,” said Mrs. Hope, becoming
slightly pale. “Don't think me unkind, Inez, but I could not bear to
go to Peru. It is associated too much in my own mind with that terrible
green mummy.”

“Oh, Don Pedro has taken that back to the Andes,” explained Sir Frank,
“and it is now reposing in the sepulchre in which it was placed,
hundreds of years ago, by the Indians, faithful to Inca Caxas. Inez and
I are going up to a kind of forbidden city, where Don Pedro reigns as
Inca, and I expect we shall have a jolly time. I hear there is some big
game shooting there.”

“What about your soldiering?” asked Hope, rather, surprised at this
extended tour being arranged.

“Oh, my husband has left the army,” pouted Inez. “His duties kept him
away from me nearly all the day, and I grew weary of being left alone.”

“So you see, Mrs. Hope,” laughed Random gayly, “that I have had to
succumb to my fireside tyrant. We shall go and see this fairy city and
then return to my home in Oxfordshire. There Inez will settle down as
a real English wife and I'll turn a country squire. So, after all our
troubles, peace will come.”

“And as you will not come to my country,” said Lady Random to her
hostess, “you cannot refuse to visit Frank and myself at the Grange.
We have had so much trouble together that we cannot lose sight of each
other.”

“No,” said Lucy, kissing her. “We will come to Oxfordshire.”

So it was arranged, and the next day Mr. and Mrs. Hope went over to
Monte Carlo to see the last of Sir Frank and his wife. They stood on
the heights watching the pretty little steamer making for South America.
Archie noticed that his wife's face was somewhat sad.

“Are you sorry we did not go, sweetheart?”

“No,” she replied, placing her arm within his own. “I only want to be
with you.”

“That is all right.” He patted her hand. “Now that we have sold all the
furniture in the Pyramids, and have got rid of the lease, there will be
nothing to remind you of the green mummy.”

“Yet I can't help thinking of my unfortunate step-father, and of poor
Mrs. Jasher, and of Sidney Bolton. Oh, Archie, little as we can afford
it, I am glad that we allow Mrs. Bolton a small sum a year. After all,
it was through my step-father that her son met with his death.”

“I don't quite agree with you, dear. Cockatoo's innate savagery was the
cause, as Professor Braddock did not intend or desire murder. But there,
dear, do not think any more about these dismal things. Dream of the time
when I shall be the president of the Royal Academy, and you my lady.”

“I am your lady now. But,” added Lucy, perhaps from an association of
ideas of color and the Academy, “I shall hate green for the rest of my
life.”

“That's unlucky, considering it is Nature's color. My dear, in a year or
two this tragedy, or rather the three tragedies, will seem like a dream.
I won't listen to another word now. The green mummy has passed out of
our lives and has taken its bad luck with it.”

“Amen, so be it,” said Lucy Hope, and the happy couple went home,
leaving all their sorrows behind them, while the smoke of the steamer
faded on the horizon.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN MUMMY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mystery of Edwin Drood
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mystery of Edwin Drood

Author: Charles Dickens


        
Release date: June 1, 1996 [eBook #564]
                Most recently updated: March 25, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/564


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF EDWIN DROOD ***




The Mystery of Edwin Drood

by Charles Dickens


Contents

 CHAPTER I. THE DAWN
 CHAPTER II. A DEAN, AND A CHAPTER ALSO
 CHAPTER III. THE NUNS’ HOUSE
 CHAPTER IV. MR. SAPSEA
 CHAPTER V. MR. DURDLES AND FRIEND
 CHAPTER VI. PHILANTHROPY IN MINOR CANON CORNER
 CHAPTER VII. MORE CONFIDENCES THAN ONE
 CHAPTER VIII. DAGGERS DRAWN
 CHAPTER IX. BIRDS IN THE BUSH
 CHAPTER X. SMOOTHING THE WAY
 CHAPTER XI. A PICTURE AND A RING
 CHAPTER XII. A NIGHT WITH DURDLES
 CHAPTER XIII. BOTH AT THEIR BEST
 CHAPTER XIV. WHEN SHALL THESE THREE MEET AGAIN?
 CHAPTER XV. IMPEACHED
 CHAPTER XVI. DEVOTED
 CHAPTER XVII. PHILANTHROPY, PROFESSIONAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL
 CHAPTER XVIII. A SETTLER IN CLOISTERHAM
 CHAPTER XIX. SHADOW ON THE SUN-DIAL
 CHAPTER XX. A FLIGHT
 CHAPTER XXI. A RECOGNITION
 CHAPTER XXII. A GRITTY STATE OF THINGS COMES ON
 CHAPTER XXIII. THE DAWN AGAIN




THE MYSTERY OF EDWIN DROOD

[Illustration: Rochester castle]




CHAPTER I.
THE DAWN


An ancient English Cathedral Tower? How can the ancient English
Cathedral tower be here! The well-known massive gray square tower of
its old Cathedral? How can that be here! There is no spike of rusty
iron in the air, between the eye and it, from any point of the real
prospect. What is the spike that intervenes, and who has set it up?
Maybe it is set up by the Sultan’s orders for the impaling of a horde
of Turkish robbers, one by one. It is so, for cymbals clash, and the
Sultan goes by to his palace in long procession. Ten thousand scimitars
flash in the sunlight, and thrice ten thousand dancing-girls strew
flowers. Then, follow white elephants caparisoned in countless gorgeous
colours, and infinite in number and attendants. Still the Cathedral
Tower rises in the background, where it cannot be, and still no
writhing figure is on the grim spike. Stay! Is the spike so low a thing
as the rusty spike on the top of a post of an old bedstead that has
tumbled all awry? Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be devoted
to the consideration of this possibility.

Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness has
thus fantastically pieced itself together, at length rises, supports
his trembling frame upon his arms, and looks around. He is in the
meanest and closest of small rooms. Through the ragged window-curtain,
the light of early day steals in from a miserable court. He lies,
dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a bedstead that has indeed
given way under the weight upon it. Lying, also dressed and also across
the bed, not longwise, are a Chinaman, a Lascar, and a haggard woman.
The two first are in a sleep or stupor; the last is blowing at a kind
of pipe, to kindle it. And as she blows, and shading it with her lean
hand, concentrates its red spark of light, it serves in the dim morning
as a lamp to show him what he sees of her.

“Another?” says this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper. “Have
another?”

He looks about him, with his hand to his forehead.

“Ye’ve smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight,” the woman
goes on, as she chronically complains. “Poor me, poor me, my head is so
bad. Them two come in after ye. Ah, poor me, the business is slack, is
slack! Few Chinamen about the Docks, and fewer Lascars, and no ships
coming in, these say! Here’s another ready for ye, deary. Ye’ll
remember like a good soul, won’t ye, that the market price is dreffle
high just now? More nor three shillings and sixpence for a thimbleful!
And ye’ll remember that nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t’other side
the court; but he can’t do it as well as me) has the true secret of
mixing it? Ye’ll pay up accordingly, deary, won’t ye?”

She blows at the pipe as she speaks, and, occasionally bubbling at it,
inhales much of its contents.

“O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad! It’s nearly ready for
ye, deary. Ah, poor me, poor me, my poor hand shakes like to drop off!
I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, ‘I’ll have another ready
for him, and he’ll bear in mind the market price of opium, and pay
according.’ O my poor head! I makes my pipes of old penny ink-bottles,
ye see, deary—this is one—and I fits-in a mouthpiece, this way, and I
takes my mixter out of this thimble with this little horn spoon; and so
I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves! I got Heavens-hard drunk for
sixteen year afore I took to this; but this don’t hurt me, not to speak
of. And it takes away the hunger as well as wittles, deary.”

She hands him the nearly-emptied pipe, and sinks back, turning over on
her face.

He rises unsteadily from the bed, lays the pipe upon the hearth-stone,
draws back the ragged curtain, and looks with repugnance at his three
companions. He notices that the woman has opium-smoked herself into a
strange likeness of the Chinaman. His form of cheek, eye, and temple,
and his colour, are repeated in her. Said Chinaman convulsively
wrestles with one of his many Gods or Devils, perhaps, and snarls
horribly. The Lascar laughs and dribbles at the mouth. The hostess is
still.

[Illustration: In the Court]


“What visions can _she_ have?” the waking man muses, as he turns her
face towards him, and stands looking down at it. “Visions of many
butchers’ shops, and public-houses, and much credit? Of an increase of
hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set upright again, and
this horrible court swept clean? What can she rise to, under any
quantity of opium, higher than that!—Eh?”

He bends down his ear, to listen to her mutterings.

“Unintelligible!”

As he watches the spasmodic shoots and darts that break out of her face
and limbs, like fitful lightning out of a dark sky, some contagion in
them seizes upon him: insomuch that he has to withdraw himself to a
lean arm-chair by the hearth—placed there, perhaps, for such
emergencies—and to sit in it, holding tight, until he has got the
better of this unclean spirit of imitation.

Then he comes back, pounces on the Chinaman, and seizing him with both
hands by the throat, turns him violently on the bed. The Chinaman
clutches the aggressive hands, resists, gasps, and protests.

“What do you say?”

A watchful pause.

“Unintelligible!”

Slowly loosening his grasp as he listens to the incoherent jargon with
an attentive frown, he turns to the Lascar and fairly drags him forth
upon the floor. As he falls, the Lascar starts into a half-risen
attitude, glares with his eyes, lashes about him fiercely with his
arms, and draws a phantom knife. It then becomes apparent that the
woman has taken possession of this knife, for safety’s sake; for, she
too starting up, and restraining and expostulating with him, the knife
is visible in her dress, not in his, when they drowsily drop back, side
by side.

There has been chattering and clattering enough between them, but to no
purpose. When any distinct word has been flung into the air, it has had
no sense or sequence. Wherefore “unintelligible!” is again the comment
of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding of his head, and a
gloomy smile. He then lays certain silver money on the table, finds his
hat, gropes his way down the broken stairs, gives a good morning to
some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a black hutch beneath the stairs,
and passes out.

That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old Cathedral
rises before the sight of a jaded traveller. The bells are going for
daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, one would say, from
his haste to reach the open Cathedral door. The choir are getting on
their sullied white robes, in a hurry, when he arrives among them, gets
on his own robe, and falls into the procession filing in to service.
Then, the Sacristan locks the iron-barred gates that divide the
sanctuary from the chancel, and all of the procession having scuttled
into their places, hide their faces; and then the intoned words, “WHEN
THE WICKED MAN—” rise among groins of arches and beams of roof,
awakening muttered thunder.




CHAPTER II.
A DEAN, AND A CHAPTER ALSO


Whosoever has observed that sedate and clerical bird, the rook, may
perhaps have noticed that when he wings his way homeward towards
nightfall, in a sedate and clerical company, two rooks will suddenly
detach themselves from the rest, will retrace their flight for some
distance, and will there poise and linger; conveying to mere men the
fancy that it is of some occult importance to the body politic, that
this artful couple should pretend to have renounced connection with it.

Similarly, service being over in the old Cathedral with the square
tower, and the choir scuffling out again, and divers venerable persons
of rook-like aspect dispersing, two of these latter retrace their
steps, and walk together in the echoing Close.

Not only is the day waning, but the year. The low sun is fiery and yet
cold behind the monastery ruin, and the Virginia creeper on the
Cathedral wall has showered half its deep-red leaves down on the
pavement. There has been rain this afternoon, and a wintry shudder goes
among the little pools on the cracked, uneven flag-stones, and through
the giant elm-trees as they shed a gust of tears. Their fallen leaves
lie strewn thickly about. Some of these leaves, in a timid rush, seek
sanctuary within the low arched Cathedral door; but two men coming out
resist them, and cast them forth again with their feet; this done, one
of the two locks the door with a goodly key, and the other flits away
with a folio music-book.

“Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?”

“Yes, Mr. Dean.”

“He has stayed late.”

“Yes, Mr. Dean. I have stayed for him, your Reverence. He has been took
a little poorly.”

“Say ‘taken,’ Tope—to the Dean,” the younger rook interposes in a low
tone with this touch of correction, as who should say: “You may offer
bad grammar to the laity, or the humbler clergy, not to the Dean.”

Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, and accustomed to be high with
excursion parties, declines with a silent loftiness to perceive that
any suggestion has been tendered to him.

“And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken—for, as Mr. Crisparkle has
remarked, it is better to say taken—taken—” repeats the Dean; “when and
how has Mr. Jasper been Taken—”

“Taken, sir,” Tope deferentially murmurs.

“—Poorly, Tope?”

“Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed—”

“I wouldn’t say ‘That breathed,’ Tope,” Mr. Crisparkle interposes with
the same touch as before. “Not English—to the Dean.”

“Breathed to that extent,” the Dean (not unflattered by this indirect
homage) condescendingly remarks, “would be preferable.”

“Mr. Jasper’s breathing was so remarkably short”—thus discreetly does
Mr. Tope work his way round the sunken rock—“when he came in, that it
distressed him mightily to get his notes out: which was perhaps the
cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a little. His memory
grew DAZED.” Mr. Tope, with his eyes on the Reverend Mr. Crisparkle,
shoots this word out, as defying him to improve upon it: “and a dimness
and giddiness crept over him as strange as ever I saw: though he didn’t
seem to mind it particularly, himself. However, a little time and a
little water brought him out of his DAZE.” Mr. Tope repeats the word
and its emphasis, with the air of saying: “As I _have_ made a success,
I’ll make it again.”

“And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?” asked the Dean.

“Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself. And I’m glad to see
he’s having his fire kindled up, for it’s chilly after the wet, and the
Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this afternoon, and he
was very shivery.”

They all three look towards an old stone gatehouse crossing the Close,
with an arched thoroughfare passing beneath it. Through its latticed
window, a fire shines out upon the fast-darkening scene, involving in
shadow the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering the building’s
front. As the deep Cathedral-bell strikes the hour, a ripple of wind
goes through these at their distance, like a ripple of the solemn sound
that hums through tomb and tower, broken niche and defaced statue, in
the pile close at hand.

“Is Mr. Jasper’s nephew with him?” the Dean asks.

“No, sir,” replied the Verger, “but expected. There’s his own solitary
shadow betwixt his two windows—the one looking this way, and the one
looking down into the High Street—drawing his own curtains now.”

“Well, well,” says the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up the
little conference, “I hope Mr. Jasper’s heart may not be too much set
upon his nephew. Our affections, however laudable, in this transitory
world, should never master us; we should guide them, guide them. I find
I am not disagreeably reminded of my dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell.
Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you will, before going home, look in on
Jasper?”

“Certainly, Mr. Dean. And tell him that you had the kindness to desire
to know how he was?”

“Ay; do so, do so. Certainly. Wished to know how he was. By all means.
Wished to know how he was.”

With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocks his quaint
hat as a Dean in good spirits may, and directs his comely gaiters
towards the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick house where he
is at present, “in residence” with Mrs. Dean and Miss Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually pitching
himself head-foremost into all the deep running water in the
surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser, musical,
classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, contented, and
boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon and good man, lately “Coach” upon
the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted by a patron (grateful
for a well-taught son) to his present Christian beat; betakes himself
to the gatehouse, on his way home to his early tea.

“Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper.”

“O, it was nothing, nothing!”

“You look a little worn.”

“Do I? O, I don’t think so. What is better, I don’t feel so. Tope has
made too much of it, I suspect. It’s his trade to make the most of
everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know.”

“I may tell the Dean—I call expressly from the Dean—that you are all
right again?”

The reply, with a slight smile, is: “Certainly; with my respects and
thanks to the Dean.”

“I’m glad to hear that you expect young Drood.”

“I expect the dear fellow every moment.”

“Ah! He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper.”

“More good than a dozen doctors. For I love him dearly, and I don’t
love doctors, or doctors’ stuff.”

Mr. Jasper is a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, lustrous,
well-arranged black hair and whiskers. He looks older than he is, as
dark men often do. His voice is deep and good, his face and figure are
good, his manner is a little sombre. His room is a little sombre, and
may have had its influence in forming his manner. It is mostly in
shadow. Even when the sun shines brilliantly, it seldom touches the
grand piano in the recess, or the folio music-books on the stand, or
the book-shelves on the wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming
schoolgirl hanging over the chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied
with a blue riband, and her beauty remarkable for a quite childish,
almost babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of
itself. (There is not the least artistic merit in this picture, which
is a mere daub; but it is clear that the painter has made it
humorously—one might almost say, revengefully—like the original.)

“We shall miss you, Jasper, at the ‘Alternate Musical Wednesdays’
to-night; but no doubt you are best at home. Good-night. God bless you!
‘Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, have you seen (have you
seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Flo-o-ora-a pass this way!’”
Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend Septimus Crisparkle thus
delivers himself, in musical rhythm, as he withdraws his amiable face
from the doorway and conveys it down-stairs.

Sounds of recognition and greeting pass between the Reverend Septimus
and somebody else, at the stair-foot. Mr. Jasper listens, starts from
his chair, and catches a young fellow in his arms, exclaiming:

“My dear Edwin!”

“My dear Jack! So glad to see you!”

“Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own
corner. Your feet are not wet? Pull your boots off. Do pull your boots
off.”

“My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone. Don’t moddley-coddley, there’s a
good fellow. I like anything better than being moddley-coddleyed.”

With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a
genial outburst of enthusiasm, Mr. Jasper stands still, and looks on
intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward coat,
hat, gloves, and so forth. Once for all, a look of intentness and
intensity—a look of hungry, exacting, watchful, and yet devoted
affection—is always, now and ever afterwards, on the Jasper face
whenever the Jasper face is addressed in this direction. And whenever
it is so addressed, it is never, on this occasion or on any other,
dividedly addressed; it is always concentrated.

“Now I am right, and now I’ll take my corner, Jack. Any dinner, Jack?”

Mr. Jasper opens a door at the upper end of the room, and discloses a
small inner room pleasantly lighted and prepared, wherein a comely dame
is in the act of setting dishes on table.

“What a jolly old Jack it is!” cries the young fellow, with a clap of
his hands. “Look here, Jack; tell me; whose birthday is it?”

“Not yours, I know,” Mr. Jasper answers, pausing to consider.

“Not mine, you know? No; not mine, _I_ know! Pussy’s!”

Fixed as the look the young fellow meets is, there is yet in it some
strange power of suddenly including the sketch over the chimneypiece.

“Pussy’s, Jack! We must drink Many happy returns to her. Come, uncle;
take your dutiful and sharp-set nephew in to dinner.”

As the boy (for he is little more) lays a hand on Jasper’s shoulder,
Jasper cordially and gaily lays a hand on _his_ shoulder, and so
Marseillaise-wise they go in to dinner.

“And, Lord! here’s Mrs. Tope!” cries the boy. “Lovelier than ever!”

“Never you mind me, Master Edwin,” retorts the Verger’s wife; “I can
take care of myself.”

“You can’t. You’re much too handsome. Give me a kiss because it’s
Pussy’s birthday.”

“I’d Pussy you, young man, if I was Pussy, as you call her,” Mrs. Tope
blushingly retorts, after being saluted. “Your uncle’s too much wrapt
up in you, that’s where it is. He makes so much of you, that it’s my
opinion you think you’ve only to call your Pussys by the dozen, to make
’em come.”

“You forget, Mrs. Tope,” Mr. Jasper interposes, taking his place at the
table with a genial smile, “and so do you, Ned, that Uncle and Nephew
are words prohibited here by common consent and express agreement. For
what we are going to receive His holy name be praised!”

“Done like the Dean! Witness, Edwin Drood! Please to carve, Jack, for I
can’t.”

This sally ushers in the dinner. Little to the present purpose, or to
any purpose, is said, while it is in course of being disposed of. At
length the cloth is drawn, and a dish of walnuts and a decanter of
rich-coloured sherry are placed upon the table.

“I say! Tell me, Jack,” the young fellow then flows on: “do you really
and truly feel as if the mention of our relationship divided us at all?
_I_ don’t.”

“Uncles as a rule, Ned, are so much older than their nephews,” is the
reply, “that I have that feeling instinctively.”

“As a rule! Ah, may-be! But what is a difference in age of half-a-dozen
years or so? And some uncles, in large families, are even younger than
their nephews. By George, I wish it was the case with us!”

“Why?”

“Because if it was, I’d take the lead with you, Jack, and be as wise as
Begone, dull Care! that turned a young man gray, and Begone, dull Care!
that turned an old man to clay.—Halloa, Jack! Don’t drink.”

“Why not?”

“Asks why not, on Pussy’s birthday, and no Happy returns proposed!
Pussy, Jack, and many of ’em! Happy returns, I mean.”

Laying an affectionate and laughing touch on the boy’s extended hand,
as if it were at once his giddy head and his light heart, Mr. Jasper
drinks the toast in silence.

“Hip, hip, hip, and nine times nine, and one to finish with, and all
that, understood. Hooray, hooray, hooray!—And now, Jack, let’s have a
little talk about Pussy. Two pairs of nut-crackers? Pass me one, and
take the other.” Crack. “How’s Pussy getting on Jack?”

“With her music? Fairly.”

“What a dreadfully conscientious fellow you are, Jack! But _I_ know,
Lord bless you! Inattentive, isn’t she?”

“She can learn anything, if she will.”

“_If_ she will! Egad, that’s it. But if she won’t?”

Crack!—on Mr. Jasper’s part.

“How’s she looking, Jack?”

Mr. Jasper’s concentrated face again includes the portrait as he
returns: “Very like your sketch indeed.”

“I _am_ a little proud of it,” says the young fellow, glancing up at
the sketch with complacency, and then shutting one eye, and taking a
corrected prospect of it over a level bridge of nut-crackers in the
air: “Not badly hit off from memory. But I ought to have caught that
expression pretty well, for I have seen it often enough.”

Crack!—on Edwin Drood’s part.

Crack!—on Mr. Jasper’s part.

“In point of fact,” the former resumes, after some silent dipping among
his fragments of walnut with an air of pique, “I see it whenever I go
to see Pussy. If I don’t find it on her face, I leave it there.—You
know I do, Miss Scornful Pert. Booh!” With a twirl of the nut-crackers
at the portrait.

Crack! crack! crack. Slowly, on Mr. Jasper’s part.

Crack. Sharply on the part of Edwin Drood.

Silence on both sides.

“Have you lost your tongue, Jack?”

“Have you found yours, Ned?”

“No, but really;—isn’t it, you know, after all—”

Mr. Jasper lifts his dark eyebrows inquiringly.

“Isn’t it unsatisfactory to be cut off from choice in such a matter?
There, Jack! I tell you! If I could choose, I would choose Pussy from
all the pretty girls in the world.”

“But you have not got to choose.”

“That’s what I complain of. My dead and gone father and Pussy’s dead
and gone father must needs marry us together by anticipation. Why
the—Devil, I was going to say, if it had been respectful to their
memory—couldn’t they leave us alone?”

“Tut, tut, dear boy,” Mr. Jasper remonstrates, in a tone of gentle
deprecation.

“Tut, tut? Yes, Jack, it’s all very well for _you_. _You_ can take it
easily. _Your_ life is not laid down to scale, and lined and dotted out
for you, like a surveyor’s plan. _You_ have no uncomfortable suspicion
that you are forced upon anybody, nor has anybody an uncomfortable
suspicion that she is forced upon you, or that you are forced upon her.
_You_ can choose for yourself. Life, for _you_, is a plum with the
natural bloom on; it hasn’t been over-carefully wiped off for _you_—”

“Don’t stop, dear fellow. Go on.”

“Can I anyhow have hurt your feelings, Jack?”

“How can you have hurt my feelings?”

“Good Heaven, Jack, you look frightfully ill! There’s a strange film
come over your eyes.”

Mr. Jasper, with a forced smile, stretches out his right hand, as if at
once to disarm apprehension and gain time to get better. After a while
he says faintly:

“I have been taking opium for a pain—an agony—that sometimes overcomes
me. The effects of the medicine steal over me like a blight or a cloud,
and pass. You see them in the act of passing; they will be gone
directly. Look away from me. They will go all the sooner.”

With a scared face the younger man complies by casting his eyes
downward at the ashes on the hearth. Not relaxing his own gaze on the
fire, but rather strengthening it with a fierce, firm grip upon his
elbow-chair, the elder sits for a few moments rigid, and then, with
thick drops standing on his forehead, and a sharp catch of his breath,
becomes as he was before. On his so subsiding in his chair, his nephew
gently and assiduously tends him while he quite recovers. When Jasper
is restored, he lays a tender hand upon his nephew’s shoulder, and, in
a tone of voice less troubled than the purport of his words—indeed with
something of raillery or banter in it—thus addresses him:

“There is said to be a hidden skeleton in every house; but you thought
there was none in mine, dear Ned.”

“Upon my life, Jack, I did think so. However, when I come to consider
that even in Pussy’s house—if she had one—and in mine—if I had one—”

“You were going to say (but that I interrupted you in spite of myself)
what a quiet life mine is. No whirl and uproar around me, no
distracting commerce or calculation, no risk, no change of place,
myself devoted to the art I pursue, my business my pleasure.”

“I really was going to say something of the kind, Jack; but you see,
you, speaking of yourself, almost necessarily leave out much that I
should have put in. For instance: I should have put in the foreground
your being so much respected as Lay Precentor, or Lay Clerk, or
whatever you call it, of this Cathedral; your enjoying the reputation
of having done such wonders with the choir; your choosing your society,
and holding such an independent position in this queer old place; your
gift of teaching (why, even Pussy, who don’t like being taught, says
there never was such a Master as you are!), and your connexion.”

“Yes; I saw what you were tending to. I hate it.”

“Hate it, Jack?” (Much bewildered.)

“I hate it. The cramped monotony of my existence grinds me away by the
grain. How does our service sound to you?”

“Beautiful! Quite celestial!”

“It often sounds to me quite devilish. I am so weary of it. The echoes
of my own voice among the arches seem to mock me with my daily drudging
round. No wretched monk who droned his life away in that gloomy place,
before me, can have been more tired of it than I am. He could take for
relief (and did take) to carving demons out of the stalls and seats and
desks. What shall I do? Must I take to carving them out of my heart?”

“I thought you had so exactly found your niche in life, Jack,” Edwin
Drood returns, astonished, bending forward in his chair to lay a
sympathetic hand on Jasper’s knee, and looking at him with an anxious
face.

“I know you thought so. They all think so.”

“Well, I suppose they do,” says Edwin, meditating aloud. “Pussy thinks
so.”

“When did she tell you that?”

“The last time I was here. You remember when. Three months ago.”

“How did she phrase it?”

“O, she only said that she had become your pupil, and that you were
made for your vocation.”

The younger man glances at the portrait. The elder sees it in him.

“Anyhow, my dear Ned,” Jasper resumes, as he shakes his head with a
grave cheerfulness, “I must subdue myself to my vocation: which is much
the same thing outwardly. It’s too late to find another now. This is a
confidence between us.”

“It shall be sacredly preserved, Jack.”

“I have reposed it in you, because—”

“I feel it, I assure you. Because we are fast friends, and because you
love and trust me, as I love and trust you. Both hands, Jack.”

As each stands looking into the other’s eyes, and as the uncle holds
the nephew’s hands, the uncle thus proceeds:

“You know now, don’t you, that even a poor monotonous chorister and
grinder of music—in his niche—may be troubled with some stray sort of
ambition, aspiration, restlessness, dissatisfaction, what shall we call
it?”

“Yes, dear Jack.”

“And you will remember?”

“My dear Jack, I only ask you, am I likely to forget what you have said
with so much feeling?”

“Take it as a warning, then.”

In the act of having his hands released, and of moving a step back,
Edwin pauses for an instant to consider the application of these last
words. The instant over, he says, sensibly touched:

“I am afraid I am but a shallow, surface kind of fellow, Jack, and that
my headpiece is none of the best. But I needn’t say I am young; and
perhaps I shall not grow worse as I grow older. At all events, I hope I
have something impressible within me, which feels—deeply feels—the
disinterestedness of your painfully laying your inner self bare, as a
warning to me.”

Mr. Jasper’s steadiness of face and figure becomes so marvellous that
his breathing seems to have stopped.

“I couldn’t fail to notice, Jack, that it cost you a great effort, and
that you were very much moved, and very unlike your usual self. Of
course I knew that you were extremely fond of me, but I really was not
prepared for your, as I may say, sacrificing yourself to me in that
way.”

Mr. Jasper, becoming a breathing man again without the smallest stage
of transition between the two extreme states, lifts his shoulders,
laughs, and waves his right arm.

“No; don’t put the sentiment away, Jack; please don’t; for I am very
much in earnest. I have no doubt that that unhealthy state of mind
which you have so powerfully described is attended with some real
suffering, and is hard to bear. But let me reassure you, Jack, as to
the chances of its overcoming me. I don’t think I am in the way of it.
In some few months less than another year, you know, I shall carry
Pussy off from school as Mrs. Edwin Drood. I shall then go engineering
into the East, and Pussy with me. And although we have our little tiffs
now, arising out of a certain unavoidable flatness that attends our
love-making, owing to its end being all settled beforehand, still I
have no doubt of our getting on capitally then, when it’s done and
can’t be helped. In short, Jack, to go back to the old song I was
freely quoting at dinner (and who knows old songs better than you?), my
wife shall dance, and I will sing, so merrily pass the day. Of Pussy’s
being beautiful there cannot be a doubt;—and when you are good besides,
Little Miss Impudence,” once more apostrophising the portrait, “I’ll
burn your comic likeness, and paint your music-master another.”

Mr. Jasper, with his hand to his chin, and with an expression of musing
benevolence on his face, has attentively watched every animated look
and gesture attending the delivery of these words. He remains in that
attitude after they are spoken, as if in a kind of fascination
attendant on his strong interest in the youthful spirit that he loves
so well. Then he says with a quiet smile:

“You won’t be warned, then?”

“No, Jack.”

“You can’t be warned, then?”

“No, Jack, not by you. Besides that I don’t really consider myself in
danger, I don’t like your putting yourself in that position.”

“Shall we go and walk in the churchyard?”

“By all means. You won’t mind my slipping out of it for half a moment
to the Nuns’ House, and leaving a parcel there? Only gloves for Pussy;
as many pairs of gloves as she is years old to-day. Rather poetical,
Jack?”

Mr. Jasper, still in the same attitude, murmurs: “‘Nothing half so
sweet in life,’ Ned!”

“Here’s the parcel in my greatcoat-pocket. They must be presented
to-night, or the poetry is gone. It’s against regulations for me to
call at night, but not to leave a packet. I am ready, Jack!”

Mr. Jasper dissolves his attitude, and they go out together.




CHAPTER III.
THE NUNS’ HOUSE


For sufficient reasons, which this narrative will itself unfold as it
advances, a fictitious name must be bestowed upon the old Cathedral
town. Let it stand in these pages as Cloisterham. It was once possibly
known to the Druids by another name, and certainly to the Romans by
another, and to the Saxons by another, and to the Normans by another;
and a name more or less in the course of many centuries can be of
little moment to its dusty chronicles.

An ancient city, Cloisterham, and no meet dwelling-place for any one
with hankerings after the noisy world. A monotonous, silent city,
deriving an earthy flavour throughout from its Cathedral crypt, and so
abounding in vestiges of monastic graves, that the Cloisterham children
grow small salad in the dust of abbots and abbesses, and make dirt-pies
of nuns and friars; while every ploughman in its outlying fields
renders to once puissant Lord Treasurers, Archbishops, Bishops, and
such-like, the attention which the Ogre in the story-book desired to
render to his unbidden visitor, and grinds their bones to make his
bread.

A drowsy city, Cloisterham, whose inhabitants seem to suppose, with an
inconsistency more strange than rare, that all its changes lie behind
it, and that there are no more to come. A queer moral to derive from
antiquity, yet older than any traceable antiquity. So silent are the
streets of Cloisterham (though prone to echo on the smallest
provocation), that of a summer-day the sunblinds of its shops scarce
dare to flap in the south wind; while the sun-browned tramps, who pass
along and stare, quicken their limp a little, that they may the sooner
get beyond the confines of its oppressive respectability. This is a
feat not difficult of achievement, seeing that the streets of
Cloisterham city are little more than one narrow street by which you
get into it and get out of it: the rest being mostly disappointing
yards with pumps in them and no thoroughfare—exception made of the
Cathedral-close, and a paved Quaker settlement, in colour and general
confirmation very like a Quakeress’s bonnet, up in a shady corner.

In a word, a city of another and a bygone time is Cloisterham, with its
hoarse Cathedral-bell, its hoarse rooks hovering about the Cathedral
tower, its hoarser and less distinct rooks in the stalls far beneath.
Fragments of old wall, saint’s chapel, chapter-house, convent and
monastery, have got incongruously or obstructively built into many of
its houses and gardens, much as kindred jumbled notions have become
incorporated into many of its citizens’ minds. All things in it are of
the past. Even its single pawnbroker takes in no pledges, nor has he
for a long time, but offers vainly an unredeemed stock for sale, of
which the costlier articles are dim and pale old watches apparently in
a slow perspiration, tarnished sugar-tongs with ineffectual legs, and
odd volumes of dismal books. The most abundant and the most agreeable
evidences of progressing life in Cloisterham are the evidences of
vegetable life in many gardens; even its drooping and despondent little
theatre has its poor strip of garden, receiving the foul fiend, when he
ducks from its stage into the infernal regions, among scarlet-beans or
oyster-shells, according to the season of the year.

In the midst of Cloisterham stands the Nuns’ House: a venerable brick
edifice, whose present appellation is doubtless derived from the legend
of its conventual uses. On the trim gate enclosing its old courtyard is
a resplendent brass plate flashing forth the legend: “Seminary for
Young Ladies. Miss Twinkleton.” The house-front is so old and worn, and
the brass plate is so shining and staring, that the general result has
reminded imaginative strangers of a battered old beau with a large
modern eye-glass stuck in his blind eye.

Whether the nuns of yore, being of a submissive rather than a
stiff-necked generation, habitually bent their contemplative heads to
avoid collision with the beams in the low ceilings of the many chambers
of their House; whether they sat in its long low windows telling their
beads for their mortification, instead of making necklaces of them for
their adornment; whether they were ever walled up alive in odd angles
and jutting gables of the building for having some ineradicable leaven
of busy mother Nature in them which has kept the fermenting world alive
ever since; these may be matters of interest to its haunting ghosts (if
any), but constitute no item in Miss Twinkleton’s half-yearly accounts.
They are neither of Miss Twinkleton’s inclusive regulars, nor of her
extras. The lady who undertakes the poetical department of the
establishment at so much (or so little) a quarter has no pieces in her
list of recitals bearing on such unprofitable questions.

As, in some cases of drunkenness, and in others of animal magnetism,
there are two states of consciousness which never clash, but each of
which pursues its separate course as though it were continuous instead
of broken (thus, if I hide my watch when I am drunk, I must be drunk
again before I can remember where), so Miss Twinkleton has two distinct
and separate phases of being. Every night, the moment the young ladies
have retired to rest, does Miss Twinkleton smarten up her curls a
little, brighten up her eyes a little, and become a sprightlier Miss
Twinkleton than the young ladies have ever seen. Every night, at the
same hour, does Miss Twinkleton resume the topics of the previous
night, comprehending the tenderer scandal of Cloisterham, of which she
has no knowledge whatever by day, and references to a certain season at
Tunbridge Wells (airily called by Miss Twinkleton in this state of her
existence “The Wells”), notably the season wherein a certain finished
gentleman (compassionately called by Miss Twinkleton, in this stage of
her existence, “Foolish Mr. Porters”) revealed a homage of the heart,
whereof Miss Twinkleton, in her scholastic state of existence, is as
ignorant as a granite pillar. Miss Twinkleton’s companion in both
states of existence, and equally adaptable to either, is one Mrs.
Tisher: a deferential widow with a weak back, a chronic sigh, and a
suppressed voice, who looks after the young ladies’ wardrobes, and
leads them to infer that she has seen better days. Perhaps this is the
reason why it is an article of faith with the servants, handed down
from race to race, that the departed Tisher was a hairdresser.

The pet pupil of the Nuns’ House is Miss Rosa Bud, of course called
Rosebud; wonderfully pretty, wonderfully childish, wonderfully
whimsical. An awkward interest (awkward because romantic) attaches to
Miss Bud in the minds of the young ladies, on account of its being
known to them that a husband has been chosen for her by will and
bequest, and that her guardian is bound down to bestow her on that
husband when he comes of age. Miss Twinkleton, in her seminarial state
of existence, has combated the romantic aspect of this destiny by
affecting to shake her head over it behind Miss Bud’s dimpled
shoulders, and to brood on the unhappy lot of that doomed little
victim. But with no better effect—possibly some unfelt touch of foolish
Mr. Porters has undermined the endeavour—than to evoke from the young
ladies an unanimous bedchamber cry of “O, what a pretending old thing
Miss Twinkleton is, my dear!”

The Nuns’ House is never in such a state of flutter as when this
allotted husband calls to see little Rosebud. (It is unanimously
understood by the young ladies that he is lawfully entitled to this
privilege, and that if Miss Twinkleton disputed it, she would be
instantly taken up and transported.) When his ring at the gate-bell is
expected, or takes place, every young lady who can, under any pretence,
look out of window, looks out of window; while every young lady who is
“practising,” practises out of time; and the French class becomes so
demoralised that the mark goes round as briskly as the bottle at a
convivial party in the last century.

On the afternoon of the day next after the dinner of two at the
gatehouse, the bell is rung with the usual fluttering results.

“Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa.”

This is the announcement of the parlour-maid in chief. Miss Twinkleton,
with an exemplary air of melancholy on her, turns to the sacrifice, and
says, “You may go down, my dear.” Miss Bud goes down, followed by all
eyes.

Mr. Edwin Drood is waiting in Miss Twinkleton’s own parlour: a dainty
room, with nothing more directly scholastic in it than a terrestrial
and a celestial globe. These expressive machines imply (to parents and
guardians) that even when Miss Twinkleton retires into the bosom of
privacy, duty may at any moment compel her to become a sort of
Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth and soaring through the skies in
search of knowledge for her pupils.

The last new maid, who has never seen the young gentleman Miss Rosa is
engaged to, and who is making his acquaintance between the hinges of
the open door, left open for the purpose, stumbles guiltily down the
kitchen stairs, as a charming little apparition, with its face
concealed by a little silk apron thrown over its head, glides into the
parlour.

“O! it _is_ so ridiculous!” says the apparition, stopping and
shrinking. “Don’t, Eddy!”

“Don’t what, Rosa?”

“Don’t come any nearer, please. It _is_ so absurd.”

“What is absurd, Rosa?”

“The whole thing is. It _is_ so absurd to be an engaged orphan and it
_is_ so absurd to have the girls and the servants scuttling about after
one, like mice in the wainscot; and it _is_ so absurd to be called
upon!”

The apparition appears to have a thumb in the corner of its mouth while
making this complaint.

“You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say.”

“Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can’t just yet. How are you?”
(very shortly.)

“I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, Pussy,
inasmuch as I see nothing of you.”

This second remonstrance brings a dark, bright, pouting eye out from a
corner of the apron; but it swiftly becomes invisible again, as the
apparition exclaims: “O good gracious! you have had half your hair cut
off!”

“I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think,” says
Edwin, rumpling the hair in question, with a fierce glance at the
looking-glass, and giving an impatient stamp. “Shall I go?”

“No; you needn’t go just yet, Eddy. The girls would all be asking
questions why you went.”

“Once for all, Rosa, will you uncover that ridiculous little head of
yours and give me a welcome?”

The apron is pulled off the childish head, as its wearer replies:
“You’re very welcome, Eddy. There! I’m sure that’s nice. Shake hands.
No, I can’t kiss you, because I’ve got an acidulated drop in my mouth.”

“Are you at all glad to see me, Pussy?”

“O, yes, I’m dreadfully glad.—Go and sit down.—Miss Twinkleton.”

It is the custom of that excellent lady when these visits occur, to
appear every three minutes, either in her own person or in that of Mrs.
Tisher, and lay an offering on the shrine of Propriety by affecting to
look for some desiderated article. On the present occasion Miss
Twinkleton, gracefully gliding in and out, says in passing: “How do you
do, Mr. Drood? Very glad indeed to have the pleasure. Pray excuse me.
Tweezers. Thank you!”

“I got the gloves last evening, Eddy, and I like them very much. They
are beauties.”

“Well, that’s something,” the affianced replies, half grumbling. “The
smallest encouragement thankfully received. And how did you pass your
birthday, Pussy?”

“Delightfully! Everybody gave me a present. And we had a feast. And we
had a ball at night.”

“A feast and a ball, eh? These occasions seem to go off tolerably well
without me, Pussy.”

“De-lightfully!” cries Rosa, in a quite spontaneous manner, and without
the least pretence of reserve.

“Hah! And what was the feast?”

“Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps.”

“Any partners at the ball?”

“We danced with one another, of course, sir. But some of the girls made
game to be their brothers. It _was_ so droll!”

“Did anybody make game to be—”

“To be you? O dear yes!” cries Rosa, laughing with great enjoyment.
“That was the first thing done.”

“I hope she did it pretty well,” says Edwin rather doubtfully.

“O, it was excellent!—I wouldn’t dance with you, you know.”

Edwin scarcely seems to see the force of this; begs to know if he may
take the liberty to ask why?

“Because I was so tired of you,” returns Rosa. But she quickly adds,
and pleadingly too, seeing displeasure in his face: “Dear Eddy, you
were just as tired of me, you know.”

“Did I say so, Rosa?”

“Say so! Do you ever say so? No, you only showed it. O, she did it so
well!” cries Rosa, in a sudden ecstasy with her counterfeit betrothed.

“It strikes me that she must be a devilish impudent girl,” says Edwin
Drood. “And so, Pussy, you have passed your last birthday in this old
house.”

“Ah, yes!” Rosa clasps her hands, looks down with a sigh, and shakes
her head.

“You seem to be sorry, Rosa.”

“I am sorry for the poor old place. Somehow, I feel as if it would miss
me, when I am gone so far away, so young.”

“Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?”

She looks up at him with a swift bright look; next moment shakes her
head, sighs, and looks down again.

“That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?”

She nods her head again, and after a short silence, quaintly bursts out
with: “You know we must be married, and married from here, Eddy, or the
poor girls will be so dreadfully disappointed!”

For the moment there is more of compassion, both for her and for
himself, in her affianced husband’s face, than there is of love. He
checks the look, and asks: “Shall I take you out for a walk, Rosa
dear?”

Rosa dear does not seem at all clear on this point, until her face,
which has been comically reflective, brightens. “O, yes, Eddy; let us
go for a walk! And I tell you what we’ll do. You shall pretend that you
are engaged to somebody else, and I’ll pretend that I am not engaged to
anybody, and then we shan’t quarrel.”

“Do you think that will prevent our falling out, Rosa?”

“I know it will. Hush! Pretend to look out of window—Mrs. Tisher!”

Through a fortuitous concourse of accidents, the matronly Tisher heaves
in sight, says, in rustling through the room like the legendary ghost
of a dowager in silken skirts: “I hope I see Mr. Drood well; though I
needn’t ask, if I may judge from his complexion. I trust I disturb no
one; but there _was_ a paper-knife—O, thank you, I am sure!” and
disappears with her prize.

“One other thing you must do, Eddy, to oblige me,” says Rosebud. “The
moment we get into the street, you must put me outside, and keep close
to the house yourself—squeeze and graze yourself against it.”

“By all means, Rosa, if you wish it. Might I ask why?”

“O! because I don’t want the girls to see you.”

“It’s a fine day; but would you like me to carry an umbrella up?”

“Don’t be foolish, sir. You haven’t got polished leather boots on,”
pouting, with one shoulder raised.

“Perhaps that might escape the notice of the girls, even if they did
see me,” remarks Edwin, looking down at his boots with a sudden
distaste for them.

“Nothing escapes their notice, sir. And then I know what would happen.
Some of them would begin reflecting on me by saying (for _they_ are
free) that they never will on any account engage themselves to lovers
without polished leather boots. Hark! Miss Twinkleton. I’ll ask for
leave.”

That discreet lady being indeed heard without, inquiring of nobody in a
blandly conversational tone as she advances: “Eh? Indeed! Are you quite
sure you saw my mother-of-pearl button-holder on the work-table in my
room?” is at once solicited for walking leave, and graciously accords
it. And soon the young couple go out of the Nuns’ House, taking all
precautions against the discovery of the so vitally defective boots of
Mr. Edwin Drood: precautions, let us hope, effective for the peace of
Mrs. Edwin Drood that is to be.

“Which way shall we take, Rosa?”

Rosa replies: “I want to go to the Lumps-of-Delight shop.”

“To the—?”

“A Turkish sweetmeat, sir. My gracious me, don’t you understand
anything? Call yourself an Engineer, and not know _that_?”

“Why, how should I know it, Rosa?”

“Because I am very fond of them. But O! I forgot what we are to
pretend. No, you needn’t know anything about them; never mind.”

So he is gloomily borne off to the Lumps-of-Delight shop, where Rosa
makes her purchase, and, after offering some to him (which he rather
indignantly declines), begins to partake of it with great zest:
previously taking off and rolling up a pair of little pink gloves, like
rose-leaves, and occasionally putting her little pink fingers to her
rosy lips, to cleanse them from the Dust of Delight that comes off the
Lumps.

“Now, be a good-tempered Eddy, and pretend. And so you are engaged?”

“And so I am engaged.”

“Is she nice?”

“Charming.”

“Tall?”

“Immensely tall!” Rosa being short.

“Must be gawky, I should think,” is Rosa’s quiet commentary.

“I beg your pardon; not at all,” contradiction rising in him.

“What is termed a fine woman; a splendid woman.”

“Big nose, no doubt,” is the quiet commentary again.

“Not a little one, certainly,” is the quick reply, (Rosa’s being a
little one.)

“Long pale nose, with a red knob in the middle. I know the sort of
nose,” says Rosa, with a satisfied nod, and tranquilly enjoying the
Lumps.

“You _don’t_ know the sort of nose, Rosa,” with some warmth; “because
it’s nothing of the kind.”

“Not a pale nose, Eddy?”

“No.” Determined not to assent.

“A red nose? O! I don’t like red noses. However; to be sure she can
always powder it.”

“She would scorn to powder it,” says Edwin, becoming heated.

“Would she? What a stupid thing she must be! Is she stupid in
everything?”

“No; in nothing.”

After a pause, in which the whimsically wicked face has not been
unobservant of him, Rosa says:

“And this most sensible of creatures likes the idea of being carried
off to Egypt; does she, Eddy?”

“Yes. She takes a sensible interest in triumphs of engineering skill:
especially when they are to change the whole condition of an
undeveloped country.”

“Lor!” says Rosa, shrugging her shoulders, with a little laugh of
wonder.

“Do you object,” Edwin inquires, with a majestic turn of his eyes
downward upon the fairy figure: “do you object, Rosa, to her feeling
that interest?”

“Object? my dear Eddy! But really, doesn’t she hate boilers and
things?”

“I can answer for her not being so idiotic as to hate Boilers,” he
returns with angry emphasis; “though I cannot answer for her views
about Things; really not understanding what Things are meant.”

“But don’t she hate Arabs, and Turks, and Fellahs, and people?”

“Certainly not.” Very firmly.

“At least she _must_ hate the Pyramids? Come, Eddy?”

“Why should she be such a little—tall, I mean—goose, as to hate the
Pyramids, Rosa?”

“Ah! you should hear Miss Twinkleton,” often nodding her head, and much
enjoying the Lumps, “bore about them, and then you wouldn’t ask.
Tiresome old burying-grounds! Isises, and Ibises, and Cheopses, and
Pharaohses; who cares about them? And then there was Belzoni, or
somebody, dragged out by the legs, half-choked with bats and dust. All
the girls say: Serve him right, and hope it hurt him, and wish he had
been quite choked.”

The two youthful figures, side by side, but not now arm-in-arm, wander
discontentedly about the old Close; and each sometimes stops and slowly
imprints a deeper footstep in the fallen leaves.

“Well!” says Edwin, after a lengthy silence. “According to custom. We
can’t get on, Rosa.”

Rosa tosses her head, and says she don’t want to get on.

“That’s a pretty sentiment, Rosa, considering.”

“Considering what?”

“If I say what, you’ll go wrong again.”

“_You’ll_ go wrong, you mean, Eddy. Don’t be ungenerous.”

“Ungenerous! I like that!”

“Then I _don’t_ like that, and so I tell you plainly,” Rosa pouts.

“Now, Rosa, I put it to you. Who disparaged my profession, my
destination—”

“You are not going to be buried in the Pyramids, I hope?” she
interrupts, arching her delicate eyebrows. “You never said you were. If
you are, why haven’t you mentioned it to me? I can’t find out your
plans by instinct.”

“Now, Rosa, you know very well what I mean, my dear.”

“Well then, why did you begin with your detestable red-nosed
giantesses? And she would, she would, she would, she would, she WOULD
powder it!” cries Rosa, in a little burst of comical contradictory
spleen.

“Somehow or other, I never can come right in these discussions,” says
Edwin, sighing and becoming resigned.

“How is it possible, sir, that you ever can come right when you’re
always wrong? And as to Belzoni, I suppose he’s dead;—I’m sure I hope
he is—and how can his legs or his chokes concern you?”

“It is nearly time for your return, Rosa. We have not had a very happy
walk, have we?”

“A happy walk? A detestably unhappy walk, sir. If I go up-stairs the
moment I get in and cry till I can’t take my dancing lesson, you are
responsible, mind!”

“Let us be friends, Rosa.”

“Ah!” cries Rosa, shaking her head and bursting into real tears, “I
wish we _could_ be friends! It’s because we can’t be friends, that we
try one another so. I am a young little thing, Eddy, to have an old
heartache; but I really, really have, sometimes. Don’t be angry. I know
you have one yourself too often. We should both of us have done better,
if What is to be had been left What might have been. I am quite a
little serious thing now, and not teasing you. Let each of us forbear,
this one time, on our own account, and on the other’s!”

Disarmed by this glimpse of a woman’s nature in the spoilt child,
though for an instant disposed to resent it as seeming to involve the
enforced infliction of himself upon her, Edwin Drood stands watching
her as she childishly cries and sobs, with both hands to the
handkerchief at her eyes, and then—she becoming more composed, and
indeed beginning in her young inconstancy to laugh at herself for
having been so moved—leads her to a seat hard by, under the elm-trees.

[Illustration: Under the trees]


“One clear word of understanding, Pussy dear. I am not clever out of my
own line—now I come to think of it, I don’t know that I am particularly
clever in it—but I want to do right. There is not—there may be—I really
don’t see my way to what I want to say, but I must say it before we
part—there is not any other young—”

“O no, Eddy! It’s generous of you to ask me; but no, no, no!”

They have come very near to the Cathedral windows, and at this moment
the organ and the choir sound out sublimely. As they sit listening to
the solemn swell, the confidence of last night rises in young Edwin
Drood’s mind, and he thinks how unlike this music is to that
discordance.

“I fancy I can distinguish Jack’s voice,” is his remark in a low tone
in connection with the train of thought.

“Take me back at once, please,” urges his Affianced, quickly laying her
light hand upon his wrist. “They will all be coming out directly; let
us get away. O, what a resounding chord! But don’t let us stop to
listen to it; let us get away!”

Her hurry is over as soon as they have passed out of the Close. They go
arm-in-arm now, gravely and deliberately enough, along the old
High-street, to the Nuns’ House. At the gate, the street being within
sight empty, Edwin bends down his face to Rosebud’s.

She remonstrates, laughing, and is a childish schoolgirl again.

“Eddy, no! I’m too sticky to be kissed. But give me your hand, and I’ll
blow a kiss into that.”

He does so. She breathes a light breath into it and asks, retaining it
and looking into it:—

“Now say, what do you see?”

“See, Rosa?”

“Why, I thought you Egyptian boys could look into a hand and see all
sorts of phantoms. Can’t you see a happy Future?”

For certain, neither of them sees a happy Present, as the gate opens
and closes, and one goes in, and the other goes away.




CHAPTER IV.
MR. SAPSEA


Accepting the Jackass as the type of self-sufficient stupidity and
conceit—a custom, perhaps, like some few other customs, more
conventional than fair—then the purest jackass in Cloisterham is Mr.
Thomas Sapsea, Auctioneer.

Mr. Sapsea “dresses at” the Dean; has been bowed to for the Dean, in
mistake; has even been spoken to in the street as My Lord, under the
impression that he was the Bishop come down unexpectedly, without his
chaplain. Mr. Sapsea is very proud of this, and of his voice, and of
his style. He has even (in selling landed property) tried the
experiment of slightly intoning in his pulpit, to make himself more
like what he takes to be the genuine ecclesiastical article. So, in
ending a Sale by Public Auction, Mr. Sapsea finishes off with an air of
bestowing a benediction on the assembled brokers, which leaves the real
Dean—a modest and worthy gentleman—far behind.

Mr. Sapsea has many admirers; indeed, the proposition is carried by a
large local majority, even including non-believers in his wisdom, that
he is a credit to Cloisterham. He possesses the great qualities of
being portentous and dull, and of having a roll in his speech, and
another roll in his gait; not to mention a certain gravely flowing
action with his hands, as if he were presently going to Confirm the
individual with whom he holds discourse. Much nearer sixty years of age
than fifty, with a flowing outline of stomach, and horizontal creases
in his waistcoat; reputed to be rich; voting at elections in the
strictly respectable interest; morally satisfied that nothing but he
himself has grown since he was a baby; how can dunder-headed Mr. Sapsea
be otherwise than a credit to Cloisterham, and society?

Mr. Sapsea’s premises are in the High-street, over against the Nuns’
House. They are of about the period of the Nuns’ House, irregularly
modernised here and there, as steadily deteriorating generations found,
more and more, that they preferred air and light to Fever and the
Plague. Over the doorway is a wooden effigy, about half life-size,
representing Mr. Sapsea’s father, in a curly wig and toga, in the act
of selling. The chastity of the idea, and the natural appearance of the
little finger, hammer, and pulpit, have been much admired.

Mr. Sapsea sits in his dull ground-floor sitting-room, giving first on
his paved back yard; and then on his railed-off garden. Mr. Sapsea has
a bottle of port wine on a table before the fire—the fire is an early
luxury, but pleasant on the cool, chilly autumn evening—and is
characteristically attended by his portrait, his eight-day clock, and
his weather-glass. Characteristically, because he would uphold himself
against mankind, his weather-glass against weather, and his clock
against time.

By Mr. Sapsea’s side on the table are a writing-desk and writing
materials. Glancing at a scrap of manuscript, Mr. Sapsea reads it to
himself with a lofty air, and then, slowly pacing the room with his
thumbs in the arm-holes of his waistcoat, repeats it from memory: so
internally, though with much dignity, that the word “Ethelinda” is
alone audible.

There are three clean wineglasses in a tray on the table. His
serving-maid entering, and announcing “Mr. Jasper is come, sir,” Mr.
Sapsea waves “Admit him,” and draws two wineglasses from the rank, as
being claimed.

“Glad to see you, sir. I congratulate myself on having the honour of
receiving you here for the first time.” Mr. Sapsea does the honours of
his house in this wise.

“You are very good. The honour is mine and the self-congratulation is
mine.”

“You are pleased to say so, sir. But I do assure you that it is a
satisfaction to me to receive you in my humble home. And that is what I
would not say to everybody.” Ineffable loftiness on Mr. Sapsea’s part
accompanies these words, as leaving the sentence to be understood: “You
will not easily believe that your society can be a satisfaction to a
man like myself; nevertheless, it is.”

“I have for some time desired to know you, Mr. Sapsea.”

“And I, sir, have long known you by reputation as a man of taste. Let
me fill your glass. I will give you, sir,” says Mr. Sapsea, filling his
own:

“When the French come over,
May we meet them at Dover!”


This was a patriotic toast in Mr. Sapsea’s infancy, and he is therefore
fully convinced of its being appropriate to any subsequent era.

“You can scarcely be ignorant, Mr. Sapsea,” observes Jasper, watching
the auctioneer with a smile as the latter stretches out his legs before
the fire, “that you know the world.”

“Well, sir,” is the chuckling reply, “I think I know something of it;
something of it.”

“Your reputation for that knowledge has always interested and surprised
me, and made me wish to know you. For Cloisterham is a little place.
Cooped up in it myself, I know nothing beyond it, and feel it to be a
very little place.”

“If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man,” Mr. Sapsea
begins, and then stops:—“You will excuse me calling you young man, Mr.
Jasper? You are much my junior.”

“By all means.”

“If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man, foreign countries
have come to me. They have come to me in the way of business, and I
have improved upon my opportunities. Put it that I take an inventory,
or make a catalogue. I see a French clock. I never saw him before, in
my life, but I instantly lay my finger on him and say ‘Paris!’ I see
some cups and saucers of Chinese make, equally strangers to me
personally: I put my finger on them, then and there, and I say ‘Pekin,
Nankin, and Canton.’ It is the same with Japan, with Egypt, and with
bamboo and sandalwood from the East Indies; I put my finger on them
all. I have put my finger on the North Pole before now, and said ‘Spear
of Esquimaux make, for half a pint of pale sherry!’”

“Really? A very remarkable way, Mr. Sapsea, of acquiring a knowledge of
men and things.”

“I mention it, sir,” Mr. Sapsea rejoins, with unspeakable complacency,
“because, as I say, it don’t do to boast of what you are; but show how
you came to be it, and then you prove it.”

“Most interesting. We were to speak of the late Mrs. Sapsea.”

“We were, sir.” Mr. Sapsea fills both glasses, and takes the decanter
into safe keeping again. “Before I consult your opinion as a man of
taste on this little trifle”—holding it up—“which is _but_ a trifle,
and still has required some thought, sir, some little fever of the
brow, I ought perhaps to describe the character of the late Mrs.
Sapsea, now dead three quarters of a year.”

Mr. Jasper, in the act of yawning behind his wineglass, puts down that
screen and calls up a look of interest. It is a little impaired in its
expressiveness by his having a shut-up gape still to dispose of, with
watering eyes.

“Half a dozen years ago, or so,” Mr. Sapsea proceeds, “when I had
enlarged my mind up to—I will not say to what it now is, for that might
seem to aim at too much, but up to the pitch of wanting another mind to
be absorbed in it—I cast my eye about me for a nuptial partner.
Because, as I say, it is not good for man to be alone.”

Mr. Jasper appears to commit this original idea to memory.

“Miss Brobity at that time kept, I will not call it the rival
establishment to the establishment at the Nuns’ House opposite, but I
will call it the other parallel establishment down town. The world did
have it that she showed a passion for attending my sales, when they
took place on half holidays, or in vacation time. The world did put it
about, that she admired my style. The world did notice that as time
flowed by, my style became traceable in the dictation-exercises of Miss
Brobity’s pupils. Young man, a whisper even sprang up in obscure
malignity, that one ignorant and besotted Churl (a parent) so committed
himself as to object to it by name. But I do not believe this. For is
it likely that any human creature in his right senses would so lay
himself open to be pointed at, by what I call the finger of scorn?”

Mr. Jasper shakes his head. Not in the least likely. Mr. Sapsea, in a
grandiloquent state of absence of mind, seems to refill his visitor’s
glass, which is full already; and does really refill his own, which is
empty.

“Miss Brobity’s Being, young man, was deeply imbued with homage to
Mind. She revered Mind, when launched, or, as I say, precipitated, on
an extensive knowledge of the world. When I made my proposal, she did
me the honour to be so overshadowed with a species of Awe, as to be
able to articulate only the two words, ‘O Thou!’ meaning myself. Her
limpid blue eyes were fixed upon me, her semi-transparent hands were
clasped together, pallor overspread her aquiline features, and, though
encouraged to proceed, she never did proceed a word further. I disposed
of the parallel establishment by private contract, and we became as
nearly one as could be expected under the circumstances. But she never
could, and she never did, find a phrase satisfactory to her
perhaps-too-favourable estimate of my intellect. To the very last
(feeble action of liver), she addressed me in the same unfinished
terms.”

Mr. Jasper has closed his eyes as the auctioneer has deepened his
voice. He now abruptly opens them, and says, in unison with the
deepened voice “Ah!”—rather as if stopping himself on the extreme verge
of adding—“men!”

“I have been since,” says Mr. Sapsea, with his legs stretched out, and
solemnly enjoying himself with the wine and the fire, “what you behold
me; I have been since a solitary mourner; I have been since, as I say,
wasting my evening conversation on the desert air. I will not say that
I have reproached myself; but there have been times when I have asked
myself the question: What if her husband had been nearer on a level
with her? If she had not had to look up quite so high, what might the
stimulating action have been upon the liver?”

Mr. Jasper says, with an appearance of having fallen into dreadfully
low spirits, that he “supposes it was to be.”

“We can only suppose so, sir,” Mr. Sapsea coincides. “As I say, Man
proposes, Heaven disposes. It may or may not be putting the same
thought in another form; but that is the way I put it.”

Mr. Jasper murmurs assent.

“And now, Mr. Jasper,” resumes the auctioneer, producing his scrap of
manuscript, “Mrs. Sapsea’s monument having had full time to settle and
dry, let me take your opinion, as a man of taste, on the inscription I
have (as I before remarked, not without some little fever of the brow)
drawn out for it. Take it in your own hand. The setting out of the
lines requires to be followed with the eye, as well as the contents
with the mind.”

Mr. Jasper complying, sees and reads as follows:

ETHELINDA,
Reverential Wife of
MR. THOMAS SAPSEA,
AUCTIONEER, VALUER, ESTATE AGENT, &c.,
OF THIS CITY.
Whose Knowledge of the World,
Though somewhat extensive,
Never brought him acquainted with
A SPIRIT
More capable of
LOOKING UP TO HIM.
STRANGER, PAUSE
And ask thyself the Question,
CANST THOU DO LIKEWISE?
If Not,
WITH A BLUSH RETIRE.


Mr. Sapsea having risen and stationed himself with his back to the
fire, for the purpose of observing the effect of these lines on the
countenance of a man of taste, consequently has his face towards the
door, when his serving-maid, again appearing, announces, “Durdles is
come, sir!” He promptly draws forth and fills the third wineglass, as
being now claimed, and replies, “Show Durdles in.”

“Admirable!” quoth Mr. Jasper, handing back the paper.

“You approve, sir?”

“Impossible not to approve. Striking, characteristic, and complete.”

The auctioneer inclines his head, as one accepting his due and giving a
receipt; and invites the entering Durdles to take off that glass of
wine (handing the same), for it will warm him.

Durdles is a stonemason; chiefly in the gravestone, tomb, and monument
way, and wholly of their colour from head to foot. No man is better
known in Cloisterham. He is the chartered libertine of the place. Fame
trumpets him a wonderful workman—which, for aught that anybody knows,
he may be (as he never works); and a wonderful sot—which everybody
knows he is. With the Cathedral crypt he is better acquainted than any
living authority; it may even be than any dead one. It is said that the
intimacy of this acquaintance began in his habitually resorting to that
secret place, to lock-out the Cloisterham boy-populace, and sleep off
fumes of liquor: he having ready access to the Cathedral, as contractor
for rough repairs. Be this as it may, he does know much about it, and,
in the demolition of impedimental fragments of wall, buttress, and
pavement, has seen strange sights. He often speaks of himself in the
third person; perhaps, being a little misty as to his own identity,
when he narrates; perhaps impartially adopting the Cloisterham
nomenclature in reference to a character of acknowledged distinction.
Thus he will say, touching his strange sights: “Durdles come upon the
old chap,” in reference to a buried magnate of ancient time and high
degree, “by striking right into the coffin with his pick. The old chap
gave Durdles a look with his open eyes, as much as to say, ‘Is your
name Durdles? Why, my man, I’ve been waiting for you a devil of a
time!’ And then he turned to powder.” With a two-foot rule always in
his pocket, and a mason’s hammer all but always in his hand, Durdles
goes continually sounding and tapping all about and about the
Cathedral; and whenever he says to Tope: “Tope, here’s another old ’un
in here!” Tope announces it to the Dean as an established discovery.

In a suit of coarse flannel with horn buttons, a yellow neckerchief
with draggled ends, an old hat more russet-coloured than black, and
laced boots of the hue of his stony calling, Durdles leads a hazy,
gipsy sort of life, carrying his dinner about with him in a small
bundle, and sitting on all manner of tombstones to dine. This dinner of
Durdles’s has become quite a Cloisterham institution: not only because
of his never appearing in public without it, but because of its having
been, on certain renowned occasions, taken into custody along with
Durdles (as drunk and incapable), and exhibited before the Bench of
justices at the townhall. These occasions, however, have been few and
far apart: Durdles being as seldom drunk as sober. For the rest, he is
an old bachelor, and he lives in a little antiquated hole of a house
that was never finished: supposed to be built, so far, of stones stolen
from the city wall. To this abode there is an approach, ankle-deep in
stone chips, resembling a petrified grove of tombstones, urns,
draperies, and broken columns, in all stages of sculpture. Herein two
journeymen incessantly chip, while other two journeymen, who face each
other, incessantly saw stone; dipping as regularly in and out of their
sheltering sentry-boxes, as if they were mechanical figures
emblematical of Time and Death.

To Durdles, when he had consumed his glass of port, Mr. Sapsea intrusts
that precious effort of his Muse. Durdles unfeelingly takes out his
two-foot rule, and measures the lines calmly, alloying them with
stone-grit.

“This is for the monument, is it, Mr. Sapsea?”

“The Inscription. Yes.” Mr. Sapsea waits for its effect on a common
mind.

“It’ll come in to a eighth of a inch,” says Durdles. “Your servant, Mr.
Jasper. Hope I see you well.”

“How are you Durdles?”

“I’ve got a touch of the Tombatism on me, Mr. Jasper, but that I must
expect.”

“You mean the Rheumatism,” says Sapsea, in a sharp tone. (He is nettled
by having his composition so mechanically received.)

“No, I don’t. I mean, Mr. Sapsea, the Tombatism. It’s another sort from
Rheumatism. Mr. Jasper knows what Durdles means. You get among them
Tombs afore it’s well light on a winter morning, and keep on, as the
Catechism says, a-walking in the same all the days of your life, and
_you’ll_ know what Durdles means.”

“It is a bitter cold place,” Mr. Jasper assents, with an antipathetic
shiver.

“And if it’s bitter cold for you, up in the chancel, with a lot of live
breath smoking out about you, what the bitterness is to Durdles, down
in the crypt among the earthy damps there, and the dead breath of the
old ’uns,” returns that individual, “Durdles leaves you to judge.—Is
this to be put in hand at once, Mr. Sapsea?”

Mr. Sapsea, with an Author’s anxiety to rush into publication, replies
that it cannot be out of hand too soon.

“You had better let me have the key then,” says Durdles.

“Why, man, it is not to be put inside the monument!”

“Durdles knows where it’s to be put, Mr. Sapsea; no man better. Ask
’ere a man in Cloisterham whether Durdles knows his work.”

Mr. Sapsea rises, takes a key from a drawer, unlocks an iron safe let
into the wall, and takes from it another key.

“When Durdles puts a touch or a finish upon his work, no matter where,
inside or outside, Durdles likes to look at his work all round, and see
that his work is a-doing him credit,” Durdles explains, doggedly.

The key proffered him by the bereaved widower being a large one, he
slips his two-foot rule into a side-pocket of his flannel trousers made
for it, and deliberately opens his flannel coat, and opens the mouth of
a large breast-pocket within it before taking the key to place it in
that repository.

“Why, Durdles!” exclaims Jasper, looking on amused, “you are undermined
with pockets!”

“And I carries weight in ’em too, Mr. Jasper. Feel those!” producing
two other large keys.

“Hand me Mr. Sapsea’s likewise. Surely this is the heaviest of the
three.”

“You’ll find ’em much of a muchness, I expect,” says Durdles. “They all
belong to monuments. They all open Durdles’s work. Durdles keeps the
keys of his work mostly. Not that they’re much used.”

“By the bye,” it comes into Jasper’s mind to say, as he idly examines
the keys, “I have been going to ask you, many a day, and have always
forgotten. You know they sometimes call you Stony Durdles, don’t you?”

“Cloisterham knows me as Durdles, Mr. Jasper.”

“I am aware of that, of course. But the boys sometimes—”

“O! if you mind them young imps of boys—” Durdles gruffly interrupts.

“I don’t mind them any more than you do. But there was a discussion the
other day among the Choir, whether Stony stood for Tony;” clinking one
key against another.

(“Take care of the wards, Mr. Jasper.”)

“Or whether Stony stood for Stephen;” clinking with a change of keys.

(“You can’t make a pitch pipe of ’em, Mr. Jasper.”)

“Or whether the name comes from your trade. How stands the fact?”

Mr. Jasper weighs the three keys in his hand, lifts his head from his
idly stooping attitude over the fire, and delivers the keys to Durdles
with an ingenuous and friendly face.

But the stony one is a gruff one likewise, and that hazy state of his
is always an uncertain state, highly conscious of its dignity, and
prone to take offence. He drops his two keys back into his pocket one
by one, and buttons them up; he takes his dinner-bundle from the
chair-back on which he hung it when he came in; he distributes the
weight he carries, by tying the third key up in it, as though he were
an Ostrich, and liked to dine off cold iron; and he gets out of the
room, deigning no word of answer.

Mr. Sapsea then proposes a hit at backgammon, which, seasoned with his
own improving conversation, and terminating in a supper of cold roast
beef and salad, beguiles the golden evening until pretty late. Mr.
Sapsea’s wisdom being, in its delivery to mortals, rather of the
diffuse than the epigrammatic order, is by no means expended even then;
but his visitor intimates that he will come back for more of the
precious commodity on future occasions, and Mr. Sapsea lets him off for
the present, to ponder on the instalment he carries away.




CHAPTER V.
MR. DURDLES AND FRIEND


John Jasper, on his way home through the Close, is brought to a
stand-still by the spectacle of Stony Durdles, dinner-bundle and all,
leaning his back against the iron railing of the burial-ground
enclosing it from the old cloister-arches; and a hideous small boy in
rags flinging stones at him as a well-defined mark in the moonlight.
Sometimes the stones hit him, and sometimes they miss him, but Durdles
seems indifferent to either fortune. The hideous small boy, on the
contrary, whenever he hits Durdles, blows a whistle of triumph through
a jagged gap, convenient for the purpose, in the front of his mouth,
where half his teeth are wanting; and whenever he misses him, yelps out
“Mulled agin!” and tries to atone for the failure by taking a more
correct and vicious aim.

“What are you doing to the man?” demands Jasper, stepping out into the
moonlight from the shade.

“Making a cock-shy of him,” replies the hideous small boy.

“Give me those stones in your hand.”

“Yes, I’ll give ’em you down your throat, if you come a-ketching hold
of me,” says the small boy, shaking himself loose, and backing. “I’ll
smash your eye, if you don’t look out!”

“Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?”

“He won’t go home.”

“What is that to you?”

“He gives me a ’apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too late,”
says the boy. And then chants, like a little savage, half stumbling and
half dancing among the rags and laces of his dilapidated boots:—

“Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten,
Widdy widdy wy!
Then—E—don’t—go—then—I—shy—
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!”


—with a comprehensive sweep on the last word, and one more delivery at
Durdles.

This would seem to be a poetical note of preparation, agreed upon, as a
caution to Durdles to stand clear if he can, or to betake himself
homeward.

John Jasper invites the boy with a beck of his head to follow him
(feeling it hopeless to drag him, or coax him), and crosses to the iron
railing where the Stony (and stoned) One is profoundly meditating.

“Do you know this thing, this child?” asks Jasper, at a loss for a word
that will define this thing.

“Deputy,” says Durdles, with a nod.

“Is that its—his—name?”

“Deputy,” assents Durdles.

“I’m man-servant up at the Travellers’ Twopenny in Gas Works Garding,”
this thing explains. “All us man-servants at Travellers’ Lodgings is
named Deputy. When we’re chock full and the Travellers is all a-bed I
come out for my ’elth.” Then withdrawing into the road, and taking aim,
he resumes:—

“Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—”


“Hold your hand,” cries Jasper, “and don’t throw while I stand so near
him, or I’ll kill you! Come, Durdles; let me walk home with you
to-night. Shall I carry your bundle?”

“Not on any account,” replies Durdles, adjusting it. “Durdles was
making his reflections here when you come up, sir, surrounded by his
works, like a poplar Author.—Your own brother-in-law;” introducing a
sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the moonlight. “Mrs.
Sapsea;” introducing the monument of that devoted wife. “Late
Incumbent;” introducing the Reverend Gentleman’s broken column.
“Departed Assessed Taxes;” introducing a vase and towel, standing on
what might represent the cake of soap. “Former pastrycook and
Muffin-maker, much respected;” introducing gravestone. “All safe and
sound here, sir, and all Durdles’s work. Of the common folk, that is
merely bundled up in turf and brambles, the less said the better. A
poor lot, soon forgot.”

“This creature, Deputy, is behind us,” says Jasper, looking back. “Is
he to follow us?”

The relations between Durdles and Deputy are of a capricious kind; for,
on Durdles’s turning himself about with the slow gravity of beery
suddenness, Deputy makes a pretty wide circuit into the road and stands
on the defensive.

“You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night,” says
Durdles, unexpectedly reminded of, or imagining, an injury.

“Yer lie, I did,” says Deputy, in his only form of polite
contradiction.

“Own brother, sir,” observes Durdles, turning himself about again, and
as unexpectedly forgetting his offence as he had recalled or conceived
it; “own brother to Peter the Wild Boy! But I gave him an object in
life.”

“At which he takes aim?” Mr. Jasper suggests.

“That’s it, sir,” returns Durdles, quite satisfied; “at which he takes
aim. I took him in hand and gave him an object. What was he before? A
destroyer. What work did he do? Nothing but destruction. What did he
earn by it? Short terms in Cloisterham jail. Not a person, not a piece
of property, not a winder, not a horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a
bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but what he stoned, for want of an
enlightened object. I put that enlightened object before him, and now
he can turn his honest halfpenny by the three penn’orth a week.”

“I wonder he has no competitors.”

“He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones ’em all away. Now, I don’t
know what this scheme of mine comes to,” pursues Durdles, considering
about it with the same sodden gravity; “I don’t know what you may
precisely call it. It ain’t a sort of a—scheme of a—National
Education?”

“I should say not,” replies Jasper.

“I should say not,” assents Durdles; “then we won’t try to give it a
name.”

“He still keeps behind us,” repeats Jasper, looking over his shoulder;
“is he to follow us?”

“We can’t help going round by the Travellers’ Twopenny, if we go the
short way, which is the back way,” Durdles answers, “and we’ll drop him
there.”

So they go on; Deputy, as a rear rank one, taking open order, and
invading the silence of the hour and place by stoning every wall, post,
pillar, and other inanimate object, by the deserted way.

“Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?” asks John Jasper.

“Anything old, I think you mean,” growls Durdles. “It ain’t a spot for
novelty.”

“Any new discovery on your part, I meant.”

“There’s a old ’un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go down
the broken steps of the little underground chapel as formerly was; I
make him out (so fur as I’ve made him out yet) to be one of them old
’uns with a crook. To judge from the size of the passages in the walls,
and of the steps and doors, by which they come and went, them crooks
must have been a good deal in the way of the old ’uns! Two on ’em
meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another by the mitre pretty
often, I should say.”

Without any endeavour to correct the literality of this opinion, Jasper
surveys his companion—covered from head to foot with old mortar, lime,
and stone grit—as though he, Jasper, were getting imbued with a
romantic interest in his weird life.

“Yours is a curious existence.”

Without furnishing the least clue to the question, whether he receives
this as a compliment or as quite the reverse, Durdles gruffly answers:
“Yours is another.”

“Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly,
never-changing place, Yes. But there is much more mystery and interest
in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine. Indeed, I am
beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me on as a sort of
student, or free ’prentice, under you, and to let me go about with you
sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks in which you pass your
days.”

The Stony One replies, in a general way, “All right. Everybody knows
where to find Durdles, when he’s wanted.” Which, if not strictly true,
is approximately so, if taken to express that Durdles may always be
found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.

“What I dwell upon most,” says Jasper, pursuing his subject of romantic
interest, “is the remarkable accuracy with which you would seem to find
out where people are buried.—What is the matter? That bundle is in your
way; let me hold it.”

Durdles has stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all his
movements, immediately skirmishing into the road), and was looking
about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on, when thus
relieved of it.

“Just you give me my hammer out of that,” says Durdles, “and I’ll show
you.”

Clink, clink. And his hammer is handed him.

“Now, lookee here. You pitch your note, don’t you, Mr. Jasper?”

“Yes.”

“So I sound for mine. I take my hammer, and I tap.” (Here he strikes
the pavement, and the attentive Deputy skirmishes at a rather wider
range, as supposing that his head may be in requisition.) “I tap, tap,
tap. Solid! I go on tapping. Solid still! Tap again. Holloa! Hollow!
Tap again, persevering. Solid in hollow! Tap, tap, tap, to try it
better. Solid in hollow; and inside solid, hollow again! There you are!
Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault!”

“Astonishing!”

“I have even done this,” says Durdles, drawing out his two-foot rule
(Deputy meanwhile skirmishing nearer, as suspecting that Treasure may
be about to be discovered, which may somehow lead to his own
enrichment, and the delicious treat of the discoverers being hanged by
the neck, on his evidence, until they are dead). “Say that hammer of
mine’s a wall—my work. Two; four; and two is six,” measuring on the
pavement. “Six foot inside that wall is Mrs. Sapsea.”

“Not really Mrs. Sapsea?”

“Say Mrs. Sapsea. Her wall’s thicker, but say Mrs. Sapsea. Durdles
taps, that wall represented by that hammer, and says, after good
sounding: ‘Something betwixt us!’ Sure enough, some rubbish has been
left in that same six-foot space by Durdles’s men!”

Jasper opines that such accuracy “is a gift.”

“I wouldn’t have it at a gift,” returns Durdles, by no means receiving
the observation in good part. “I worked it out for myself. Durdles
comes by _his_ knowledge through grubbing deep for it, and having it up
by the roots when it don’t want to come.—Holloa you Deputy!”

“Widdy!” is Deputy’s shrill response, standing off again.

“Catch that ha’penny. And don’t let me see any more of you to-night,
after we come to the Travellers’ Twopenny.”

“Warning!” returns Deputy, having caught the halfpenny, and appearing
by this mystic word to express his assent to the arrangement.

They have but to cross what was once the vineyard, belonging to what
was once the Monastery, to come into the narrow back lane wherein
stands the crazy wooden house of two low stories currently known as the
Travellers’ Twopenny:—a house all warped and distorted, like the morals
of the travellers, with scant remains of a lattice-work porch over the
door, and also of a rustic fence before its stamped-out garden; by
reason of the travellers being so bound to the premises by a tender
sentiment (or so fond of having a fire by the roadside in the course of
the day), that they can never be persuaded or threatened into
departure, without violently possessing themselves of some wooden
forget-me-not, and bearing it off.

The semblance of an inn is attempted to be given to this wretched place
by fragments of conventional red curtaining in the windows, which rags
are made muddily transparent in the night-season by feeble lights of
rush or cotton dip burning dully in the close air of the inside. As
Durdles and Jasper come near, they are addressed by an inscribed paper
lantern over the door, setting forth the purport of the house. They are
also addressed by some half-dozen other hideous small boys—whether
twopenny lodgers or followers or hangers-on of such, who knows!—who, as
if attracted by some carrion-scent of Deputy in the air, start into the
moonlight, as vultures might gather in the desert, and instantly fall
to stoning him and one another.

“Stop, you young brutes,” cries Jasper angrily, “and let us go by!”

This remonstrance being received with yells and flying stones,
according to a custom of late years comfortably established among the
police regulations of our English communities, where Christians are
stoned on all sides, as if the days of Saint Stephen were revived,
Durdles remarks of the young savages, with some point, that “they
haven’t got an object,” and leads the way down the lane.

At the corner of the lane, Jasper, hotly enraged, checks his companion
and looks back. All is silent. Next moment, a stone coming rattling at
his hat, and a distant yell of “Wake-Cock! Warning!” followed by a
crow, as from some infernally-hatched Chanticleer, apprising him under
whose victorious fire he stands, he turns the corner into safety, and
takes Durdles home: Durdles stumbling among the litter of his stony
yard as if he were going to turn head foremost into one of the
unfinished tombs.

John Jasper returns by another way to his gatehouse, and entering
softly with his key, finds his fire still burning. He takes from a
locked press a peculiar-looking pipe, which he fills—but not with
tobacco—and, having adjusted the contents of the bowl, very carefully,
with a little instrument, ascends an inner staircase of only a few
steps, leading to two rooms. One of these is his own sleeping chamber:
the other is his nephew’s. There is a light in each.

His nephew lies asleep, calm and untroubled. John Jasper stands looking
down upon him, his unlighted pipe in his hand, for some time, with a
fixed and deep attention. Then, hushing his footsteps, he passes to his
own room, lights his pipe, and delivers himself to the Spectres it
invokes at midnight.




CHAPTER VI.
PHILANTHROPY IN MINOR CANON CORNER


The Reverend Septimus Crisparkle (Septimus, because six little brother
Crisparkles before him went out, one by one, as they were born, like
six weak little rushlights, as they were lighted), having broken the
thin morning ice near Cloisterham Weir with his amiable head, much to
the invigoration of his frame, was now assisting his circulation by
boxing at a looking-glass with great science and prowess. A fresh and
healthy portrait the looking-glass presented of the Reverend Septimus,
feinting and dodging with the utmost artfulness, and hitting out from
the shoulder with the utmost straightness, while his radiant features
teemed with innocence, and soft-hearted benevolence beamed from his
boxing-gloves.

It was scarcely breakfast-time yet, for Mrs. Crisparkle—mother, not
wife of the Reverend Septimus—was only just down, and waiting for the
urn. Indeed, the Reverend Septimus left off at this very moment to take
the pretty old lady’s entering face between his boxing-gloves and kiss
it. Having done so with tenderness, the Reverend Septimus turned to
again, countering with his left, and putting in his right, in a
tremendous manner.

“I say, every morning of my life, that you’ll do it at last, Sept,”
remarked the old lady, looking on; “and so you will.”

“Do what, Ma dear?”

“Break the pier-glass, or burst a blood-vessel.”

“Neither, please God, Ma dear. Here’s wind, Ma. Look at this!” In a
concluding round of great severity, the Reverend Septimus administered
and escaped all sorts of punishment, and wound up by getting the old
lady’s cap into Chancery—such is the technical term used in scientific
circles by the learned in the Noble Art—with a lightness of touch that
hardly stirred the lightest lavender or cherry riband on it.
Magnanimously releasing the defeated, just in time to get his gloves
into a drawer and feign to be looking out of window in a contemplative
state of mind when a servant entered, the Reverend Septimus then gave
place to the urn and other preparations for breakfast. These completed,
and the two alone again, it was pleasant to see (or would have been, if
there had been any one to see it, which there never was), the old lady
standing to say the Lord’s Prayer aloud, and her son, Minor Canon
nevertheless, standing with bent head to hear it, he being within five
years of forty: much as he had stood to hear the same words from the
same lips when he was within five months of four.

What is prettier than an old lady—except a young lady—when her eyes are
bright, when her figure is trim and compact, when her face is cheerful
and calm, when her dress is as the dress of a china shepherdess: so
dainty in its colours, so individually assorted to herself, so neatly
moulded on her? Nothing is prettier, thought the good Minor Canon
frequently, when taking his seat at table opposite his long-widowed
mother. Her thought at such times may be condensed into the two words
that oftenest did duty together in all her conversations: “My Sept!”

They were a good pair to sit breakfasting together in Minor Canon
Corner, Cloisterham. For Minor Canon Corner was a quiet place in the
shadow of the Cathedral, which the cawing of the rooks, the echoing
footsteps of rare passers, the sound of the Cathedral bell, or the roll
of the Cathedral organ, seemed to render more quiet than absolute
silence. Swaggering fighting men had had their centuries of ramping and
raving about Minor Canon Corner, and beaten serfs had had their
centuries of drudging and dying there, and powerful monks had had their
centuries of being sometimes useful and sometimes harmful there, and
behold they were all gone out of Minor Canon Corner, and so much the
better. Perhaps one of the highest uses of their ever having been
there, was, that there might be left behind, that blessed air of
tranquillity which pervaded Minor Canon Corner, and that serenely
romantic state of the mind—productive for the most part of pity and
forbearance—which is engendered by a sorrowful story that is all told,
or a pathetic play that is played out.

Red-brick walls harmoniously toned down in colour by time,
strong-rooted ivy, latticed windows, panelled rooms, big oaken beams in
little places, and stone-walled gardens where annual fruit yet ripened
upon monkish trees, were the principal surroundings of pretty old Mrs.
Crisparkle and the Reverend Septimus as they sat at breakfast.

“And what, Ma dear,” inquired the Minor Canon, giving proof of a
wholesome and vigorous appetite, “does the letter say?”

The pretty old lady, after reading it, had just laid it down upon the
breakfast-cloth. She handed it over to her son.

Now, the old lady was exceedingly proud of her bright eyes being so
clear that she could read writing without spectacles. Her son was also
so proud of the circumstance, and so dutifully bent on her deriving the
utmost possible gratification from it, that he had invented the
pretence that he himself could _not_ read writing without spectacles.
Therefore he now assumed a pair, of grave and prodigious proportions,
which not only seriously inconvenienced his nose and his breakfast, but
seriously impeded his perusal of the letter. For, he had the eyes of a
microscope and a telescope combined, when they were unassisted.

“It’s from Mr. Honeythunder, of course,” said the old lady, folding her
arms.

“Of course,” assented her son. He then lamely read on:

“‘Haven of Philanthropy,
Chief Offices, London, Wednesday.


“‘DEAR MADAM,


“‘I write in the—;’ In the what’s this? What does he write in?”

“In the chair,” said the old lady.

The Reverend Septimus took off his spectacles, that he might see her
face, as he exclaimed:

“Why, what should he write in?”

“Bless me, bless me, Sept,” returned the old lady, “you don’t see the
context! Give it back to me, my dear.”

Glad to get his spectacles off (for they always made his eyes water),
her son obeyed: murmuring that his sight for reading manuscript got
worse and worse daily.

“‘I write,’” his mother went on, reading very perspicuously and
precisely, “‘from the chair, to which I shall probably be confined for
some hours.’”

Septimus looked at the row of chairs against the wall, with a
half-protesting and half-appealing countenance.

“‘We have,’” the old lady read on with a little extra emphasis, “‘a
meeting of our Convened Chief Composite Committee of Central and
District Philanthropists, at our Head Haven as above; and it is their
unanimous pleasure that I take the chair.’”

Septimus breathed more freely, and muttered: “O! if he comes to _that_,
let him.”

“‘Not to lose a day’s post, I take the opportunity of a long report
being read, denouncing a public miscreant—’”

“It is a most extraordinary thing,” interposed the gentle Minor Canon,
laying down his knife and fork to rub his ear in a vexed manner, “that
these Philanthropists are always denouncing somebody. And it is another
most extraordinary thing that they are always so violently flush of
miscreants!”

“‘Denouncing a public miscreant—’”—the old lady resumed, “‘to get our
little affair of business off my mind. I have spoken with my two wards,
Neville and Helena Landless, on the subject of their defective
education, and they give in to the plan proposed; as I should have
taken good care they did, whether they liked it or not.’”

“And it is another most extraordinary thing,” remarked the Minor Canon
in the same tone as before, “that these philanthropists are so given to
seizing their fellow-creatures by the scruff of the neck, and (as one
may say) bumping them into the paths of peace.—I beg your pardon, Ma
dear, for interrupting.”

“‘Therefore, dear Madam, you will please prepare your son, the Rev. Mr.
Septimus, to expect Neville as an inmate to be read with, on Monday
next. On the same day Helena will accompany him to Cloisterham, to take
up her quarters at the Nuns’ House, the establishment recommended by
yourself and son jointly. Please likewise to prepare for her reception
and tuition there. The terms in both cases are understood to be exactly
as stated to me in writing by yourself, when I opened a correspondence
with you on this subject, after the honour of being introduced to you
at your sister’s house in town here. With compliments to the Rev. Mr.
Septimus, I am, Dear Madam, Your affectionate brother (In
Philanthropy), LUKE HONEYTHUNDER.’”

“Well, Ma,” said Septimus, after a little more rubbing of his ear, “we
must try it. There can be no doubt that we have room for an inmate, and
that I have time to bestow upon him, and inclination too. I must
confess to feeling rather glad that he is not Mr. Honeythunder himself.
Though that seems wretchedly prejudiced—does it not?—for I never saw
him. Is he a large man, Ma?”

“I should call him a large man, my dear,” the old lady replied after
some hesitation, “but that his voice is so much larger.”

“Than himself?”

“Than anybody.”

“Hah!” said Septimus. And finished his breakfast as if the flavour of
the Superior Family Souchong, and also of the ham and toast and eggs,
were a little on the wane.

Mrs. Crisparkle’s sister, another piece of Dresden china, and matching
her so neatly that they would have made a delightful pair of ornaments
for the two ends of any capacious old-fashioned chimneypiece, and by
right should never have been seen apart, was the childless wife of a
clergyman holding Corporation preferment in London City. Mr.
Honeythunder in his public character of Professor of Philanthropy had
come to know Mrs. Crisparkle during the last re-matching of the china
ornaments (in other words during her last annual visit to her sister),
after a public occasion of a philanthropic nature, when certain devoted
orphans of tender years had been glutted with plum buns, and plump
bumptiousness. These were all the antecedents known in Minor Canon
Corner of the coming pupils.

“I am sure you will agree with me, Ma,” said Mr. Crisparkle, after
thinking the matter over, “that the first thing to be done, is, to put
these young people as much at their ease as possible. There is nothing
disinterested in the notion, because we cannot be at our ease with them
unless they are at their ease with us. Now, Jasper’s nephew is down
here at present; and like takes to like, and youth takes to youth. He
is a cordial young fellow, and we will have him to meet the brother and
sister at dinner. That’s three. We can’t think of asking him, without
asking Jasper. That’s four. Add Miss Twinkleton and the fairy bride
that is to be, and that’s six. Add our two selves, and that’s eight.
Would eight at a friendly dinner at all put you out, Ma?”

“Nine would, Sept,” returned the old lady, visibly nervous.

“My dear Ma, I particularise eight.”

“The exact size of the table and the room, my dear.”

So it was settled that way: and when Mr. Crisparkle called with his
mother upon Miss Twinkleton, to arrange for the reception of Miss
Helena Landless at the Nuns’ House, the two other invitations having
reference to that establishment were proffered and accepted. Miss
Twinkleton did, indeed, glance at the globes, as regretting that they
were not formed to be taken out into society; but became reconciled to
leaving them behind. Instructions were then despatched to the
Philanthropist for the departure and arrival, in good time for dinner,
of Mr. Neville and Miss Helena; and stock for soup became fragrant in
the air of Minor Canon Corner.

In those days there was no railway to Cloisterham, and Mr. Sapsea said
there never would be. Mr. Sapsea said more; he said there never should
be. And yet, marvellous to consider, it has come to pass, in these
days, that Express Trains don’t think Cloisterham worth stopping at,
but yell and whirl through it on their larger errands, casting the dust
off their wheels as a testimony against its insignificance. Some remote
fragment of Main Line to somewhere else, there was, which was going to
ruin the Money Market if it failed, and Church and State if it
succeeded, and (of course), the Constitution, whether or no; but even
that had already so unsettled Cloisterham traffic, that the traffic,
deserting the high road, came sneaking in from an unprecedented part of
the country by a back stable-way, for many years labelled at the
corner: “Beware of the Dog.”

To this ignominious avenue of approach, Mr. Crisparkle repaired,
awaiting the arrival of a short, squat omnibus, with a disproportionate
heap of luggage on the roof—like a little Elephant with infinitely too
much Castle—which was then the daily service between Cloisterham and
external mankind. As this vehicle lumbered up, Mr. Crisparkle could
hardly see anything else of it for a large outside passenger seated on
the box, with his elbows squared, and his hands on his knees,
compressing the driver into a most uncomfortably small compass, and
glowering about him with a strongly-marked face.

“Is this Cloisterham?” demanded the passenger, in a tremendous voice.

“It is,” replied the driver, rubbing himself as if he ached, after
throwing the reins to the ostler. “And I never was so glad to see it.”

“Tell your master to make his box-seat wider, then,” returned the
passenger. “Your master is morally bound—and ought to be legally, under
ruinous penalties—to provide for the comfort of his fellow-man.”

The driver instituted, with the palms of his hands, a superficial
perquisition into the state of his skeleton; which seemed to make him
anxious.

“Have I sat upon you?” asked the passenger.

“You have,” said the driver, as if he didn’t like it at all.

“Take that card, my friend.”

“I think I won’t deprive you on it,” returned the driver, casting his
eyes over it with no great favour, without taking it. “What’s the good
of it to me?”

“Be a Member of that Society,” said the passenger.

“What shall I get by it?” asked the driver.

“Brotherhood,” returned the passenger, in a ferocious voice.

“Thankee,” said the driver, very deliberately, as he got down; “my
mother was contented with myself, and so am I. I don’t want no
brothers.”

“But you must have them,” replied the passenger, also descending,
“whether you like it or not. I am your brother.”

“I say!” expostulated the driver, becoming more chafed in temper, “not
too fur! The worm _will_, when—”

But here, Mr. Crisparkle interposed, remonstrating aside, in a friendly
voice: “Joe, Joe, Joe! don’t forget yourself, Joe, my good fellow!” and
then, when Joe peaceably touched his hat, accosting the passenger with:
“Mr. Honeythunder?”

“That is my name, sir.”

“My name is Crisparkle.”

“Reverend Mr. Septimus? Glad to see you, sir. Neville and Helena are
inside. Having a little succumbed of late, under the pressure of my
public labours, I thought I would take a mouthful of fresh air, and
come down with them, and return at night. So you are the Reverend Mr.
Septimus, are you?” surveying him on the whole with disappointment, and
twisting a double eye-glass by its ribbon, as if he were roasting it,
but not otherwise using it. “Hah! I expected to see you older, sir.”

“I hope you will,” was the good-humoured reply.

“Eh?” demanded Mr. Honeythunder.

“Only a poor little joke. Not worth repeating.”

“Joke? Ay; I never see a joke,” Mr. Honeythunder frowningly retorted.
“A joke is wasted upon me, sir. Where are they? Helena and Neville,
come here! Mr. Crisparkle has come down to meet you.”

An unusually handsome lithe young fellow, and an unusually handsome
lithe girl; much alike; both very dark, and very rich in colour; she of
almost the gipsy type; something untamed about them both; a certain air
upon them of hunter and huntress; yet withal a certain air of being the
objects of the chase, rather than the followers. Slender, supple, quick
of eye and limb; half shy, half defiant; fierce of look; an indefinable
kind of pause coming and going on their whole expression, both of face
and form, which might be equally likened to the pause before a crouch
or a bound. The rough mental notes made in the first five minutes by
Mr. Crisparkle would have read thus, _verbatim_.

He invited Mr. Honeythunder to dinner, with a troubled mind (for the
discomfiture of the dear old china shepherdess lay heavy on it), and
gave his arm to Helena Landless. Both she and her brother, as they
walked all together through the ancient streets, took great delight in
what he pointed out of the Cathedral and the Monastery ruin, and
wondered—so his notes ran on—much as if they were beautiful barbaric
captives brought from some wild tropical dominion. Mr. Honeythunder
walked in the middle of the road, shouldering the natives out of his
way, and loudly developing a scheme he had, for making a raid on all
the unemployed persons in the United Kingdom, laying them every one by
the heels in jail, and forcing them, on pain of prompt extermination,
to become philanthropists.

Mrs. Crisparkle had need of her own share of philanthropy when she
beheld this very large and very loud excrescence on the little party.
Always something in the nature of a Boil upon the face of society, Mr.
Honeythunder expanded into an inflammatory Wen in Minor Canon Corner.
Though it was not literally true, as was facetiously charged against
him by public unbelievers, that he called aloud to his
fellow-creatures: “Curse your souls and bodies, come here and be
blessed!” still his philanthropy was of that gunpowderous sort that the
difference between it and animosity was hard to determine. You were to
abolish military force, but you were first to bring all commanding
officers who had done their duty, to trial by court-martial for that
offence, and shoot them. You were to abolish war, but were to make
converts by making war upon them, and charging them with loving war as
the apple of their eye. You were to have no capital punishment, but
were first to sweep off the face of the earth all legislators, jurists,
and judges, who were of the contrary opinion. You were to have
universal concord, and were to get it by eliminating all the people who
wouldn’t, or conscientiously couldn’t, be concordant. You were to love
your brother as yourself, but after an indefinite interval of maligning
him (very much as if you hated him), and calling him all manner of
names. Above all things, you were to do nothing in private, or on your
own account. You were to go to the offices of the Haven of
Philanthropy, and put your name down as a Member and a Professing
Philanthropist. Then, you were to pay up your subscription, get your
card of membership and your riband and medal, and were evermore to live
upon a platform, and evermore to say what Mr. Honeythunder said, and
what the Treasurer said, and what the sub-Treasurer said, and what the
Committee said, and what the sub-Committee said, and what the Secretary
said, and what the Vice-Secretary said. And this was usually said in
the unanimously-carried resolution under hand and seal, to the effect:
“That this assembled Body of Professing Philanthropists views, with
indignant scorn and contempt, not unmixed with utter detestation and
loathing abhorrence”—in short, the baseness of all those who do not
belong to it, and pledges itself to make as many obnoxious statements
as possible about them, without being at all particular as to facts.

The dinner was a most doleful breakdown. The philanthropist deranged
the symmetry of the table, sat himself in the way of the waiting,
blocked up the thoroughfare, and drove Mr. Tope (who assisted the
parlour-maid) to the verge of distraction by passing plates and dishes
on, over his own head. Nobody could talk to anybody, because he held
forth to everybody at once, as if the company had no individual
existence, but were a Meeting. He impounded the Reverend Mr. Septimus,
as an official personage to be addressed, or kind of human peg to hang
his oratorical hat on, and fell into the exasperating habit, common
among such orators, of impersonating him as a wicked and weak opponent.
Thus, he would ask: “And will you, sir, now stultify yourself by
telling me”—and so forth, when the innocent man had not opened his
lips, nor meant to open them. Or he would say: “Now see, sir, to what a
position you are reduced. I will leave you no escape. After exhausting
all the resources of fraud and falsehood, during years upon years;
after exhibiting a combination of dastardly meanness with ensanguined
daring, such as the world has not often witnessed; you have now the
hypocrisy to bend the knee before the most degraded of mankind, and to
sue and whine and howl for mercy!” Whereat the unfortunate Minor Canon
would look, in part indignant and in part perplexed; while his worthy
mother sat bridling, with tears in her eyes, and the remainder of the
party lapsed into a sort of gelatinous state, in which there was no
flavour or solidity, and very little resistance.

But the gush of philanthropy that burst forth when the departure of Mr.
Honeythunder began to impend, must have been highly gratifying to the
feelings of that distinguished man. His coffee was produced, by the
special activity of Mr. Tope, a full hour before he wanted it. Mr.
Crisparkle sat with his watch in his hand for about the same period,
lest he should overstay his time. The four young people were unanimous
in believing that the Cathedral clock struck three-quarters, when it
actually struck but one. Miss Twinkleton estimated the distance to the
omnibus at five-and-twenty minutes’ walk, when it was really five. The
affectionate kindness of the whole circle hustled him into his
greatcoat, and shoved him out into the moonlight, as if he were a
fugitive traitor with whom they sympathised, and a troop of horse were
at the back door. Mr. Crisparkle and his new charge, who took him to
the omnibus, were so fervent in their apprehensions of his catching
cold, that they shut him up in it instantly and left him, with still
half-an-hour to spare.




CHAPTER VII.
MORE CONFIDENCES THAN ONE


“I know very little of that gentleman, sir,” said Neville to the Minor
Canon as they turned back.

“You know very little of your guardian?” the Minor Canon repeated.

“Almost nothing!”

“How came he—”

“To _be_ my guardian? I’ll tell you, sir. I suppose you know that we
come (my sister and I) from Ceylon?”

“Indeed, no.”

“I wonder at that. We lived with a stepfather there. Our mother died
there, when we were little children. We have had a wretched existence.
She made him our guardian, and he was a miserly wretch who grudged us
food to eat, and clothes to wear. At his death, he passed us over to
this man; for no better reason that I know of, than his being a friend
or connexion of his, whose name was always in print and catching his
attention.”

“That was lately, I suppose?”

“Quite lately, sir. This stepfather of ours was a cruel brute as well
as a grinding one. It is well he died when he did, or I might have
killed him.”

Mr. Crisparkle stopped short in the moonlight and looked at his hopeful
pupil in consternation.

“I surprise you, sir?” he said, with a quick change to a submissive
manner.

“You shock me; unspeakably shock me.”

The pupil hung his head for a little while, as they walked on, and then
said: “You never saw him beat your sister. I have seen him beat mine,
more than once or twice, and I never forgot it.”

“Nothing,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “not even a beloved and beautiful
sister’s tears under dastardly ill-usage;” he became less severe, in
spite of himself, as his indignation rose; “could justify those
horrible expressions that you used.”

“I am sorry I used them, and especially to you, sir. I beg to recall
them. But permit me to set you right on one point. You spoke of my
sister’s tears. My sister would have let him tear her to pieces, before
she would have let him believe that he could make her shed a tear.”

Mr. Crisparkle reviewed those mental notes of his, and was neither at
all surprised to hear it, nor at all disposed to question it.

“Perhaps you will think it strange, sir,”—this was said in a hesitating
voice—“that I should so soon ask you to allow me to confide in you, and
to have the kindness to hear a word or two from me in my defence?”

“Defence?” Mr. Crisparkle repeated. “You are not on your defence, Mr.
Neville.”

“I think I am, sir. At least I know I should be, if you were better
acquainted with my character.”

“Well, Mr. Neville,” was the rejoinder. “What if you leave me to find
it out?”

“Since it is your pleasure, sir,” answered the young man, with a quick
change in his manner to sullen disappointment: “since it is your
pleasure to check me in my impulse, I must submit.”

There was that in the tone of this short speech which made the
conscientious man to whom it was addressed uneasy. It hinted to him
that he might, without meaning it, turn aside a trustfulness beneficial
to a mis-shapen young mind and perhaps to his own power of directing
and improving it. They were within sight of the lights in his windows,
and he stopped.

“Let us turn back and take a turn or two up and down, Mr. Neville, or
you may not have time to finish what you wish to say to me. You are
hasty in thinking that I mean to check you. Quite the contrary. I
invite your confidence.”

“You have invited it, sir, without knowing it, ever since I came here.
I say ‘ever since,’ as if I had been here a week. The truth is, we came
here (my sister and I) to quarrel with you, and affront you, and break
away again.”

“Really?” said Mr. Crisparkle, at a dead loss for anything else to say.

“You see, we could not know what you were beforehand, sir; could we?”

“Clearly not,” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“And having liked no one else with whom we have ever been brought into
contact, we had made up our minds not to like you.”

“Really?” said Mr. Crisparkle again.

“But we do like you, sir, and we see an unmistakable difference between
your house and your reception of us, and anything else we have ever
known. This—and my happening to be alone with you—and everything around
us seeming so quiet and peaceful after Mr. Honeythunder’s departure—and
Cloisterham being so old and grave and beautiful, with the moon shining
on it—these things inclined me to open my heart.”

“I quite understand, Mr. Neville. And it is salutary to listen to such
influences.”

“In describing my own imperfections, sir, I must ask you not to suppose
that I am describing my sister’s. She has come out of the disadvantages
of our miserable life, as much better than I am, as that Cathedral
tower is higher than those chimneys.”

Mr. Crisparkle in his own breast was not so sure of this.

“I have had, sir, from my earliest remembrance, to suppress a deadly
and bitter hatred. This has made me secret and revengeful. I have been
always tyrannically held down by the strong hand. This has driven me,
in my weakness, to the resource of being false and mean. I have been
stinted of education, liberty, money, dress, the very necessaries of
life, the commonest pleasures of childhood, the commonest possessions
of youth. This has caused me to be utterly wanting in I don’t know what
emotions, or remembrances, or good instincts—I have not even a name for
the thing, you see!—that you have had to work upon in other young men
to whom you have been accustomed.”

“This is evidently true. But this is not encouraging,” thought Mr.
Crisparkle as they turned again.

“And to finish with, sir: I have been brought up among abject and
servile dependents, of an inferior race, and I may easily have
contracted some affinity with them. Sometimes, I don’t know but that it
may be a drop of what is tigerish in their blood.”

“As in the case of that remark just now,” thought Mr. Crisparkle.

“In a last word of reference to my sister, sir (we are twin children),
you ought to know, to her honour, that nothing in our misery ever
subdued her, though it often cowed me. When we ran away from it (we ran
away four times in six years, to be soon brought back and cruelly
punished), the flight was always of her planning and leading. Each time
she dressed as a boy, and showed the daring of a man. I take it we were
seven years old when we first decamped; but I remember, when I lost the
pocket-knife with which she was to have cut her hair short, how
desperately she tried to tear it out, or bite it off. I have nothing
further to say, sir, except that I hope you will bear with me and make
allowance for me.”

“Of that, Mr. Neville, you may be sure,” returned the Minor Canon. “I
don’t preach more than I can help, and I will not repay your confidence
with a sermon. But I entreat you to bear in mind, very seriously and
steadily, that if I am to do you any good, it can only be with your own
assistance; and that you can only render that, efficiently, by seeking
aid from Heaven.”

“I will try to do my part, sir.”

“And, Mr. Neville, I will try to do mine. Here is my hand on it. May
God bless our endeavours!”

They were now standing at his house-door, and a cheerful sound of
voices and laughter was heard within.

“We will take one more turn before going in,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “for
I want to ask you a question. When you said you were in a changed mind
concerning me, you spoke, not only for yourself, but for your sister
too?”

“Undoubtedly I did, sir.”

“Excuse me, Mr. Neville, but I think you have had no opportunity of
communicating with your sister, since I met you. Mr. Honeythunder was
very eloquent; but perhaps I may venture to say, without ill-nature,
that he rather monopolised the occasion. May you not have answered for
your sister without sufficient warrant?”

Neville shook his head with a proud smile.

“You don’t know, sir, yet, what a complete understanding can exist
between my sister and me, though no spoken word—perhaps hardly as much
as a look—may have passed between us. She not only feels as I have
described, but she very well knows that I am taking this opportunity of
speaking to you, both for her and for myself.”

Mr. Crisparkle looked in his face, with some incredulity; but his face
expressed such absolute and firm conviction of the truth of what he
said, that Mr. Crisparkle looked at the pavement, and mused, until they
came to his door again.

“I will ask for one more turn, sir, this time,” said the young man,
with a rather heightened colour rising in his face. “But for Mr.
Honeythunder’s—I think you called it eloquence, sir?” (somewhat slyly.)

“I—yes, I called it eloquence,” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“But for Mr. Honeythunder’s eloquence, I might have had no need to ask
you what I am going to ask you. This Mr. Edwin Drood, sir: I think
that’s the name?”

“Quite correct,” said Mr. Crisparkle. “D-r-double o-d.”

“Does he—or did he—read with you, sir?”

“Never, Mr. Neville. He comes here visiting his relation, Mr. Jasper.”

“Is Miss Bud his relation too, sir?”

(“Now, why should he ask that, with sudden superciliousness?” thought
Mr. Crisparkle.) Then he explained, aloud, what he knew of the little
story of their betrothal.

“O! _that’s_ it, is it?” said the young man. “I understand his air of
proprietorship now!”

This was said so evidently to himself, or to anybody rather than Mr.
Crisparkle, that the latter instinctively felt as if to notice it would
be almost tantamount to noticing a passage in a letter which he had
read by chance over the writer’s shoulder. A moment afterwards they
re-entered the house.

Mr. Jasper was seated at the piano as they came into his drawing-room,
and was accompanying Miss Rosebud while she sang. It was a consequence
of his playing the accompaniment without notes, and of her being a
heedless little creature, very apt to go wrong, that he followed her
lips most attentively, with his eyes as well as hands; carefully and
softly hinting the key-note from time to time. Standing with an arm
drawn round her, but with a face far more intent on Mr. Jasper than on
her singing, stood Helena, between whom and her brother an
instantaneous recognition passed, in which Mr. Crisparkle saw, or
thought he saw, the understanding that had been spoken of, flash out.
Mr. Neville then took his admiring station, leaning against the piano,
opposite the singer; Mr. Crisparkle sat down by the china shepherdess;
Edwin Drood gallantly furled and unfurled Miss Twinkleton’s fan; and
that lady passively claimed that sort of exhibitor’s proprietorship in
the accomplishment on view, which Mr. Tope, the Verger, daily claimed
in the Cathedral service.

[Illustration: At the piano]


The song went on. It was a sorrowful strain of parting, and the fresh
young voice was very plaintive and tender. As Jasper watched the pretty
lips, and ever and again hinted the one note, as though it were a low
whisper from himself, the voice became less steady, until all at once
the singer broke into a burst of tears, and shrieked out, with her
hands over her eyes: “I can’t bear this! I am frightened! Take me
away!”

With one swift turn of her lithe figure, Helena laid the little beauty
on a sofa, as if she had never caught her up. Then, on one knee beside
her, and with one hand upon her rosy mouth, while with the other she
appealed to all the rest, Helena said to them: “It’s nothing; it’s all
over; don’t speak to her for one minute, and she is well!”

Jasper’s hands had, in the same instant, lifted themselves from the
keys, and were now poised above them, as though he waited to resume. In
that attitude he yet sat quiet: not even looking round, when all the
rest had changed their places and were reassuring one another.

“Pussy’s not used to an audience; that’s the fact,” said Edwin Drood.
“She got nervous, and couldn’t hold out. Besides, Jack, you are such a
conscientious master, and require so much, that I believe you make her
afraid of you. No wonder.”

“No wonder,” repeated Helena.

“There, Jack, you hear! You would be afraid of him, under similar
circumstances, wouldn’t you, Miss Landless?”

“Not under any circumstances,” returned Helena.

Jasper brought down his hands, looked over his shoulder, and begged to
thank Miss Landless for her vindication of his character. Then he fell
to dumbly playing, without striking the notes, while his little pupil
was taken to an open window for air, and was otherwise petted and
restored. When she was brought back, his place was empty. “Jack’s gone,
Pussy,” Edwin told her. “I am more than half afraid he didn’t like to
be charged with being the Monster who had frightened you.” But she
answered never a word, and shivered, as if they had made her a little
too cold.

Miss Twinkleton now opining that indeed these were late hours, Mrs.
Crisparkle, for finding ourselves outside the walls of the Nuns’ House,
and that we who undertook the formation of the future wives and mothers
of England (the last words in a lower voice, as requiring to be
communicated in confidence) were really bound (voice coming up again)
to set a better example than one of rakish habits, wrappers were put in
requisition, and the two young cavaliers volunteered to see the ladies
home. It was soon done, and the gate of the Nuns’ House closed upon
them.

The boarders had retired, and only Mrs. Tisher in solitary vigil
awaited the new pupil. Her bedroom being within Rosa’s, very little
introduction or explanation was necessary, before she was placed in
charge of her new friend, and left for the night.

“This is a blessed relief, my dear,” said Helena. “I have been dreading
all day, that I should be brought to bay at this time.”

“There are not many of us,” returned Rosa, “and we are good-natured
girls; at least the others are; I can answer for them.”

“I can answer for you,” laughed Helena, searching the lovely little
face with her dark, fiery eyes, and tenderly caressing the small
figure. “You will be a friend to me, won’t you?”

“I hope so. But the idea of my being a friend to you seems too absurd,
though.”

“Why?”

“O, I am such a mite of a thing, and you are so womanly and handsome.
You seem to have resolution and power enough to crush me. I shrink into
nothing by the side of your presence even.”

“I am a neglected creature, my dear, unacquainted with all
accomplishments, sensitively conscious that I have everything to learn,
and deeply ashamed to own my ignorance.”

“And yet you acknowledge everything to me!” said Rosa.

“My pretty one, can I help it? There is a fascination in you.”

“O! is there though?” pouted Rosa, half in jest and half in earnest.
“What a pity Master Eddy doesn’t feel it more!”

Of course her relations towards that young gentleman had been already
imparted in Minor Canon Corner.

“Why, surely he must love you with all his heart!” cried Helena, with
an earnestness that threatened to blaze into ferocity if he didn’t.

“Eh? O, well, I suppose he does,” said Rosa, pouting again; “I am sure
I have no right to say he doesn’t. Perhaps it’s my fault. Perhaps I am
not as nice to him as I ought to be. I don’t think I am. But it _is_ so
ridiculous!”

Helena’s eyes demanded what was.

“_We_ are,” said Rosa, answering as if she had spoken. “We are such a
ridiculous couple. And we are always quarrelling.”

“Why?”

“Because we both know we are ridiculous, my dear!” Rosa gave that
answer as if it were the most conclusive answer in the world.

Helena’s masterful look was intent upon her face for a few moments, and
then she impulsively put out both her hands and said:

“You will be my friend and help me?”

“Indeed, my dear, I will,” replied Rosa, in a tone of affectionate
childishness that went straight and true to her heart; “I will be as
good a friend as such a mite of a thing can be to such a noble creature
as you. And be a friend to me, please; I don’t understand myself: and I
want a friend who can understand me, very much indeed.”

Helena Landless kissed her, and retaining both her hands said:

“Who is Mr. Jasper?”

Rosa turned aside her head in answering: “Eddy’s uncle, and my
music-master.”

“You do not love him?”

“Ugh!” She put her hands up to her face, and shook with fear or horror.

“You know that he loves you?”

“O, don’t, don’t, don’t!” cried Rosa, dropping on her knees, and
clinging to her new resource. “Don’t tell me of it! He terrifies me. He
haunts my thoughts, like a dreadful ghost. I feel that I am never safe
from him. I feel as if he could pass in through the wall when he is
spoken of.” She actually did look round, as if she dreaded to see him
standing in the shadow behind her.

“Try to tell me more about it, darling.”

“Yes, I will, I will. Because you are so strong. But hold me the while,
and stay with me afterwards.”

“My child! You speak as if he had threatened you in some dark way.”

“He has never spoken to me about—that. Never.”

“What has he done?”

“He has made a slave of me with his looks. He has forced me to
understand him, without his saying a word; and he has forced me to keep
silence, without his uttering a threat. When I play, he never moves his
eyes from my hands. When I sing, he never moves his eyes from my lips.
When he corrects me, and strikes a note, or a chord, or plays a
passage, he himself is in the sounds, whispering that he pursues me as
a lover, and commanding me to keep his secret. I avoid his eyes, but he
forces me to see them without looking at them. Even when a glaze comes
over them (which is sometimes the case), and he seems to wander away
into a frightful sort of dream in which he threatens most, he obliges
me to know it, and to know that he is sitting close at my side, more
terrible to me than ever.”

“What is this imagined threatening, pretty one? What is threatened?”

“I don’t know. I have never even dared to think or wonder what it is.”

“And was this all, to-night?”

“This was all; except that to-night when he watched my lips so closely
as I was singing, besides feeling terrified I felt ashamed and
passionately hurt. It was as if he kissed me, and I couldn’t bear it,
but cried out. You must never breathe this to any one. Eddy is devoted
to him. But you said to-night that you would not be afraid of him,
under any circumstances, and that gives me—who am so much afraid of
him—courage to tell only you. Hold me! Stay with me! I am too
frightened to be left by myself.”

The lustrous gipsy-face drooped over the clinging arms and bosom, and
the wild black hair fell down protectingly over the childish form.
There was a slumbering gleam of fire in the intense dark eyes, though
they were then softened with compassion and admiration. Let whomsoever
it most concerned look well to it!




CHAPTER VIII.
DAGGERS DRAWN


The two young men, having seen the damsels, their charges, enter the
courtyard of the Nuns’ House, and finding themselves coldly stared at
by the brazen door-plate, as if the battered old beau with the glass in
his eye were insolent, look at one another, look along the perspective
of the moonlit street, and slowly walk away together.

“Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?” says Neville.

“Not this time,” is the careless answer. “I leave for London again,
to-morrow. But I shall be here, off and on, until next Midsummer; then
I shall take my leave of Cloisterham, and England too; for many a long
day, I expect.”

“Are you going abroad?”

“Going to wake up Egypt a little,” is the condescending answer.

“Are you reading?”

“Reading?” repeats Edwin Drood, with a touch of contempt. “No. Doing,
working, engineering. My small patrimony was left a part of the capital
of the Firm I am with, by my father, a former partner; and I am a
charge upon the Firm until I come of age; and then I step into my
modest share in the concern. Jack—you met him at dinner—is, until then,
my guardian and trustee.”

“I heard from Mr. Crisparkle of your other good fortune.”

“What do you mean by my other good fortune?”

Neville has made his remark in a watchfully advancing, and yet furtive
and shy manner, very expressive of that peculiar air already noticed,
of being at once hunter and hunted. Edwin has made his retort with an
abruptness not at all polite. They stop and interchange a rather heated
look.

“I hope,” says Neville, “there is no offence, Mr. Drood, in my
innocently referring to your betrothal?”

“By George!” cries Edwin, leading on again at a somewhat quicker pace;
“everybody in this chattering old Cloisterham refers to it. I wonder no
public-house has been set up, with my portrait for the sign of The
Betrothed’s Head. Or Pussy’s portrait. One or the other.”

“I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle’s mentioning the matter to me,
quite openly,” Neville begins.

“No; that’s true; you are not,” Edwin Drood assents.

“But,” resumes Neville, “I am accountable for mentioning it to you. And
I did so, on the supposition that you could not fail to be highly proud
of it.”

Now, there are these two curious touches of human nature working the
secret springs of this dialogue. Neville Landless is already enough
impressed by Little Rosebud, to feel indignant that Edwin Drood (far
below her) should hold his prize so lightly. Edwin Drood is already
enough impressed by Helena, to feel indignant that Helena’s brother
(far below her) should dispose of him so coolly, and put him out of the
way so entirely.

However, the last remark had better be answered. So, says Edwin:

“I don’t know, Mr. Neville” (adopting that mode of address from Mr.
Crisparkle), “that what people are proudest of, they usually talk most
about; I don’t know either, that what they are proudest of, they most
like other people to talk about. But I live a busy life, and I speak
under correction by you readers, who ought to know everything, and I
daresay do.”

By this time they had both become savage; Mr. Neville out in the open;
Edwin Drood under the transparent cover of a popular tune, and a stop
now and then to pretend to admire picturesque effects in the moonlight
before him.

“It does not seem to me very civil in you,” remarks Neville, at length,
“to reflect upon a stranger who comes here, not having had your
advantages, to try to make up for lost time. But, to be sure, I was not
brought up in ‘busy life,’ and my ideas of civility were formed among
Heathens.”

“Perhaps, the best civility, whatever kind of people we are brought up
among,” retorts Edwin Drood, “is to mind our own business. If you will
set me that example, I promise to follow it.”

“Do you know that you take a great deal too much upon yourself?” is the
angry rejoinder, “and that in the part of the world I come from, you
would be called to account for it?”

“By whom, for instance?” asks Edwin Drood, coming to a halt, and
surveying the other with a look of disdain.

But, here a startling right hand is laid on Edwin’s shoulder, and
Jasper stands between them. For, it would seem that he, too, has
strolled round by the Nuns’ House, and has come up behind them on the
shadowy side of the road.

“Ned, Ned, Ned!” he says; “we must have no more of this. I don’t like
this. I have overheard high words between you two. Remember, my dear
boy, you are almost in the position of host to-night. You belong, as it
were, to the place, and in a manner represent it towards a stranger.
Mr. Neville is a stranger, and you should respect the obligations of
hospitality. And, Mr. Neville,” laying his left hand on the inner
shoulder of that young gentleman, and thus walking on between them,
hand to shoulder on either side: “you will pardon me; but I appeal to
you to govern your temper too. Now, what is amiss? But why ask! Let
there be nothing amiss, and the question is superfluous. We are all
three on a good understanding, are we not?”

After a silent struggle between the two young men who shall speak last,
Edwin Drood strikes in with: “So far as I am concerned, Jack, there is
no anger in me.”

“Nor in me,” says Neville Landless, though not so freely; or perhaps so
carelessly. “But if Mr. Drood knew all that lies behind me, far away
from here, he might know better how it is that sharp-edged words have
sharp edges to wound me.”

“Perhaps,” says Jasper, in a soothing manner, “we had better not
qualify our good understanding. We had better not say anything having
the appearance of a remonstrance or condition; it might not seem
generous. Frankly and freely, you see there is no anger in Ned. Frankly
and freely, there is no anger in you, Mr. Neville?”

“None at all, Mr. Jasper.” Still, not quite so frankly or so freely;
or, be it said once again, not quite so carelessly perhaps.

“All over then! Now, my bachelor gatehouse is a few yards from here,
and the heater is on the fire, and the wine and glasses are on the
table, and it is not a stone’s throw from Minor Canon Corner. Ned, you
are up and away to-morrow. We will carry Mr. Neville in with us, to
take a stirrup-cup.”

“With all my heart, Jack.”

“And with all mine, Mr. Jasper.” Neville feels it impossible to say
less, but would rather not go. He has an impression upon him that he
has lost hold of his temper; feels that Edwin Drood’s coolness, so far
from being infectious, makes him red-hot.

Mr. Jasper, still walking in the centre, hand to shoulder on either
side, beautifully turns the Refrain of a drinking song, and they all go
up to his rooms. There, the first object visible, when he adds the
light of a lamp to that of the fire, is the portrait over the
chimneypiece. It is not an object calculated to improve the
understanding between the two young men, as rather awkwardly reviving
the subject of their difference. Accordingly, they both glance at it
consciously, but say nothing. Jasper, however (who would appear from
his conduct to have gained but an imperfect clue to the cause of their
late high words), directly calls attention to it.

“You recognise that picture, Mr. Neville?” shading the lamp to throw
the light upon it.

“I recognise it, but it is far from flattering the original.”

“O, you are hard upon it! It was done by Ned, who made me a present of
it.”

“I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood.” Neville apologises, with a real
intention to apologise; “if I had known I was in the artist’s
presence—”

“O, a joke, sir, a mere joke,” Edwin cuts in, with a provoking yawn. “A
little humouring of Pussy’s points! I’m going to paint her gravely, one
of these days, if she’s good.”

The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this is
said, as the speaker throws himself back in a chair and clasps his
hands at the back of his head, as a rest for it, is very exasperating
to the excitable and excited Neville. Jasper looks observantly from the
one to the other, slightly smiles, and turns his back to mix a jug of
mulled wine at the fire. It seems to require much mixing and
compounding.

“I suppose, Mr. Neville,” says Edwin, quick to resent the indignant
protest against himself in the face of young Landless, which is fully
as visible as the portrait, or the fire, or the lamp: “I suppose that
if you painted the picture of your lady love—”

“I can’t paint,” is the hasty interruption.

“That’s your misfortune, and not your fault. You would if you could.
But if you could, I suppose you would make her (no matter what she was
in reality), Juno, Minerva, Diana, and Venus, all in one. Eh?”

“I have no lady love, and I can’t say.”

“If I were to try my hand,” says Edwin, with a boyish boastfulness
getting up in him, “on a portrait of Miss Landless—in earnest, mind
you; in earnest—you should see what I could do!”

“My sister’s consent to sit for it being first got, I suppose? As it
never will be got, I am afraid I shall never see what you can do. I
must bear the loss.”

Jasper turns round from the fire, fills a large goblet glass for
Neville, fills a large goblet glass for Edwin, and hands each his own;
then fills for himself, saying:

“Come, Mr. Neville, we are to drink to my nephew, Ned. As it is his
foot that is in the stirrup—metaphorically—our stirrup-cup is to be
devoted to him. Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!”

Jasper sets the example of nearly emptying his glass, and Neville
follows it. Edwin Drood says, “Thank you both very much,” and follows
the double example.

“Look at him,” cries Jasper, stretching out his hand admiringly and
tenderly, though rallyingly too. “See where he lounges so easily, Mr.
Neville! The world is all before him where to choose. A life of
stirring work and interest, a life of change and excitement, a life of
domestic ease and love! Look at him!”

Edwin Drood’s face has become quickly and remarkably flushed with the
wine; so has the face of Neville Landless. Edwin still sits thrown back
in his chair, making that rest of clasped hands for his head.

“See how little he heeds it all!” Jasper proceeds in a bantering vein.
“It is hardly worth his while to pluck the golden fruit that hangs ripe
on the tree for him. And yet consider the contrast, Mr. Neville. You
and I have no prospect of stirring work and interest, or of change and
excitement, or of domestic ease and love. You and I have no prospect
(unless you are more fortunate than I am, which may easily be), but the
tedious unchanging round of this dull place.”

“Upon my soul, Jack,” says Edwin, complacently, “I feel quite
apologetic for having my way smoothed as you describe. But you know
what I know, Jack, and it may not be so very easy as it seems, after
all. May it, Pussy?” To the portrait, with a snap of his thumb and
finger. “We have got to hit it off yet; haven’t we, Pussy? You know
what I mean, Jack.”

[Illustration: On dangerous ground]


His speech has become thick and indistinct. Jasper, quiet and
self-possessed, looks to Neville, as expecting his answer or comment.
When Neville speaks, _his_ speech is also thick and indistinct.

“It might have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships,”
he says, defiantly.

“Pray,” retorts Edwin, turning merely his eyes in that direction, “pray
why might it have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some
hardships?”

“Ay,” Jasper assents, with an air of interest; “let us know why?”

“Because they might have made him more sensible,” says Neville, “of
good fortune that is not by any means necessarily the result of his own
merits.”

Mr. Jasper quickly looks to his nephew for his rejoinder.

“Have _you_ known hardships, may I ask?” says Edwin Drood, sitting
upright.

Mr. Jasper quickly looks to the other for his retort.

“I have.”

“And what have they made you sensible of?”

Mr. Jasper’s play of eyes between the two holds good throughout the
dialogue, to the end.

“I have told you once before to-night.”

“You have done nothing of the sort.”

“I tell you I have. That you take a great deal too much upon yourself.”

“You added something else to that, if I remember?”

“Yes, I did say something else.”

“Say it again.”

“I said that in the part of the world I come from, you would be called
to account for it.”

“Only there?” cries Edwin Drood, with a contemptuous laugh. “A long way
off, I believe? Yes; I see! That part of the world is at a safe
distance.”

“Say here, then,” rejoins the other, rising in a fury. “Say anywhere!
Your vanity is intolerable, your conceit is beyond endurance; you talk
as if you were some rare and precious prize, instead of a common
boaster. You are a common fellow, and a common boaster.”

“Pooh, pooh,” says Edwin Drood, equally furious, but more collected;
“how should you know? You may know a black common fellow, or a black
common boaster, when you see him (and no doubt you have a large
acquaintance that way); but you are no judge of white men.”

This insulting allusion to his dark skin infuriates Neville to that
violent degree, that he flings the dregs of his wine at Edwin Drood,
and is in the act of flinging the goblet after it, when his arm is
caught in the nick of time by Jasper.

“Ned, my dear fellow!” he cries in a loud voice; “I entreat you, I
command you, to be still!” There has been a rush of all the three, and
a clattering of glasses and overturning of chairs. “Mr. Neville, for
shame! Give this glass to me. Open your hand, sir. I WILL have it!”

But Neville throws him off, and pauses for an instant, in a raging
passion, with the goblet yet in his uplifted hand. Then, he dashes it
down under the grate, with such force that the broken splinters fly out
again in a shower; and he leaves the house.

When he first emerges into the night air, nothing around him is still
or steady; nothing around him shows like what it is; he only knows that
he stands with a bare head in the midst of a blood-red whirl, waiting
to be struggled with, and to struggle to the death.

But, nothing happening, and the moon looking down upon him as if he
were dead after a fit of wrath, he holds his steam-hammer beating head
and heart, and staggers away. Then, he becomes half-conscious of having
heard himself bolted and barred out, like a dangerous animal; and
thinks what shall he do?

Some wildly passionate ideas of the river dissolve under the spell of
the moonlight on the Cathedral and the graves, and the remembrance of
his sister, and the thought of what he owes to the good man who has but
that very day won his confidence and given him his pledge. He repairs
to Minor Canon Corner, and knocks softly at the door.

It is Mr. Crisparkle’s custom to sit up last of the early household,
very softly touching his piano and practising his favourite parts in
concerted vocal music. The south wind that goes where it lists, by way
of Minor Canon Corner on a still night, is not more subdued than Mr.
Crisparkle at such times, regardful of the slumbers of the china
shepherdess.

His knock is immediately answered by Mr. Crisparkle himself. When he
opens the door, candle in hand, his cheerful face falls, and
disappointed amazement is in it.

“Mr. Neville! In this disorder! Where have you been?”

“I have been to Mr. Jasper’s, sir. With his nephew.”

“Come in.”

The Minor Canon props him by the elbow with a strong hand (in a
strictly scientific manner, worthy of his morning trainings), and turns
him into his own little book-room, and shuts the door.

“I have begun ill, sir. I have begun dreadfully ill.”

“Too true. You are not sober, Mr. Neville.”

“I am afraid I am not, sir, though I can satisfy you at another time
that I have had a very little indeed to drink, and that it overcame me
in the strangest and most sudden manner.”

“Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville,” says the Minor Canon, shaking his head with
a sorrowful smile; “I have heard that said before.”

“I think—my mind is much confused, but I think—it is equally true of
Mr. Jasper’s nephew, sir.”

“Very likely,” is the dry rejoinder.

“We quarrelled, sir. He insulted me most grossly. He had heated that
tigerish blood I told you of to-day, before then.”

“Mr. Neville,” rejoins the Minor Canon, mildly, but firmly: “I request
you not to speak to me with that clenched right hand. Unclench it, if
you please.”

“He goaded me, sir,” pursues the young man, instantly obeying, “beyond
my power of endurance. I cannot say whether or no he meant it at first,
but he did it. He certainly meant it at last. In short, sir,” with an
irrepressible outburst, “in the passion into which he lashed me, I
would have cut him down if I could, and I tried to do it.”

“You have clenched that hand again,” is Mr. Crisparkle’s quiet
commentary.

“I beg your pardon, sir.”

“You know your room, for I showed it you before dinner; but I will
accompany you to it once more. Your arm, if you please. Softly, for the
house is all a-bed.”

Scooping his hand into the same scientific elbow-rest as before, and
backing it up with the inert strength of his arm, as skilfully as a
Police Expert, and with an apparent repose quite unattainable by
novices, Mr. Crisparkle conducts his pupil to the pleasant and orderly
old room prepared for him. Arrived there, the young man throws himself
into a chair, and, flinging his arms upon his reading-table, rests his
head upon them with an air of wretched self-reproach.

The gentle Minor Canon has had it in his thoughts to leave the room,
without a word. But looking round at the door, and seeing this dejected
figure, he turns back to it, touches it with a mild hand, says “Good
night!” A sob is his only acknowledgment. He might have had many a
worse; perhaps, could have had few better.

Another soft knock at the outer door attracts his attention as he goes
down-stairs. He opens it to Mr. Jasper, holding in his hand the pupil’s
hat.

“We have had an awful scene with him,” says Jasper, in a low voice.

“Has it been so bad as that?”

“Murderous!”

Mr. Crisparkle remonstrates: “No, no, no. Do not use such strong
words.”

“He might have laid my dear boy dead at my feet. It is no fault of his,
that he did not. But that I was, through the mercy of God, swift and
strong with him, he would have cut him down on my hearth.”

The phrase smites home. “Ah!” thinks Mr. Crisparkle, “his own words!”

“Seeing what I have seen to-night, and hearing what I have heard,” adds
Jasper, with great earnestness, “I shall never know peace of mind when
there is danger of those two coming together, with no one else to
interfere. It was horrible. There is something of the tiger in his dark
blood.”

“Ah!” thinks Mr. Crisparkle, “so he said!”

“You, my dear sir,” pursues Jasper, taking his hand, “even you, have
accepted a dangerous charge.”

“You need have no fear for me, Jasper,” returns Mr. Crisparkle, with a
quiet smile. “I have none for myself.”

“I have none for myself,” returns Jasper, with an emphasis on the last
pronoun, “because I am not, nor am I in the way of being, the object of
his hostility. But you may be, and my dear boy has been. Good night!”

Mr. Crisparkle goes in, with the hat that has so easily, so almost
imperceptibly, acquired the right to be hung up in his hall; hangs it
up; and goes thoughtfully to bed.




CHAPTER IX.
BIRDS IN THE BUSH


Rosa, having no relation that she knew of in the world, had, from the
seventh year of her age, known no home but the Nuns’ House, and no
mother but Miss Twinkleton. Her remembrance of her own mother was of a
pretty little creature like herself (not much older than herself it
seemed to her), who had been brought home in her father’s arms,
drowned. The fatal accident had happened at a party of pleasure. Every
fold and colour in the pretty summer dress, and even the long wet hair,
with scattered petals of ruined flowers still clinging to it, as the
dead young figure, in its sad, sad beauty lay upon the bed, were fixed
indelibly in Rosa’s recollection. So were the wild despair and the
subsequent bowed-down grief of her poor young father, who died
broken-hearted on the first anniversary of that hard day.

The betrothal of Rosa grew out of the soothing of his year of mental
distress by his fast friend and old college companion, Drood: who
likewise had been left a widower in his youth. But he, too, went the
silent road into which all earthly pilgrimages merge, some sooner, and
some later; and thus the young couple had come to be as they were.

The atmosphere of pity surrounding the little orphan girl when she
first came to Cloisterham, had never cleared away. It had taken
brighter hues as she grew older, happier, prettier; now it had been
golden, now roseate, and now azure; but it had always adorned her with
some soft light of its own. The general desire to console and caress
her, had caused her to be treated in the beginning as a child much
younger than her years; the same desire had caused her to be still
petted when she was a child no longer. Who should be her favourite, who
should anticipate this or that small present, or do her this or that
small service; who should take her home for the holidays; who should
write to her the oftenest when they were separated, and whom she would
most rejoice to see again when they were reunited; even these gentle
rivalries were not without their slight dashes of bitterness in the
Nuns’ House. Well for the poor Nuns in their day, if they hid no harder
strife under their veils and rosaries!

Thus Rosa had grown to be an amiable, giddy, wilful, winning little
creature; spoilt, in the sense of counting upon kindness from all
around her; but not in the sense of repaying it with indifference.
Possessing an exhaustless well of affection in her nature, its
sparkling waters had freshened and brightened the Nuns’ House for
years, and yet its depths had never yet been moved: what might betide
when that came to pass; what developing changes might fall upon the
heedless head, and light heart, then; remained to be seen.

By what means the news that there had been a quarrel between the two
young men overnight, involving even some kind of onslaught by Mr.
Neville upon Edwin Drood, got into Miss Twinkleton’s establishment
before breakfast, it is impossible to say. Whether it was brought in by
the birds of the air, or came blowing in with the very air itself, when
the casement windows were set open; whether the baker brought it
kneaded into the bread, or the milkman delivered it as part of the
adulteration of his milk; or the housemaids, beating the dust out of
their mats against the gateposts, received it in exchange deposited on
the mats by the town atmosphere; certain it is that the news permeated
every gable of the old building before Miss Twinkleton was down, and
that Miss Twinkleton herself received it through Mrs. Tisher, while yet
in the act of dressing; or (as she might have expressed the phrase to a
parent or guardian of a mythological turn) of sacrificing to the
Graces.

Miss Landless’s brother had thrown a bottle at Mr. Edwin Drood.

Miss Landless’s brother had thrown a knife at Mr. Edwin Drood.

A knife became suggestive of a fork; and Miss Landless’s brother had
thrown a fork at Mr. Edwin Drood.

As in the governing precedence of Peter Piper, alleged to have picked
the peck of pickled pepper, it was held physically desirable to have
evidence of the existence of the peck of pickled pepper which Peter
Piper was alleged to have picked; so, in this case, it was held
psychologically important to know why Miss Landless’s brother threw a
bottle, knife, or fork—or bottle, knife, _and_ fork—for the cook had
been given to understand it was all three—at Mr. Edwin Drood?

Well, then. Miss Landless’s brother had said he admired Miss Bud. Mr.
Edwin Drood had said to Miss Landless’s brother that he had no business
to admire Miss Bud. Miss Landless’s brother had then “up’d” (this was
the cook’s exact information) with the bottle, knife, fork, and
decanter (the decanter now coolly flying at everybody’s head, without
the least introduction), and thrown them all at Mr. Edwin Drood.

Poor little Rosa put a forefinger into each of her ears when these
rumours began to circulate, and retired into a corner, beseeching not
to be told any more; but Miss Landless, begging permission of Miss
Twinkleton to go and speak with her brother, and pretty plainly showing
that she would take it if it were not given, struck out the more
definite course of going to Mr. Crisparkle’s for accurate intelligence.

When she came back (being first closeted with Miss Twinkleton, in order
that anything objectionable in her tidings might be retained by that
discreet filter), she imparted to Rosa only, what had taken place;
dwelling with a flushed cheek on the provocation her brother had
received, but almost limiting it to that last gross affront as crowning
“some other words between them,” and, out of consideration for her new
friend, passing lightly over the fact that the other words had
originated in her lover’s taking things in general so very easily. To
Rosa direct, she brought a petition from her brother that she would
forgive him; and, having delivered it with sisterly earnestness, made
an end of the subject.

It was reserved for Miss Twinkleton to tone down the public mind of the
Nuns’ House. That lady, therefore, entering in a stately manner what
plebeians might have called the school-room, but what, in the patrician
language of the head of the Nuns’ House, was euphuistically, not to say
round-aboutedly, denominated “the apartment allotted to study,” and
saying with a forensic air, “Ladies!” all rose. Mrs. Tisher at the same
time grouped herself behind her chief, as representing Queen
Elizabeth’s first historical female friend at Tilbury fort. Miss
Twinkleton then proceeded to remark that Rumour, Ladies, had been
represented by the bard of Avon—needless were it to mention the
immortal SHAKESPEARE, also called the Swan of his native river, not
improbably with some reference to the ancient superstition that that
bird of graceful plumage (Miss Jennings will please stand upright) sang
sweetly on the approach of death, for which we have no ornithological
authority,—Rumour, Ladies, had been represented by that bard—hem!—

        “who drew
The celebrated Jew,”


as painted full of tongues. Rumour in Cloisterham (Miss Ferdinand will
honour me with her attention) was no exception to the great limner’s
portrait of Rumour elsewhere. A slight _fracas_ between two young
gentlemen occurring last night within a hundred miles of these peaceful
walls (Miss Ferdinand, being apparently incorrigible, will have the
kindness to write out this evening, in the original language, the first
four fables of our vivacious neighbour, Monsieur La Fontaine) had been
very grossly exaggerated by Rumour’s voice. In the first alarm and
anxiety arising from our sympathy with a sweet young friend, not wholly
to be dissociated from one of the gladiators in the bloodless arena in
question (the impropriety of Miss Reynolds’s appearing to stab herself
in the hand with a pin, is far too obvious, and too glaringly
unladylike, to be pointed out), we descended from our maiden elevation
to discuss this uncongenial and this unfit theme. Responsible inquiries
having assured us that it was but one of those “airy nothings” pointed
at by the Poet (whose name and date of birth Miss Giggles will supply
within half an hour), we would now discard the subject, and concentrate
our minds upon the grateful labours of the day.

But the subject so survived all day, nevertheless, that Miss Ferdinand
got into new trouble by surreptitiously clapping on a paper moustache
at dinner-time, and going through the motions of aiming a water-bottle
at Miss Giggles, who drew a table-spoon in defence.

Now, Rosa thought of this unlucky quarrel a great deal, and thought of
it with an uncomfortable feeling that she was involved in it, as cause,
or consequence, or what not, through being in a false position
altogether as to her marriage engagement. Never free from such
uneasiness when she was with her affianced husband, it was not likely
that she would be free from it when they were apart. To-day, too, she
was cast in upon herself, and deprived of the relief of talking freely
with her new friend, because the quarrel had been with Helena’s
brother, and Helena undisguisedly avoided the subject as a delicate and
difficult one to herself. At this critical time, of all times, Rosa’s
guardian was announced as having come to see her.

Mr. Grewgious had been well selected for his trust, as a man of
incorruptible integrity, but certainly for no other appropriate quality
discernible on the surface. He was an arid, sandy man, who, if he had
been put into a grinding-mill, looked as if he would have ground
immediately into high-dried snuff. He had a scanty flat crop of hair,
in colour and consistency like some very mangy yellow fur tippet; it
was so unlike hair, that it must have been a wig, but for the
stupendous improbability of anybody’s voluntarily sporting such a head.
The little play of feature that his face presented, was cut deep into
it, in a few hard curves that made it more like work; and he had
certain notches in his forehead, which looked as though Nature had been
about to touch them into sensibility or refinement, when she had
impatiently thrown away the chisel, and said: “I really cannot be
worried to finish off this man; let him go as he is.”

With too great length of throat at his upper end, and too much
ankle-bone and heel at his lower; with an awkward and hesitating
manner; with a shambling walk; and with what is called a near
sight—which perhaps prevented his observing how much white cotton
stocking he displayed to the public eye, in contrast with his black
suit—Mr. Grewgious still had some strange capacity in him of making on
the whole an agreeable impression.

Mr. Grewgious was discovered by his ward, much discomfited by being in
Miss Twinkleton’s company in Miss Twinkleton’s own sacred room. Dim
forebodings of being examined in something, and not coming well out of
it, seemed to oppress the poor gentleman when found in these
circumstances.

“My dear, how do you do? I am glad to see you. My dear, how much
improved you are. Permit me to hand you a chair, my dear.”

Miss Twinkleton rose at her little writing-table, saying, with general
sweetness, as to the polite Universe: “Will you permit me to retire?”

“By no means, madam, on my account. I beg that you will not move.”

“I must entreat permission to _move_,” returned Miss Twinkleton,
repeating the word with a charming grace; “but I will not withdraw,
since you are so obliging. If I wheel my desk to this corner window,
shall I be in the way?”

“Madam! In the way!”

“You are very kind.—Rosa, my dear, you will be under no restraint, I am
sure.”

Here Mr. Grewgious, left by the fire with Rosa, said again: “My dear,
how do you do? I am glad to see you, my dear.” And having waited for
her to sit down, sat down himself.

“My visits,” said Mr. Grewgious, “are, like those of the angels—not
that I compare myself to an angel.”

“No, sir,” said Rosa.

“Not by any means,” assented Mr. Grewgious. “I merely refer to my
visits, which are few and far between. The angels are, we know very
well, up-stairs.”

Miss Twinkleton looked round with a kind of stiff stare.

“I refer, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious, laying his hand on Rosa’s, as
the possibility thrilled through his frame of his otherwise seeming to
take the awful liberty of calling Miss Twinkleton my dear; “I refer to
the other young ladies.”

Miss Twinkleton resumed her writing.

Mr. Grewgious, with a sense of not having managed his opening point
quite as neatly as he might have desired, smoothed his head from back
to front as if he had just dived, and were pressing the water out—this
smoothing action, however superfluous, was habitual with him—and took a
pocket-book from his coat-pocket, and a stump of black-lead pencil from
his waistcoat-pocket.

“I made,” he said, turning the leaves: “I made a guiding memorandum or
so—as I usually do, for I have no conversational powers whatever—to
which I will, with your permission, my dear, refer. ‘Well and happy.’
Truly. You are well and happy, my dear? You look so.”

“Yes, indeed, sir,” answered Rosa.

“For which,” said Mr. Grewgious, with a bend of his head towards the
corner window, “our warmest acknowledgments are due, and I am sure are
rendered, to the maternal kindness and the constant care and
consideration of the lady whom I have now the honour to see before me.”

This point, again, made but a lame departure from Mr. Grewgious, and
never got to its destination; for, Miss Twinkleton, feeling that the
courtesies required her to be by this time quite outside the
conversation, was biting the end of her pen, and looking upward, as
waiting for the descent of an idea from any member of the Celestial
Nine who might have one to spare.

Mr. Grewgious smoothed his smooth head again, and then made another
reference to his pocket-book; lining out “well and happy,” as disposed
of.

“‘Pounds, shillings, and pence,’ is my next note. A dry subject for a
young lady, but an important subject too. Life is pounds, shillings,
and pence. Death is—” A sudden recollection of the death of her two
parents seemed to stop him, and he said in a softer tone, and evidently
inserting the negative as an after-thought: “Death is _not_ pounds,
shillings, and pence.”

His voice was as hard and dry as himself, and Fancy might have ground
it straight, like himself, into high-dried snuff. And yet, through the
very limited means of expression that he possessed, he seemed to
express kindness. If Nature had but finished him off, kindness might
have been recognisable in his face at this moment. But if the notches
in his forehead wouldn’t fuse together, and if his face would work and
couldn’t play, what could he do, poor man!

“‘Pounds, shillings, and pence.’ You find your allowance always
sufficient for your wants, my dear?”

Rosa wanted for nothing, and therefore it was ample.

“And you are not in debt?”

Rosa laughed at the idea of being in debt. It seemed, to her
inexperience, a comical vagary of the imagination. Mr. Grewgious
stretched his near sight to be sure that this was her view of the case.
“Ah!” he said, as comment, with a furtive glance towards Miss
Twinkleton, and lining out pounds, shillings, and pence: “I spoke of
having got among the angels! So I did!”

Rosa felt what his next memorandum would prove to be, and was blushing
and folding a crease in her dress with one embarrassed hand, long
before he found it.

“‘Marriage.’ Hem!” Mr. Grewgious carried his smoothing hand down over
his eyes and nose, and even chin, before drawing his chair a little
nearer, and speaking a little more confidentially: “I now touch, my
dear, upon the point that is the direct cause of my troubling you with
the present visit. Otherwise, being a particularly Angular man, I
should not have intruded here. I am the last man to intrude into a
sphere for which I am so entirely unfitted. I feel, on these premises,
as if I was a bear—with the cramp—in a youthful Cotillon.”

His ungainliness gave him enough of the air of his simile to set Rosa
off laughing heartily.

“It strikes you in the same light,” said Mr. Grewgious, with perfect
calmness. “Just so. To return to my memorandum. Mr. Edwin has been to
and fro here, as was arranged. You have mentioned that, in your
quarterly letters to me. And you like him, and he likes you.”

“I _like_ him very much, sir,” rejoined Rosa.

“So I said, my dear,” returned her guardian, for whose ear the timid
emphasis was much too fine. “Good. And you correspond.”

“We write to one another,” said Rosa, pouting, as she recalled their
epistolary differences.

“Such is the meaning that I attach to the word ‘correspond’ in this
application, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Good. All goes well, time
works on, and at this next Christmas-time it will become necessary, as
a matter of form, to give the exemplary lady in the corner window, to
whom we are so much indebted, business notice of your departure in the
ensuing half-year. Your relations with her are far more than business
relations, no doubt; but a residue of business remains in them, and
business is business ever. I am a particularly Angular man,” proceeded
Mr. Grewgious, as if it suddenly occurred to him to mention it, “and I
am not used to give anything away. If, for these two reasons, some
competent Proxy would give _you_ away, I should take it very kindly.”

Rosa intimated, with her eyes on the ground, that she thought a
substitute might be found, if required.

“Surely, surely,” said Mr. Grewgious. “For instance, the gentleman who
teaches Dancing here—he would know how to do it with graceful
propriety. He would advance and retire in a manner satisfactory to the
feelings of the officiating clergyman, and of yourself, and the
bridegroom, and all parties concerned. I am—I am a particularly Angular
man,” said Mr. Grewgious, as if he had made up his mind to screw it out
at last: “and should only blunder.”

Rosa sat still and silent. Perhaps her mind had not got quite so far as
the ceremony yet, but was lagging on the way there.

“Memorandum, ‘Will.’ Now, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious, referring to
his notes, disposing of “Marriage” with his pencil, and taking a paper
from his pocket; “although I have before possessed you with the
contents of your father’s will, I think it right at this time to leave
a certified copy of it in your hands. And although Mr. Edwin is also
aware of its contents, I think it right at this time likewise to place
a certified copy of it in Mr. Jasper’s hand—”

“Not in his own!” asked Rosa, looking up quickly. “Cannot the copy go
to Eddy himself?”

“Why, yes, my dear, if you particularly wish it; but I spoke of Mr.
Jasper as being his trustee.”

“I do particularly wish it, if you please,” said Rosa, hurriedly and
earnestly; “I don’t like Mr. Jasper to come between us, in any way.”

“It is natural, I suppose,” said Mr. Grewgious, “that your young
husband should be all in all. Yes. You observe that I say, I suppose.
The fact is, I am a particularly Unnatural man, and I don’t know from
my own knowledge.”

Rosa looked at him with some wonder.

“I mean,” he explained, “that young ways were never my ways. I was the
only offspring of parents far advanced in life, and I half believe I
was born advanced in life myself. No personality is intended towards
the name you will so soon change, when I remark that while the general
growth of people seem to have come into existence, buds, I seem to have
come into existence a chip. I was a chip—and a very dry one—when I
first became aware of myself. Respecting the other certified copy, your
wish shall be complied with. Respecting your inheritance, I think you
know all. It is an annuity of two hundred and fifty pounds. The savings
upon that annuity, and some other items to your credit, all duly
carried to account, with vouchers, will place you in possession of a
lump-sum of money, rather exceeding Seventeen Hundred Pounds. I am
empowered to advance the cost of your preparations for your marriage
out of that fund. All is told.”

“Will you please tell me,” said Rosa, taking the paper with a prettily
knitted brow, but not opening it: “whether I am right in what I am
going to say? I can understand what you tell me, so very much better
than what I read in law-writings. My poor papa and Eddy’s father made
their agreement together, as very dear and firm and fast friends, in
order that we, too, might be very dear and firm and fast friends after
them?”

“Just so.”

“For the lasting good of both of us, and the lasting happiness of both
of us?”

“Just so.”

“That we might be to one another even much more than they had been to
one another?”

“Just so.”

“It was not bound upon Eddy, and it was not bound upon me, by any
forfeit, in case—”

“Don’t be agitated, my dear. In the case that it brings tears into your
affectionate eyes even to picture to yourself—in the case of your not
marrying one another—no, no forfeiture on either side. You would then
have been my ward until you were of age. No worse would have befallen
you. Bad enough perhaps!”

“And Eddy?”

“He would have come into his partnership derived from his father, and
into its arrears to his credit (if any), on attaining his majority,
just as now.”

Rosa, with her perplexed face and knitted brow, bit the corner of her
attested copy, as she sat with her head on one side, looking
abstractedly on the floor, and smoothing it with her foot.

“In short,” said Mr. Grewgious, “this betrothal is a wish, a sentiment,
a friendly project, tenderly expressed on both sides. That it was
strongly felt, and that there was a lively hope that it would prosper,
there can be no doubt. When you were both children, you began to be
accustomed to it, and it _has_ prospered. But circumstances alter
cases; and I made this visit to-day, partly, indeed principally, to
discharge myself of the duty of telling you, my dear, that two young
people can only be betrothed in marriage (except as a matter of
convenience, and therefore mockery and misery) of their own free will,
their own attachment, and their own assurance (it may or it may not
prove a mistaken one, but we must take our chance of that), that they
are suited to each other, and will make each other happy. Is it to be
supposed, for example, that if either of your fathers were living now,
and had any mistrust on that subject, his mind would not be changed by
the change of circumstances involved in the change of your years?
Untenable, unreasonable, inconclusive, and preposterous!”

Mr. Grewgious said all this, as if he were reading it aloud; or, still
more, as if he were repeating a lesson. So expressionless of any
approach to spontaneity were his face and manner.

“I have now, my dear,” he added, blurring out “Will” with his pencil,
“discharged myself of what is doubtless a formal duty in this case, but
still a duty in such a case. Memorandum, ‘Wishes.’ My dear, is there
any wish of yours that I can further?”

Rosa shook her head, with an almost plaintive air of hesitation in want
of help.

“Is there any instruction that I can take from you with reference to
your affairs?”

“I—I should like to settle them with Eddy first, if you please,” said
Rosa, plaiting the crease in her dress.

“Surely, surely,” returned Mr. Grewgious. “You two should be of one
mind in all things. Is the young gentleman expected shortly?”

“He has gone away only this morning. He will be back at Christmas.”

“Nothing could happen better. You will, on his return at Christmas,
arrange all matters of detail with him; you will then communicate with
me; and I will discharge myself (as a mere business acquaintance) of my
business responsibilities towards the accomplished lady in the corner
window. They will accrue at that season.” Blurring pencil once again.
“Memorandum, ‘Leave.’ Yes. I will now, my dear, take my leave.”

“Could I,” said Rosa, rising, as he jerked out of his chair in his
ungainly way: “could I ask you, most kindly to come to me at Christmas,
if I had anything particular to say to you?”

“Why, certainly, certainly,” he rejoined; apparently—if such a word can
be used of one who had no apparent lights or shadows about
him—complimented by the question. “As a particularly Angular man, I do
not fit smoothly into the social circle, and consequently I have no
other engagement at Christmas-time than to partake, on the
twenty-fifth, of a boiled turkey and celery sauce with a—with a
particularly Angular clerk I have the good fortune to possess, whose
father, being a Norfolk farmer, sends him up (the turkey up), as a
present to me, from the neighbourhood of Norwich. I should be quite
proud of your wishing to see me, my dear. As a professional Receiver of
rents, so very few people _do_ wish to see me, that the novelty would
be bracing.”

For his ready acquiescence, the grateful Rosa put her hands upon his
shoulders, stood on tiptoe, and instantly kissed him.

“Lord bless me!” cried Mr. Grewgious. “Thank you, my dear! The honour
is almost equal to the pleasure. Miss Twinkleton, madam, I have had a
most satisfactory conversation with my ward, and I will now release you
from the incumbrance of my presence.”

“Nay, sir,” rejoined Miss Twinkleton, rising with a gracious
condescension: “say not incumbrance. Not so, by any means. I cannot
permit you to say so.”

“Thank you, madam. I have read in the newspapers,” said Mr. Grewgious,
stammering a little, “that when a distinguished visitor (not that I am
one: far from it) goes to a school (not that this is one: far from it),
he asks for a holiday, or some sort of grace. It being now the
afternoon in the—College—of which you are the eminent head, the young
ladies might gain nothing, except in name, by having the rest of the
day allowed them. But if there is any young lady at all under a cloud,
might I solicit—”

“Ah, Mr. Grewgious, Mr. Grewgious!” cried Miss Twinkleton, with a
chastely-rallying forefinger. “O you gentlemen, you gentlemen! Fie for
shame, that you are so hard upon us poor maligned disciplinarians of
our sex, for your sakes! But as Miss Ferdinand is at present weighed
down by an incubus”—Miss Twinkleton might have said a pen-and-ink-ubus
of writing out Monsieur La Fontaine—“go to her, Rosa my dear, and tell
her the penalty is remitted, in deference to the intercession of your
guardian, Mr. Grewgious.”

Miss Twinkleton here achieved a curtsey, suggestive of marvels
happening to her respected legs, and which she came out of nobly, three
yards behind her starting-point.

As he held it incumbent upon him to call on Mr. Jasper before leaving
Cloisterham, Mr. Grewgious went to the gatehouse, and climbed its
postern stair. But Mr. Jasper’s door being closed, and presenting on a
slip of paper the word “Cathedral,” the fact of its being service-time
was borne into the mind of Mr. Grewgious. So he descended the stair
again, and, crossing the Close, paused at the great western
folding-door of the Cathedral, which stood open on the fine and bright,
though short-lived, afternoon, for the airing of the place.

“Dear me,” said Mr. Grewgious, peeping in, “it’s like looking down the
throat of Old Time.”

Old Time heaved a mouldy sigh from tomb and arch and vault; and gloomy
shadows began to deepen in corners; and damps began to rise from green
patches of stone; and jewels, cast upon the pavement of the nave from
stained glass by the declining sun, began to perish. Within the
grill-gate of the chancel, up the steps surmounted loomingly by the
fast-darkening organ, white robes could be dimly seen, and one feeble
voice, rising and falling in a cracked, monotonous mutter, could at
intervals be faintly heard. In the free outer air, the river, the green
pastures, and the brown arable lands, the teeming hills and dales, were
reddened by the sunset: while the distant little windows in windmills
and farm homesteads, shone, patches of bright beaten gold. In the
Cathedral, all became gray, murky, and sepulchral, and the cracked
monotonous mutter went on like a dying voice, until the organ and the
choir burst forth, and drowned it in a sea of music. Then, the sea
fell, and the dying voice made another feeble effort, and then the sea
rose high, and beat its life out, and lashed the roof, and surged among
the arches, and pierced the heights of the great tower; and then the
sea was dry, and all was still.

Mr. Grewgious had by that time walked to the chancel-steps, where he
met the living waters coming out.

“Nothing is the matter?” Thus Jasper accosted him, rather quickly. “You
have not been sent for?”

“Not at all, not at all. I came down of my own accord. I have been to
my pretty ward’s, and am now homeward bound again.”

“You found her thriving?”

“Blooming indeed. Most blooming. I merely came to tell her, seriously,
what a betrothal by deceased parents is.”

“And what is it—according to your judgment?”

Mr. Grewgious noticed the whiteness of the lips that asked the
question, and put it down to the chilling account of the Cathedral.

“I merely came to tell her that it could not be considered binding,
against any such reason for its dissolution as a want of affection, or
want of disposition to carry it into effect, on the side of either
party.”

“May I ask, had you any especial reason for telling her that?”

Mr. Grewgious answered somewhat sharply: “The especial reason of doing
my duty, sir. Simply that.” Then he added: “Come, Mr. Jasper; I know
your affection for your nephew, and that you are quick to feel on his
behalf. I assure you that this implies not the least doubt of, or
disrespect to, your nephew.”

“You could not,” returned Jasper, with a friendly pressure of his arm,
as they walked on side by side, “speak more handsomely.”

Mr. Grewgious pulled off his hat to smooth his head, and, having
smoothed it, nodded it contentedly, and put his hat on again.

“I will wager,” said Jasper, smiling—his lips were still so white that
he was conscious of it, and bit and moistened them while speaking: “I
will wager that she hinted no wish to be released from Ned.”

“And you will win your wager, if you do,” retorted Mr. Grewgious. “We
should allow some margin for little maidenly delicacies in a young
motherless creature, under such circumstances, I suppose; it is not in
my line; what do you think?”

“There can be no doubt of it.”

“I am glad you say so. Because,” proceeded Mr. Grewgious, who had all
this time very knowingly felt his way round to action on his
remembrance of what she had said of Jasper himself: “because she seems
to have some little delicate instinct that all preliminary arrangements
had best be made between Mr. Edwin Drood and herself, don’t you see?
She don’t want us, don’t you know?”

Jasper touched himself on the breast, and said, somewhat indistinctly:
“You mean me.”

Mr. Grewgious touched himself on the breast, and said: “I mean us.
Therefore, let them have their little discussions and councils
together, when Mr. Edwin Drood comes back here at Christmas; and then
you and I will step in, and put the final touches to the business.”

“So, you settled with her that you would come back at Christmas?”
observed Jasper. “I see! Mr. Grewgious, as you quite fairly said just
now, there is such an exceptional attachment between my nephew and me,
that I am more sensitive for the dear, fortunate, happy, happy fellow
than for myself. But it is only right that the young lady should be
considered, as you have pointed out, and that I should accept my cue
from you. I accept it. I understand that at Christmas they will
complete their preparations for May, and that their marriage will be
put in final train by themselves, and that nothing will remain for us
but to put ourselves in train also, and have everything ready for our
formal release from our trusts, on Edwin’s birthday.”

“That is my understanding,” assented Mr. Grewgious, as they shook hands
to part. “God bless them both!”

“God save them both!” cried Jasper.

“I said, bless them,” remarked the former, looking back over his
shoulder.

“I said, save them,” returned the latter. “Is there any difference?”




CHAPTER X.
SMOOTHING THE WAY


It has been often enough remarked that women have a curious power of
divining the characters of men, which would seem to be innate and
instinctive; seeing that it is arrived at through no patient process of
reasoning, that it can give no satisfactory or sufficient account of
itself, and that it pronounces in the most confident manner even
against accumulated observation on the part of the other sex. But it
has not been quite so often remarked that this power (fallible, like
every other human attribute) is for the most part absolutely incapable
of self-revision; and that when it has delivered an adverse opinion
which by all human lights is subsequently proved to have failed, it is
undistinguishable from prejudice, in respect of its determination not
to be corrected. Nay, the very possibility of contradiction or
disproof, however remote, communicates to this feminine judgment from
the first, in nine cases out of ten, the weakness attendant on the
testimony of an interested witness; so personally and strongly does the
fair diviner connect herself with her divination.

“Now, don’t you think, Ma dear,” said the Minor Canon to his mother one
day as she sat at her knitting in his little book-room, “that you are
rather hard on Mr. Neville?”

“No, I do _not_, Sept,” returned the old lady.

“Let us discuss it, Ma.”

“I have no objection to discuss it, Sept. I trust, my dear, I am always
open to discussion.” There was a vibration in the old lady’s cap, as
though she internally added: “and I should like to see the discussion
that would change _my_ mind!”

“Very good, Ma,” said her conciliatory son. “There is nothing like
being open to discussion.”

“I hope not, my dear,” returned the old lady, evidently shut to it.

“Well! Mr. Neville, on that unfortunate occasion, commits himself under
provocation.”

“And under mulled wine,” added the old lady.

“I must admit the wine. Though I believe the two young men were much
alike in that regard.”

“I don’t,” said the old lady.

“Why not, Ma?”

“Because I _don’t_,” said the old lady. “Still, I am quite open to
discussion.”

“But, my dear Ma, I cannot see how we are to discuss, if you take that
line.”

“Blame Mr. Neville for it, Sept, and not me,” said the old lady, with
stately severity.

“My dear Ma! why Mr. Neville?”

“Because,” said Mrs. Crisparkle, retiring on first principles, “he came
home intoxicated, and did great discredit to this house, and showed
great disrespect to this family.”

“That is not to be denied, Ma. He was then, and he is now, very sorry
for it.”

“But for Mr. Jasper’s well-bred consideration in coming up to me, next
day, after service, in the Nave itself, with his gown still on, and
expressing his hope that I had not been greatly alarmed or had my rest
violently broken, I believe I might never have heard of that
disgraceful transaction,” said the old lady.

“To be candid, Ma, I think I should have kept it from you if I could:
though I had not decidedly made up my mind. I was following Jasper out,
to confer with him on the subject, and to consider the expediency of
his and my jointly hushing the thing up on all accounts, when I found
him speaking to you. Then it was too late.”

“Too late, indeed, Sept. He was still as pale as gentlemanly ashes at
what had taken place in his rooms overnight.”

“If I _had_ kept it from you, Ma, you may be sure it would have been
for your peace and quiet, and for the good of the young men, and in my
best discharge of my duty according to my lights.”

The old lady immediately walked across the room and kissed him: saying,
“Of course, my dear Sept, I am sure of that.”

“However, it became the town-talk,” said Mr. Crisparkle, rubbing his
ear, as his mother resumed her seat, and her knitting, “and passed out
of my power.”

“And I said then, Sept,” returned the old lady, “that I thought ill of
Mr. Neville. And I say now, that I think ill of Mr. Neville. And I said
then, and I say now, that I hope Mr. Neville may come to good, but I
don’t believe he will.” Here the cap vibrated again considerably.

“I am sorry to hear you say so, Ma—”

“I am sorry to say so, my dear,” interposed the old lady, knitting on
firmly, “but I can’t help it.”

“—For,” pursued the Minor Canon, “it is undeniable that Mr. Neville is
exceedingly industrious and attentive, and that he improves apace, and
that he has—I hope I may say—an attachment to me.”

“There is no merit in the last article, my dear,” said the old lady,
quickly; “and if he says there is, I think the worse of him for the
boast.”

“But, my dear Ma, he never said there was.”

“Perhaps not,” returned the old lady; “still, I don’t see that it
greatly signifies.”

There was no impatience in the pleasant look with which Mr. Crisparkle
contemplated the pretty old piece of china as it knitted; but there
was, certainly, a humorous sense of its not being a piece of china to
argue with very closely.

“Besides, Sept, ask yourself what he would be without his sister. You
know what an influence she has over him; you know what a capacity she
has; you know that whatever he reads with you, he reads with her. Give
her her fair share of your praise, and how much do you leave for him?”

At these words Mr. Crisparkle fell into a little reverie, in which he
thought of several things. He thought of the times he had seen the
brother and sister together in deep converse over one of his own old
college books; now, in the rimy mornings, when he made those sharpening
pilgrimages to Cloisterham Weir; now, in the sombre evenings, when he
faced the wind at sunset, having climbed his favourite outlook, a
beetling fragment of monastery ruin; and the two studious figures
passed below him along the margin of the river, in which the town fires
and lights already shone, making the landscape bleaker. He thought how
the consciousness had stolen upon him that in teaching one, he was
teaching two; and how he had almost insensibly adapted his explanations
to both minds—that with which his own was daily in contact, and that
which he only approached through it. He thought of the gossip that had
reached him from the Nuns’ House, to the effect that Helena, whom he
had mistrusted as so proud and fierce, submitted herself to the
fairy-bride (as he called her), and learnt from her what she knew. He
thought of the picturesque alliance between those two, externally so
very different. He thought—perhaps most of all—could it be that these
things were yet but so many weeks old, and had become an integral part
of his life?

As, whenever the Reverend Septimus fell a-musing, his good mother took
it to be an infallible sign that he “wanted support,” the blooming old
lady made all haste to the dining-room closet, to produce from it the
support embodied in a glass of Constantia and a home-made biscuit. It
was a most wonderful closet, worthy of Cloisterham and of Minor Canon
Corner. Above it, a portrait of Handel in a flowing wig beamed down at
the spectator, with a knowing air of being up to the contents of the
closet, and a musical air of intending to combine all its harmonies in
one delicious fugue. No common closet with a vulgar door on hinges,
openable all at once, and leaving nothing to be disclosed by degrees,
this rare closet had a lock in mid-air, where two perpendicular slides
met; the one falling down, and the other pushing up. The upper slide,
on being pulled down (leaving the lower a double mystery), revealed
deep shelves of pickle-jars, jam-pots, tin canisters, spice-boxes, and
agreeably outlandish vessels of blue and white, the luscious lodgings
of preserved tamarinds and ginger. Every benevolent inhabitant of this
retreat had his name inscribed upon his stomach. The pickles, in a
uniform of rich brown double-breasted buttoned coat, and yellow or
sombre drab continuations, announced their portly forms, in printed
capitals, as Walnut, Gherkin, Onion, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Mixed, and
other members of that noble family. The jams, as being of a less
masculine temperament, and as wearing curlpapers, announced themselves
in feminine caligraphy, like a soft whisper, to be Raspberry,
Gooseberry, Apricot, Plum, Damson, Apple, and Peach. The scene closing
on these charmers, and the lower slide ascending, oranges were
revealed, attended by a mighty japanned sugar-box, to temper their
acerbity if unripe. Home-made biscuits waited at the Court of these
Powers, accompanied by a goodly fragment of plum-cake, and various
slender ladies’ fingers, to be dipped into sweet wine and kissed.
Lowest of all, a compact leaden-vault enshrined the sweet wine and a
stock of cordials: whence issued whispers of Seville Orange, Lemon,
Almond, and Caraway-seed. There was a crowning air upon this closet of
closets, of having been for ages hummed through by the Cathedral bell
and organ, until those venerable bees had made sublimated honey of
everything in store; and it was always observed that every dipper among
the shelves (deep, as has been noticed, and swallowing up head,
shoulders, and elbows) came forth again mellow-faced, and seeming to
have undergone a saccharine transfiguration.

The Reverend Septimus yielded himself up quite as willing a victim to a
nauseous medicinal herb-closet, also presided over by the china
shepherdess, as to this glorious cupboard. To what amazing infusions of
gentian, peppermint, gilliflower, sage, parsley, thyme, rue, rosemary,
and dandelion, did his courageous stomach submit itself! In what
wonderful wrappers, enclosing layers of dried leaves, would he swathe
his rosy and contented face, if his mother suspected him of a
toothache! What botanical blotches would he cheerfully stick upon his
cheek, or forehead, if the dear old lady convicted him of an
imperceptible pimple there! Into this herbaceous penitentiary, situated
on an upper staircase-landing: a low and narrow whitewashed cell, where
bunches of dried leaves hung from rusty hooks in the ceiling, and were
spread out upon shelves, in company with portentous bottles: would the
Reverend Septimus submissively be led, like the highly popular lamb who
has so long and unresistingly been led to the slaughter, and there
would he, unlike that lamb, bore nobody but himself. Not even doing
that much, so that the old lady were busy and pleased, he would quietly
swallow what was given him, merely taking a corrective dip of hands and
face into the great bowl of dried rose-leaves, and into the other great
bowl of dried lavender, and then would go out, as confident in the
sweetening powers of Cloisterham Weir and a wholesome mind, as Lady
Macbeth was hopeless of those of all the seas that roll.

In the present instance the good Minor Canon took his glass of
Constantia with an excellent grace, and, so supported to his mother’s
satisfaction, applied himself to the remaining duties of the day. In
their orderly and punctual progress they brought round Vesper Service
and twilight. The Cathedral being very cold, he set off for a brisk
trot after service; the trot to end in a charge at his favourite
fragment of ruin, which was to be carried by storm, without a pause for
breath.

He carried it in a masterly manner, and, not breathed even then, stood
looking down upon the river. The river at Cloisterham is sufficiently
near the sea to throw up oftentimes a quantity of seaweed. An unusual
quantity had come in with the last tide, and this, and the confusion of
the water, and the restless dipping and flapping of the noisy gulls,
and an angry light out seaward beyond the brown-sailed barges that were
turning black, foreshadowed a stormy night. In his mind he was
contrasting the wild and noisy sea with the quiet harbour of Minor
Canon Corner, when Helena and Neville Landless passed below him. He had
had the two together in his thoughts all day, and at once climbed down
to speak to them together. The footing was rough in an uncertain light
for any tread save that of a good climber; but the Minor Canon was as
good a climber as most men, and stood beside them before many good
climbers would have been half-way down.

“A wild evening, Miss Landless! Do you not find your usual walk with
your brother too exposed and cold for the time of year? Or at all
events, when the sun is down, and the weather is driving in from the
sea?”

Helena thought not. It was their favourite walk. It was very retired.

“It is very retired,” assented Mr. Crisparkle, laying hold of his
opportunity straightway, and walking on with them. “It is a place of
all others where one can speak without interruption, as I wish to do.
Mr. Neville, I believe you tell your sister everything that passes
between us?”

“Everything, sir.”

“Consequently,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “your sister is aware that I have
repeatedly urged you to make some kind of apology for that unfortunate
occurrence which befell on the night of your arrival here.” In saying
it he looked to her, and not to him; therefore it was she, and not he,
who replied:

“Yes.”

“I call it unfortunate, Miss Helena,” resumed Mr. Crisparkle,
“forasmuch as it certainly has engendered a prejudice against Neville.
There is a notion about, that he is a dangerously passionate fellow, of
an uncontrollable and furious temper: he is really avoided as such.”

“I have no doubt he is, poor fellow,” said Helena, with a look of proud
compassion at her brother, expressing a deep sense of his being
ungenerously treated. “I should be quite sure of it, from your saying
so; but what you tell me is confirmed by suppressed hints and
references that I meet with every day.”

“Now,” Mr. Crisparkle again resumed, in a tone of mild though firm
persuasion, “is not this to be regretted, and ought it not to be
amended? These are early days of Neville’s in Cloisterham, and I have
no fear of his outliving such a prejudice, and proving himself to have
been misunderstood. But how much wiser to take action at once, than to
trust to uncertain time! Besides, apart from its being politic, it is
right. For there can be no question that Neville was wrong.”

“He was provoked,” Helena submitted.

“He was the assailant,” Mr. Crisparkle submitted.

They walked on in silence, until Helena raised her eyes to the Minor
Canon’s face, and said, almost reproachfully: “O Mr. Crisparkle, would
you have Neville throw himself at young Drood’s feet, or at Mr.
Jasper’s, who maligns him every day? In your heart you cannot mean it.
From your heart you could not do it, if his case were yours.”

“I have represented to Mr. Crisparkle, Helena,” said Neville, with a
glance of deference towards his tutor, “that if I could do it from my
heart, I would. But I cannot, and I revolt from the pretence. You
forget however, that to put the case to Mr. Crisparkle as his own, is
to suppose to have done what I did.”

“I ask his pardon,” said Helena.

“You see,” remarked Mr. Crisparkle, again laying hold of his
opportunity, though with a moderate and delicate touch, “you both
instinctively acknowledge that Neville did wrong. Then why stop short,
and not otherwise acknowledge it?”

“Is there no difference,” asked Helena, with a little faltering in her
manner; “between submission to a generous spirit, and submission to a
base or trivial one?”

Before the worthy Minor Canon was quite ready with his argument in
reference to this nice distinction, Neville struck in:

“Help me to clear myself with Mr. Crisparkle, Helena. Help me to
convince him that I cannot be the first to make concessions without
mockery and falsehood. My nature must be changed before I can do so,
and it is not changed. I am sensible of inexpressible affront, and
deliberate aggravation of inexpressible affront, and I am angry. The
plain truth is, I am still as angry when I recall that night as I was
that night.”

“Neville,” hinted the Minor Canon, with a steady countenance, “you have
repeated that former action of your hands, which I so much dislike.”

“I am sorry for it, sir, but it was involuntary. I confessed that I was
still as angry.”

“And I confess,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “that I hoped for better things.”

“I am sorry to disappoint you, sir, but it would be far worse to
deceive you, and I should deceive you grossly if I pretended that you
had softened me in this respect. The time may come when your powerful
influence will do even that with the difficult pupil whose antecedents
you know; but it has not come yet. Is this so, and in spite of my
struggles against myself, Helena?”

She, whose dark eyes were watching the effect of what he said on Mr.
Crisparkle’s face, replied—to Mr. Crisparkle, not to him: “It is so.”
After a short pause, she answered the slightest look of inquiry
conceivable, in her brother’s eyes, with as slight an affirmative bend
of her own head; and he went on:

“I have never yet had the courage to say to you, sir, what in full
openness I ought to have said when you first talked with me on this
subject. It is not easy to say, and I have been withheld by a fear of
its seeming ridiculous, which is very strong upon me down to this last
moment, and might, but for my sister, prevent my being quite open with
you even now.—I admire Miss Bud, sir, so very much, that I cannot bear
her being treated with conceit or indifference; and even if I did not
feel that I had an injury against young Drood on my own account, I
should feel that I had an injury against him on hers.”

Mr. Crisparkle, in utter amazement, looked at Helena for corroboration,
and met in her expressive face full corroboration, and a plea for
advice.

“The young lady of whom you speak is, as you know, Mr. Neville, shortly
to be married,” said Mr. Crisparkle, gravely; “therefore your
admiration, if it be of that special nature which you seem to indicate,
is outrageously misplaced. Moreover, it is monstrous that you should
take upon yourself to be the young lady’s champion against her chosen
husband. Besides, you have seen them only once. The young lady has
become your sister’s friend; and I wonder that your sister, even on her
behalf, has not checked you in this irrational and culpable fancy.”

“She has tried, sir, but uselessly. Husband or no husband, that fellow
is incapable of the feeling with which I am inspired towards the
beautiful young creature whom he treats like a doll. I say he is as
incapable of it, as he is unworthy of her. I say she is sacrificed in
being bestowed upon him. I say that I love her, and despise and hate
him!” This with a face so flushed, and a gesture so violent, that his
sister crossed to his side, and caught his arm, remonstrating,
“Neville, Neville!”

Thus recalled to himself, he quickly became sensible of having lost the
guard he had set upon his passionate tendency, and covered his face
with his hand, as one repentant and wretched.

Mr. Crisparkle, watching him attentively, and at the same time
meditating how to proceed, walked on for some paces in silence. Then he
spoke:

“Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville, I am sorely grieved to see in you more
traces of a character as sullen, angry, and wild, as the night now
closing in. They are of too serious an aspect to leave me the resource
of treating the infatuation you have disclosed, as undeserving serious
consideration. I give it very serious consideration, and I speak to you
accordingly. This feud between you and young Drood must not go on. I
cannot permit it to go on any longer, knowing what I now know from you,
and you living under my roof. Whatever prejudiced and unauthorised
constructions your blind and envious wrath may put upon his character,
it is a frank, good-natured character. I know I can trust to it for
that. Now, pray observe what I am about to say. On reflection, and on
your sister’s representation, I am willing to admit that, in making
peace with young Drood, you have a right to be met half-way. I will
engage that you shall be, and even that young Drood shall make the
first advance. This condition fulfilled, you will pledge me the honour
of a Christian gentleman that the quarrel is for ever at an end on your
side. What may be in your heart when you give him your hand, can only
be known to the Searcher of all hearts; but it will never go well with
you, if there be any treachery there. So far, as to that; next as to
what I must again speak of as your infatuation. I understand it to have
been confided to me, and to be known to no other person save your
sister and yourself. Do I understand aright?”

Helena answered in a low voice: “It is only known to us three who are
here together.”

“It is not at all known to the young lady, your friend?”

“On my soul, no!”

“I require you, then, to give me your similar and solemn pledge, Mr.
Neville, that it shall remain the secret it is, and that you will take
no other action whatsoever upon it than endeavouring (and that most
earnestly) to erase it from your mind. I will not tell you that it will
soon pass; I will not tell you that it is the fancy of the moment; I
will not tell you that such caprices have their rise and fall among the
young and ardent every hour; I will leave you undisturbed in the belief
that it has few parallels or none, that it will abide with you a long
time, and that it will be very difficult to conquer. So much the more
weight shall I attach to the pledge I require from you, when it is
unreservedly given.”

The young man twice or thrice essayed to speak, but failed.

“Let me leave you with your sister, whom it is time you took home,”
said Mr. Crisparkle. “You will find me alone in my room by-and-by.”

“Pray do not leave us yet,” Helena implored him. “Another minute.”

“I should not,” said Neville, pressing his hand upon his face, “have
needed so much as another minute, if you had been less patient with me,
Mr. Crisparkle, less considerate of me, and less unpretendingly good
and true. O, if in my childhood I had known such a guide!”

“Follow your guide now, Neville,” murmured Helena, “and follow him to
Heaven!”

There was that in her tone which broke the good Minor Canon’s voice, or
it would have repudiated her exaltation of him. As it was, he laid a
finger on his lips, and looked towards her brother.

“To say that I give both pledges, Mr. Crisparkle, out of my innermost
heart, and to say that there is no treachery in it, is to say nothing!”
Thus Neville, greatly moved. “I beg your forgiveness for my miserable
lapse into a burst of passion.”

“Not mine, Neville, not mine. You know with whom forgiveness lies, as
the highest attribute conceivable. Miss Helena, you and your brother
are twin children. You came into this world with the same dispositions,
and you passed your younger days together surrounded by the same
adverse circumstances. What you have overcome in yourself, can you not
overcome in him? You see the rock that lies in his course. Who but you
can keep him clear of it?”

“Who but you, sir?” replied Helena. “What is my influence, or my weak
wisdom, compared with yours!”

“You have the wisdom of Love,” returned the Minor Canon, “and it was
the highest wisdom ever known upon this earth, remember. As to mine—but
the less said of that commonplace commodity the better. Good night!”

She took the hand he offered her, and gratefully and almost reverently
raised it to her lips.

“Tut!” said the Minor Canon softly, “I am much overpaid!” and turned
away.

[Illustration: Mr. Crisparkle is overpaid]


Retracing his steps towards the Cathedral Close, he tried, as he went
along in the dark, to think out the best means of bringing to pass what
he had promised to effect, and what must somehow be done. “I shall
probably be asked to marry them,” he reflected, “and I would they were
married and gone! But this presses first.”

He debated principally whether he should write to young Drood, or
whether he should speak to Jasper. The consciousness of being popular
with the whole Cathedral establishment inclined him to the latter
course, and the well-timed sight of the lighted gatehouse decided him
to take it. “I will strike while the iron is hot,” he said, “and see
him now.”

Jasper was lying asleep on a couch before the fire, when, having
ascended the postern-stair, and received no answer to his knock at the
door, Mr. Crisparkle gently turned the handle and looked in. Long
afterwards he had cause to remember how Jasper sprang from the couch in
a delirious state between sleeping and waking, and crying out: “What is
the matter? Who did it?”

“It is only I, Jasper. I am sorry to have disturbed you.”

The glare of his eyes settled down into a look of recognition, and he
moved a chair or two, to make a way to the fireside.

“I was dreaming at a great rate, and am glad to be disturbed from an
indigestive after-dinner sleep. Not to mention that you are always
welcome.”

“Thank you. I am not confident,” returned Mr. Crisparkle, as he sat
himself down in the easy-chair placed for him, “that my subject will at
first sight be quite as welcome as myself; but I am a minister of
peace, and I pursue my subject in the interests of peace. In a word,
Jasper, I want to establish peace between these two young fellows.”

A very perplexed expression took hold of Mr. Jasper’s face; a very
perplexing expression too, for Mr. Crisparkle could make nothing of it.

“How?” was Jasper’s inquiry, in a low and slow voice, after a silence.

“For the ‘How’ I come to you. I want to ask you to do me the great
favour and service of interposing with your nephew (I have already
interposed with Mr. Neville), and getting him to write you a short
note, in his lively way, saying that he is willing to shake hands. I
know what a good-natured fellow he is, and what influence you have with
him. And without in the least defending Mr. Neville, we must all admit
that he was bitterly stung.”

Jasper turned that perplexed face towards the fire. Mr. Crisparkle
continuing to observe it, found it even more perplexing than before,
inasmuch as it seemed to denote (which could hardly be) some close
internal calculation.

“I know that you are not prepossessed in Mr. Neville’s favour,” the
Minor Canon was going on, when Jasper stopped him:

“You have cause to say so. I am not, indeed.”

“Undoubtedly; and I admit his lamentable violence of temper, though I
hope he and I will get the better of it between us. But I have exacted
a very solemn promise from him as to his future demeanour towards your
nephew, if you do kindly interpose; and I am sure he will keep it.”

“You are always responsible and trustworthy, Mr. Crisparkle. Do you
really feel sure that you can answer for him so confidently?”

“I do.”

The perplexed and perplexing look vanished.

“Then you relieve my mind of a great dread, and a heavy weight,” said
Jasper; “I will do it.”

Mr. Crisparkle, delighted by the swiftness and completeness of his
success, acknowledged it in the handsomest terms.

“I will do it,” repeated Jasper, “for the comfort of having your
guarantee against my vague and unfounded fears. You will laugh—but do
you keep a Diary?”

“A line for a day; not more.”

“A line for a day would be quite as much as my uneventful life would
need, Heaven knows,” said Jasper, taking a book from a desk, “but that
my Diary is, in fact, a Diary of Ned’s life too. You will laugh at this
entry; you will guess when it was made:

“‘Past midnight.—After what I have just now seen, I have a morbid dread
upon me of some horrible consequences resulting to my dear boy, that I
cannot reason with or in any way contend against. All my efforts are
vain. The demoniacal passion of this Neville Landless, his strength in
his fury, and his savage rage for the destruction of its object, appal
me. So profound is the impression, that twice since I have gone into my
dear boy’s room, to assure myself of his sleeping safely, and not lying
dead in his blood.’


“Here is another entry next morning:

“‘Ned up and away. Light-hearted and unsuspicious as ever. He laughed
when I cautioned him, and said he was as good a man as Neville Landless
any day. I told him that might be, but he was not as bad a man. He
continued to make light of it, but I travelled with him as far as I
could, and left him most unwillingly. I am unable to shake off these
dark intangible presentiments of evil—if feelings founded upon staring
facts are to be so called.’


“Again and again,” said Jasper, in conclusion, twirling the leaves of
the book before putting it by, “I have relapsed into these moods, as
other entries show. But I have now your assurance at my back, and shall
put it in my book, and make it an antidote to my black humours.”

“Such an antidote, I hope,” returned Mr. Crisparkle, “as will induce
you before long to consign the black humours to the flames. I ought to
be the last to find any fault with you this evening, when you have met
my wishes so freely; but I must say, Jasper, that your devotion to your
nephew has made you exaggerative here.”

“You are my witness,” said Jasper, shrugging his shoulders, “what my
state of mind honestly was, that night, before I sat down to write, and
in what words I expressed it. You remember objecting to a word I used,
as being too strong? It was a stronger word than any in my Diary.”

“Well, well. Try the antidote,” rejoined Mr. Crisparkle; “and may it
give you a brighter and better view of the case! We will discuss it no
more now. I have to thank you for myself, thank you sincerely.”

“You shall find,” said Jasper, as they shook hands, “that I will not do
the thing you wish me to do, by halves. I will take care that Ned,
giving way at all, shall give way thoroughly.”

On the third day after this conversation, he called on Mr. Crisparkle
with the following letter:

“MY DEAR JACK,
    “I am touched by your account of your interview with Mr.
    Crisparkle, whom I much respect and esteem. At once I openly say
    that I forgot myself on that occasion quite as much as Mr. Landless
    did, and that I wish that bygone to be a bygone, and all to be
    right again.
    “Look here, dear old boy. Ask Mr. Landless to dinner on Christmas
    Eve (the better the day the better the deed), and let there be only
    we three, and let us shake hands all round there and then, and say
    no more about it.


“My dear Jack,
“Ever your most affectionate,
“EDWIN DROOD.


“P.S. Love to Miss Pussy at the next music-lesson.”


“You expect Mr. Neville, then?” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“I count upon his coming,” said Mr. Jasper.




CHAPTER XI.
A PICTURE AND A RING


Behind the most ancient part of Holborn, London, where certain gabled
houses some centuries of age still stand looking on the public way, as
if disconsolately looking for the Old Bourne that has long run dry, is
a little nook composed of two irregular quadrangles, called Staple Inn.
It is one of those nooks, the turning into which out of the clashing
street, imparts to the relieved pedestrian the sensation of having put
cotton in his ears, and velvet soles on his boots. It is one of those
nooks where a few smoky sparrows twitter in smoky trees, as though they
called to one another, “Let us play at country,” and where a few feet
of garden-mould and a few yards of gravel enable them to do that
refreshing violence to their tiny understandings. Moreover, it is one
of those nooks which are legal nooks; and it contains a little Hall,
with a little lantern in its roof: to what obstructive purposes
devoted, and at whose expense, this history knoweth not.

In the days when Cloisterham took offence at the existence of a
railroad afar off, as menacing that sensitive constitution, the
property of us Britons: the odd fortune of which sacred institution it
is to be in exactly equal degrees croaked about, trembled for, and
boasted of, whatever happens to anything, anywhere in the world: in
those days no neighbouring architecture of lofty proportions had arisen
to overshadow Staple Inn. The westering sun bestowed bright glances on
it, and the south-west wind blew into it unimpeded.

Neither wind nor sun, however, favoured Staple Inn one December
afternoon towards six o’clock, when it was filled with fog, and candles
shed murky and blurred rays through the windows of all its
then-occupied sets of chambers; notably from a set of chambers in a
corner house in the little inner quadrangle, presenting in black and
white over its ugly portal the mysterious inscription:

P
J
T
1747


In which set of chambers, never having troubled his head about the
inscription, unless to bethink himself at odd times on glancing up at
it, that haply it might mean Perhaps John Thomas, or Perhaps Joe Tyler,
sat Mr. Grewgious writing by his fire.

Who could have told, by looking at Mr. Grewgious, whether he had ever
known ambition or disappointment? He had been bred to the Bar, and had
laid himself out for chamber practice; to draw deeds; “convey the wise
it call,” as Pistol says. But Conveyancing and he had made such a very
indifferent marriage of it that they had separated by consent—if there
can be said to be separation where there has never been coming
together.

No. Coy Conveyancing would not come to Mr. Grewgious. She was wooed,
not won, and they went their several ways. But an Arbitration being
blown towards him by some unaccountable wind, and he gaining great
credit in it as one indefatigable in seeking out right and doing right,
a pretty fat Receivership was next blown into his pocket by a wind more
traceable to its source. So, by chance, he had found his niche.
Receiver and Agent now, to two rich estates, and deputing their legal
business, in an amount worth having, to a firm of solicitors on the
floor below, he had snuffed out his ambition (supposing him to have
ever lighted it), and had settled down with his snuffers for the rest
of his life under the dry vine and fig-tree of P. J. T., who planted in
seventeen-forty-seven.

Many accounts and account-books, many files of correspondence, and
several strong boxes, garnished Mr. Grewgious’s room. They can scarcely
be represented as having lumbered it, so conscientious and precise was
their orderly arrangement. The apprehension of dying suddenly, and
leaving one fact or one figure with any incompleteness or obscurity
attaching to it, would have stretched Mr. Grewgious stone-dead any day.
The largest fidelity to a trust was the life-blood of the man. There
are sorts of life-blood that course more quickly, more gaily, more
attractively; but there is no better sort in circulation.

There was no luxury in his room. Even its comforts were limited to its
being dry and warm, and having a snug though faded fireside. What may
be called its private life was confined to the hearth, and an
easy-chair, and an old-fashioned occasional round table that was
brought out upon the rug after business hours, from a corner where it
elsewise remained turned up like a shining mahogany shield. Behind it,
when standing thus on the defensive, was a closet, usually containing
something good to drink. An outer room was the clerk’s room; Mr.
Grewgious’s sleeping-room was across the common stair; and he held some
not empty cellarage at the bottom of the common stair. Three hundred
days in the year, at least, he crossed over to the hotel in Furnival’s
Inn for his dinner, and after dinner crossed back again, to make the
most of these simplicities until it should become broad business day
once more, with P. J. T., date seventeen-forty-seven.

As Mr. Grewgious sat and wrote by his fire that afternoon, so did the
clerk of Mr. Grewgious sit and write by _his_ fire. A pale,
puffy-faced, dark-haired person of thirty, with big dark eyes that
wholly wanted lustre, and a dissatisfied doughy complexion, that seemed
to ask to be sent to the baker’s, this attendant was a mysterious
being, possessed of some strange power over Mr. Grewgious. As though he
had been called into existence, like a fabulous Familiar, by a magic
spell which had failed when required to dismiss him, he stuck tight to
Mr. Grewgious’s stool, although Mr. Grewgious’s comfort and convenience
would manifestly have been advanced by dispossessing him. A gloomy
person with tangled locks, and a general air of having been reared
under the shadow of that baleful tree of Java which has given shelter
to more lies than the whole botanical kingdom, Mr. Grewgious,
nevertheless, treated him with unaccountable consideration.

“Now, Bazzard,” said Mr. Grewgious, on the entrance of his clerk:
looking up from his papers as he arranged them for the night: “what is
in the wind besides fog?”

“Mr. Drood,” said Bazzard.

“What of him?”

“Has called,” said Bazzard.

“You might have shown him in.”

“I am doing it,” said Bazzard.

The visitor came in accordingly.

“Dear me!” said Mr. Grewgious, looking round his pair of office
candles. “I thought you had called and merely left your name and gone.
How do you do, Mr. Edwin? Dear me, you’re choking!”

“It’s this fog,” returned Edwin; “and it makes my eyes smart, like
Cayenne pepper.”

“Is it really so bad as that? Pray undo your wrappers. It’s fortunate I
have so good a fire; but Mr. Bazzard has taken care of me.”

“No I haven’t,” said Mr. Bazzard at the door.

“Ah! then it follows that I must have taken care of myself without
observing it,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Pray be seated in my chair. No. I
beg! Coming out of such an atmosphere, in _my_ chair.”

Edwin took the easy-chair in the corner; and the fog he had brought in
with him, and the fog he took off with his greatcoat and neck-shawl,
was speedily licked up by the eager fire.

“I look,” said Edwin, smiling, “as if I had come to stop.”

“—By the by,” cried Mr. Grewgious; “excuse my interrupting you; do
stop. The fog may clear in an hour or two. We can have dinner in from
just across Holborn. You had better take your Cayenne pepper here than
outside; pray stop and dine.”

“You are very kind,” said Edwin, glancing about him as though attracted
by the notion of a new and relishing sort of gipsy-party.

“Not at all,” said Mr. Grewgious; “_you_ are very kind to join issue
with a bachelor in chambers, and take pot-luck. And I’ll ask,” said Mr.
Grewgious, dropping his voice, and speaking with a twinkling eye, as if
inspired with a bright thought: “I’ll ask Bazzard. He mightn’t like it
else.—Bazzard!”

Bazzard reappeared.

“Dine presently with Mr. Drood and me.”

“If I am ordered to dine, of course I will, sir,” was the gloomy
answer.

“Save the man!” cried Mr. Grewgious. “You’re not ordered; you’re
invited.”

“Thank you, sir,” said Bazzard; “in that case I don’t care if I do.”

“That’s arranged. And perhaps you wouldn’t mind,” said Mr. Grewgious,
“stepping over to the hotel in Furnival’s, and asking them to send in
materials for laying the cloth. For dinner we’ll have a tureen of the
hottest and strongest soup available, and we’ll have the best made-dish
that can be recommended, and we’ll have a joint (such as a haunch of
mutton), and we’ll have a goose, or a turkey, or any little stuffed
thing of that sort that may happen to be in the bill of fare—in short,
we’ll have whatever there is on hand.”

These liberal directions Mr. Grewgious issued with his usual air of
reading an inventory, or repeating a lesson, or doing anything else by
rote. Bazzard, after drawing out the round table, withdrew to execute
them.

“I was a little delicate, you see,” said Mr. Grewgious, in a lower
tone, after his clerk’s departure, “about employing him in the foraging
or commissariat department. Because he mightn’t like it.”

“He seems to have his own way, sir,” remarked Edwin.

“His own way?” returned Mr. Grewgious. “O dear no! Poor fellow, you
quite mistake him. If he had his own way, he wouldn’t be here.”

“I wonder where he would be!” Edwin thought. But he only thought it,
because Mr. Grewgious came and stood himself with his back to the other
corner of the fire, and his shoulder-blades against the chimneypiece,
and collected his skirts for easy conversation.

“I take it, without having the gift of prophecy, that you have done me
the favour of looking in to mention that you are going down
yonder—where I can tell you, you are expected—and to offer to execute
any little commission from me to my charming ward, and perhaps to
sharpen me up a bit in any proceedings? Eh, Mr. Edwin?”

“I called, sir, before going down, as an act of attention.”

“Of attention!” said Mr. Grewgious. “Ah! of course, not of impatience?”

“Impatience, sir?”

Mr. Grewgious had meant to be arch—not that he in the remotest degree
expressed that meaning—and had brought himself into scarcely
supportable proximity with the fire, as if to burn the fullest effect
of his archness into himself, as other subtle impressions are burnt
into hard metals. But his archness suddenly flying before the composed
face and manner of his visitor, and only the fire remaining, he started
and rubbed himself.

“I have lately been down yonder,” said Mr. Grewgious, rearranging his
skirts; “and that was what I referred to, when I said I could tell you
you are expected.”

“Indeed, sir! Yes; I knew that Pussy was looking out for me.”

“Do you keep a cat down there?” asked Mr. Grewgious.

Edwin coloured a little as he explained: “I call Rosa Pussy.”

“O, really,” said Mr. Grewgious, smoothing down his head; “that’s very
affable.”

Edwin glanced at his face, uncertain whether or no he seriously
objected to the appellation. But Edwin might as well have glanced at
the face of a clock.

“A pet name, sir,” he explained again.

“Umps,” said Mr. Grewgious, with a nod. But with such an extraordinary
compromise between an unqualified assent and a qualified dissent, that
his visitor was much disconcerted.

“Did PRosa—” Edwin began by way of recovering himself.

“PRosa?” repeated Mr. Grewgious.

“I was going to say Pussy, and changed my mind;—did she tell you
anything about the Landlesses?”

“No,” said Mr. Grewgious. “What is the Landlesses? An estate? A villa?
A farm?”

“A brother and sister. The sister is at the Nuns’ House, and has become
a great friend of P—”

“PRosa’s,” Mr. Grewgious struck in, with a fixed face.

“She is a strikingly handsome girl, sir, and I thought she might have
been described to you, or presented to you perhaps?”

“Neither,” said Mr. Grewgious. “But here is Bazzard.”

Bazzard returned, accompanied by two waiters—an immovable waiter, and a
flying waiter; and the three brought in with them as much fog as gave a
new roar to the fire. The flying waiter, who had brought everything on
his shoulders, laid the cloth with amazing rapidity and dexterity;
while the immovable waiter, who had brought nothing, found fault with
him. The flying waiter then highly polished all the glasses he had
brought, and the immovable waiter looked through them. The flying
waiter then flew across Holborn for the soup, and flew back again, and
then took another flight for the made-dish, and flew back again, and
then took another flight for the joint and poultry, and flew back
again, and between whiles took supplementary flights for a great
variety of articles, as it was discovered from time to time that the
immovable waiter had forgotten them all. But let the flying waiter
cleave the air as he might, he was always reproached on his return by
the immovable waiter for bringing fog with him, and being out of
breath. At the conclusion of the repast, by which time the flying
waiter was severely blown, the immovable waiter gathered up the
tablecloth under his arm with a grand air, and having sternly (not to
say with indignation) looked on at the flying waiter while he set the
clean glasses round, directed a valedictory glance towards Mr.
Grewgious, conveying: “Let it be clearly understood between us that the
reward is mine, and that Nil is the claim of this slave,” and pushed
the flying waiter before him out of the room.

It was like a highly-finished miniature painting representing My Lords
of the Circumlocution Department, Commandership-in-Chief of any sort,
Government. It was quite an edifying little picture to be hung on the
line in the National Gallery.

As the fog had been the proximate cause of this sumptuous repast, so
the fog served for its general sauce. To hear the out-door clerks
sneezing, wheezing, and beating their feet on the gravel was a zest far
surpassing Doctor Kitchener’s. To bid, with a shiver, the unfortunate
flying waiter shut the door before he had opened it, was a condiment of
a profounder flavour than Harvey. And here let it be noticed,
parenthetically, that the leg of this young man, in its application to
the door, evinced the finest sense of touch: always preceding himself
and tray (with something of an angling air about it), by some seconds:
and always lingering after he and the tray had disappeared, like
Macbeth’s leg when accompanying him off the stage with reluctance to
the assassination of Duncan.

The host had gone below to the cellar, and had brought up bottles of
ruby, straw-coloured, and golden drinks, which had ripened long ago in
lands where no fogs are, and had since lain slumbering in the shade.
Sparkling and tingling after so long a nap, they pushed at their corks
to help the corkscrew (like prisoners helping rioters to force their
gates), and danced out gaily. If P. J. T. in seventeen-forty-seven, or
in any other year of his period, drank such wines—then, for a
certainty, P. J. T. was Pretty Jolly Too.

Externally, Mr. Grewgious showed no signs of being mellowed by these
glowing vintages. Instead of his drinking them, they might have been
poured over him in his high-dried snuff form, and run to waste, for any
lights and shades they caused to flicker over his face. Neither was his
manner influenced. But, in his wooden way, he had observant eyes for
Edwin; and when at the end of dinner, he motioned Edwin back to his own
easy-chair in the fireside corner, and Edwin sank luxuriously into it
after very brief remonstrance, Mr. Grewgious, as he turned his seat
round towards the fire too, and smoothed his head and face, might have
been seen looking at his visitor between his smoothing fingers.

“Bazzard!” said Mr. Grewgious, suddenly turning to him.

“I follow you, sir,” returned Bazzard; who had done his work of
consuming meat and drink in a workmanlike manner, though mostly in
speechlessness.

“I drink to you, Bazzard; Mr. Edwin, success to Mr. Bazzard!”

“Success to Mr. Bazzard!” echoed Edwin, with a totally unfounded
appearance of enthusiasm, and with the unspoken addition: “What in, I
wonder!”

“And May!” pursued Mr. Grewgious—“I am not at liberty to be
definite—May!—my conversational powers are so very limited that I know
I shall not come well out of this—May!—it ought to be put
imaginatively, but I have no imagination—May!—the thorn of anxiety is
as nearly the mark as I am likely to get—May it come out at last!”

Mr. Bazzard, with a frowning smile at the fire, put a hand into his
tangled locks, as if the thorn of anxiety were there; then into his
waistcoat, as if it were there; then into his pockets, as if it were
there. In all these movements he was closely followed by the eyes of
Edwin, as if that young gentleman expected to see the thorn in action.
It was not produced, however, and Mr. Bazzard merely said: “I follow
you, sir, and I thank you.”

“I am going,” said Mr. Grewgious, jingling his glass on the table with
one hand, and bending aside under cover of the other, to whisper to
Edwin, “to drink to my ward. But I put Bazzard first. He mightn’t like
it else.”

This was said with a mysterious wink; or what would have been a wink,
if, in Mr. Grewgious’s hands, it could have been quick enough. So Edwin
winked responsively, without the least idea what he meant by doing so.

“And now,” said Mr. Grewgious, “I devote a bumper to the fair and
fascinating Miss Rosa. Bazzard, the fair and fascinating Miss Rosa!”

“I follow you, sir,” said Bazzard, “and I pledge you!”

“And so do I!” said Edwin.

“Lord bless me,” cried Mr. Grewgious, breaking the blank silence which
of course ensued: though why these pauses _should_ come upon us when we
have performed any small social rite, not directly inducive of
self-examination or mental despondency, who can tell? “I am a
particularly Angular man, and yet I fancy (if I may use the word, not
having a morsel of fancy), that I could draw a picture of a true
lover’s state of mind, to-night.”

“Let us follow you, sir,” said Bazzard, “and have the picture.”

“Mr. Edwin will correct it where it’s wrong,” resumed Mr. Grewgious,
“and will throw in a few touches from the life. I dare say it is wrong
in many particulars, and wants many touches from the life, for I was
born a Chip, and have neither soft sympathies nor soft experiences.
Well! I hazard the guess that the true lover’s mind is completely
permeated by the beloved object of his affections. I hazard the guess
that her dear name is precious to him, cannot be heard or repeated
without emotion, and is preserved sacred. If he has any distinguishing
appellation of fondness for her, it is reserved for her, and is not for
common ears. A name that it would be a privilege to call her by, being
alone with her own bright self, it would be a liberty, a coldness, an
insensibility, almost a breach of good faith, to flaunt elsewhere.”

It was wonderful to see Mr. Grewgious sitting bolt upright, with his
hands on his knees, continuously chopping this discourse out of
himself: much as a charity boy with a very good memory might get his
catechism said: and evincing no correspondent emotion whatever, unless
in a certain occasional little tingling perceptible at the end of his
nose.

“My picture,” Mr. Grewgious proceeded, “goes on to represent (under
correction from you, Mr. Edwin), the true lover as ever impatient to be
in the presence or vicinity of the beloved object of his affections; as
caring very little for his case in any other society; and as constantly
seeking that. If I was to say seeking that, as a bird seeks its nest, I
should make an ass of myself, because that would trench upon what I
understand to be poetry; and I am so far from trenching upon poetry at
any time, that I never, to my knowledge, got within ten thousand miles
of it. And I am besides totally unacquainted with the habits of birds,
except the birds of Staple Inn, who seek their nests on ledges, and in
gutter-pipes and chimneypots, not constructed for them by the
beneficent hand of Nature. I beg, therefore, to be understood as
foregoing the bird’s-nest. But my picture does represent the true lover
as having no existence separable from that of the beloved object of his
affections, and as living at once a doubled life and a halved life. And
if I do not clearly express what I mean by that, it is either for the
reason that having no conversational powers, I cannot express what I
mean, or that having no meaning, I do not mean what I fail to express.
Which, to the best of my belief, is not the case.”

Edwin had turned red and turned white, as certain points of this
picture came into the light. He now sat looking at the fire, and bit
his lip.

“The speculations of an Angular man,” resumed Mr. Grewgious, still
sitting and speaking exactly as before, “are probably erroneous on so
globular a topic. But I figure to myself (subject, as before, to Mr.
Edwin’s correction), that there can be no coolness, no lassitude, no
doubt, no indifference, no half fire and half smoke state of mind, in a
real lover. Pray am I at all near the mark in my picture?”

As abrupt in his conclusion as in his commencement and progress, he
jerked this inquiry at Edwin, and stopped when one might have supposed
him in the middle of his oration.

“I should say, sir,” stammered Edwin, “as you refer the question to
me—”

“Yes,” said Mr. Grewgious, “I refer it to you, as an authority.”

“I should say, then, sir,” Edwin went on, embarrassed, “that the
picture you have drawn is generally correct; but I submit that perhaps
you may be rather hard upon the unlucky lover.”

“Likely so,” assented Mr. Grewgious, “likely so. I am a hard man in the
grain.”

“He may not show,” said Edwin, “all he feels; or he may not—”

There he stopped so long, to find the rest of his sentence, that Mr.
Grewgious rendered his difficulty a thousand times the greater by
unexpectedly striking in with:

“No to be sure; he _may_ not!”

After that, they all sat silent; the silence of Mr. Bazzard being
occasioned by slumber.

“His responsibility is very great, though,” said Mr. Grewgious at
length, with his eyes on the fire.

Edwin nodded assent, with _his_ eyes on the fire.

“And let him be sure that he trifles with no one,” said Mr. Grewgious;
“neither with himself, nor with any other.”

Edwin bit his lip again, and still sat looking at the fire.

“He must not make a plaything of a treasure. Woe betide him if he does!
Let him take that well to heart,” said Mr. Grewgious.

Though he said these things in short sentences, much as the
supposititious charity boy just now referred to might have repeated a
verse or two from the Book of Proverbs, there was something dreamy (for
so literal a man) in the way in which he now shook his right forefinger
at the live coals in the grate, and again fell silent.

But not for long. As he sat upright and stiff in his chair, he suddenly
rapped his knees, like the carved image of some queer Joss or other
coming out of its reverie, and said: “We must finish this bottle, Mr.
Edwin. Let me help you. I’ll help Bazzard too, though he _is_ asleep.
He mightn’t like it else.”

He helped them both, and helped himself, and drained his glass, and
stood it bottom upward on the table, as though he had just caught a
bluebottle in it.

“And now, Mr. Edwin,” he proceeded, wiping his mouth and hands upon his
handkerchief: “to a little piece of business. You received from me, the
other day, a certified copy of Miss Rosa’s father’s will. You knew its
contents before, but you received it from me as a matter of business. I
should have sent it to Mr. Jasper, but for Miss Rosa’s wishing it to
come straight to you, in preference. You received it?”

“Quite safely, sir.”

“You should have acknowledged its receipt,” said Mr. Grewgious;
“business being business all the world over. However, you did not.”

“I meant to have acknowledged it when I first came in this evening,
sir.”

“Not a business-like acknowledgment,” returned Mr. Grewgious; “however,
let that pass. Now, in that document you have observed a few words of
kindly allusion to its being left to me to discharge a little trust,
confided to me in conversation, at such time as I in my discretion may
think best.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Mr. Edwin, it came into my mind just now, when I was looking at the
fire, that I could, in my discretion, acquit myself of that trust at no
better time than the present. Favour me with your attention, half a
minute.”

He took a bunch of keys from his pocket, singled out by the
candle-light the key he wanted, and then, with a candle in his hand,
went to a bureau or escritoire, unlocked it, touched the spring of a
little secret drawer, and took from it an ordinary ring-case made for a
single ring. With this in his hand, he returned to his chair. As he
held it up for the young man to see, his hand trembled.

“Mr. Edwin, this rose of diamonds and rubies delicately set in gold,
was a ring belonging to Miss Rosa’s mother. It was removed from her
dead hand, in my presence, with such distracted grief as I hope it may
never be my lot to contemplate again. Hard man as I am, I am not hard
enough for that. See how bright these stones shine!” opening the case.
“And yet the eyes that were so much brighter, and that so often looked
upon them with a light and a proud heart, have been ashes among ashes,
and dust among dust, some years! If I had any imagination (which it is
needless to say I have not), I might imagine that the lasting beauty of
these stones was almost cruel.”

He closed the case again as he spoke.

“This ring was given to the young lady who was drowned so early in her
beautiful and happy career, by her husband, when they first plighted
their faith to one another. It was he who removed it from her
unconscious hand, and it was he who, when his death drew very near,
placed it in mine. The trust in which I received it, was, that, you and
Miss Rosa growing to manhood and womanhood, and your betrothal
prospering and coming to maturity, I should give it to you to place
upon her finger. Failing those desired results, it was to remain in my
possession.”

Some trouble was in the young man’s face, and some indecision was in
the action of his hand, as Mr. Grewgious, looking steadfastly at him,
gave him the ring.

“Your placing it on her finger,” said Mr. Grewgious, “will be the
solemn seal upon your strict fidelity to the living and the dead. You
are going to her, to make the last irrevocable preparations for your
marriage. Take it with you.”

The young man took the little case, and placed it in his breast.

“If anything should be amiss, if anything should be even slightly
wrong, between you; if you should have any secret consciousness that
you are committing yourself to this step for no higher reason than
because you have long been accustomed to look forward to it; then,”
said Mr. Grewgious, “I charge you once more, by the living and by the
dead, to bring that ring back to me!”

Here Bazzard awoke himself by his own snoring; and, as is usual in such
cases, sat apoplectically staring at vacancy, as defying vacancy to
accuse him of having been asleep.

“Bazzard!” said Mr. Grewgious, harder than ever.

“I follow you, sir,” said Bazzard, “and I have been following you.”

“In discharge of a trust, I have handed Mr. Edwin Drood a ring of
diamonds and rubies. You see?”

Edwin reproduced the little case, and opened it; and Bazzard looked
into it.

“I follow you both, sir,” returned Bazzard, “and I witness the
transaction.”

Evidently anxious to get away and be alone, Edwin Drood now resumed his
outer clothing, muttering something about time and appointments. The
fog was reported no clearer (by the flying waiter, who alighted from a
speculative flight in the coffee interest), but he went out into it;
and Bazzard, after his manner, “followed” him.

Mr. Grewgious, left alone, walked softly and slowly to and fro, for an
hour and more. He was restless to-night, and seemed dispirited.

“I hope I have done right,” he said. “The appeal to him seemed
necessary. It was hard to lose the ring, and yet it must have gone from
me very soon.”

He closed the empty little drawer with a sigh, and shut and locked the
escritoire, and came back to the solitary fireside.

“Her ring,” he went on. “Will it come back to me? My mind hangs about
her ring very uneasily to-night. But that is explainable. I have had it
so long, and I have prized it so much! I wonder—”

He was in a wondering mood as well as a restless; for, though he
checked himself at that point, and took another walk, he resumed his
wondering when he sat down again.

“I wonder (for the ten-thousandth time, and what a weak fool I, for
what can it signify now!) whether he confided the charge of their
orphan child to me, because he knew—Good God, how like her mother she
has become!”

“I wonder whether he ever so much as suspected that some one doted on
her, at a hopeless, speechless distance, when he struck in and won her.
I wonder whether it ever crept into his mind who that unfortunate some
one was!”

“I wonder whether I shall sleep to-night! At all events, I will shut
out the world with the bedclothes, and try.”

Mr. Grewgious crossed the staircase to his raw and foggy bedroom, and
was soon ready for bed. Dimly catching sight of his face in the misty
looking-glass, he held his candle to it for a moment.

“A likely some one, _you_, to come into anybody’s thoughts in such an
aspect!” he exclaimed. “There! there! there! Get to bed, poor man, and
cease to jabber!”

With that, he extinguished his light, pulled up the bedclothes around
him, and with another sigh shut out the world. And yet there are such
unexplored romantic nooks in the unlikeliest men, that even old
tinderous and touchwoody P. J. T. Possibly Jabbered Thus, at some odd
times, in or about seventeen-forty-seven.




CHAPTER XII.
A NIGHT WITH DURDLES


When Mr. Sapsea has nothing better to do, towards evening, and finds
the contemplation of his own profundity becoming a little monotonous in
spite of the vastness of the subject, he often takes an airing in the
Cathedral Close and thereabout. He likes to pass the churchyard with a
swelling air of proprietorship, and to encourage in his breast a sort
of benignant-landlord feeling, in that he has been bountiful towards
that meritorious tenant, Mrs. Sapsea, and has publicly given her a
prize. He likes to see a stray face or two looking in through the
railings, and perhaps reading his inscription. Should he meet a
stranger coming from the churchyard with a quick step, he is morally
convinced that the stranger is “with a blush retiring,” as monumentally
directed.

Mr. Sapsea’s importance has received enhancement, for he has become
Mayor of Cloisterham. Without mayors, and many of them, it cannot be
disputed that the whole framework of society—Mr. Sapsea is confident
that he invented that forcible figure—would fall to pieces. Mayors have
been knighted for “going up” with addresses: explosive machines
intrepidly discharging shot and shell into the English Grammar. Mr.
Sapsea may “go up” with an address. Rise, Sir Thomas Sapsea! Of such is
the salt of the earth.

Mr. Sapsea has improved the acquaintance of Mr. Jasper, since their
first meeting to partake of port, epitaph, backgammon, beef, and salad.
Mr. Sapsea has been received at the gatehouse with kindred hospitality;
and on that occasion Mr. Jasper seated himself at the piano, and sang
to him, tickling his ears—figuratively—long enough to present a
considerable area for tickling. What Mr. Sapsea likes in that young man
is, that he is always ready to profit by the wisdom of his elders, and
that he is sound, sir, at the core. In proof of which, he sang to Mr.
Sapsea that evening, no kickshaw ditties, favourites with national
enemies, but gave him the genuine George the Third home-brewed;
exhorting him (as “my brave boys”) to reduce to a smashed condition all
other islands but this island, and all continents, peninsulas,
isthmuses, promontories, and other geographical forms of land soever,
besides sweeping the seas in all directions. In short, he rendered it
pretty clear that Providence made a distinct mistake in originating so
small a nation of hearts of oak, and so many other verminous peoples.

Mr. Sapsea, walking slowly this moist evening near the churchyard with
his hands behind him, on the look-out for a blushing and retiring
stranger, turns a corner, and comes instead into the goodly presence of
the Dean, conversing with the Verger and Mr. Jasper. Mr. Sapsea makes
his obeisance, and is instantly stricken far more ecclesiastical than
any Archbishop of York or Canterbury.

“You are evidently going to write a book about us, Mr. Jasper,” quoth
the Dean; “to write a book about us. Well! We are very ancient, and we
ought to make a good book. We are not so richly endowed in possessions
as in age; but perhaps you will put _that_ in your book, among other
things, and call attention to our wrongs.”

Mr. Tope, as in duty bound, is greatly entertained by this.

“I really have no intention at all, sir,” replies Jasper, “of turning
author or archæologist. It is but a whim of mine. And even for my whim,
Mr. Sapsea here is more accountable than I am.”

“How so, Mr. Mayor?” says the Dean, with a nod of good-natured
recognition of his Fetch. “How is that, Mr. Mayor?”

“I am not aware,” Mr. Sapsea remarks, looking about him for
information, “to what the Very Reverend the Dean does me the honour of
referring.” And then falls to studying his original in minute points of
detail.

“Durdles,” Mr. Tope hints.

“Ay!” the Dean echoes; “Durdles, Durdles!”

“The truth is, sir,” explains Jasper, “that my curiosity in the man was
first really stimulated by Mr. Sapsea. Mr. Sapsea’s knowledge of
mankind and power of drawing out whatever is recluse or odd around him,
first led to my bestowing a second thought upon the man: though of
course I had met him constantly about. You would not be surprised by
this, Mr. Dean, if you had seen Mr. Sapsea deal with him in his own
parlour, as I did.”

“O!” cries Sapsea, picking up the ball thrown to him with ineffable
complacency and pomposity; “yes, yes. The Very Reverend the Dean refers
to that? Yes. I happened to bring Durdles and Mr. Jasper together. I
regard Durdles as a Character.”

“A character, Mr. Sapsea, that with a few skilful touches you turn
inside out,” says Jasper.

“Nay, not quite that,” returns the lumbering auctioneer. “I may have a
little influence over him, perhaps; and a little insight into his
character, perhaps. The Very Reverend the Dean will please to bear in
mind that I have seen the world.” Here Mr. Sapsea gets a little behind
the Dean, to inspect his coat-buttons.

“Well!” says the Dean, looking about him to see what has become of his
copyist: “I hope, Mr. Mayor, you will use your study and knowledge of
Durdles to the good purpose of exhorting him not to break our worthy
and respected Choir-Master’s neck; we cannot afford it; his head and
voice are much too valuable to us.”

Mr. Tope is again highly entertained, and, having fallen into
respectful convulsions of laughter, subsides into a deferential murmur,
importing that surely any gentleman would deem it a pleasure and an
honour to have his neck broken, in return for such a compliment from
such a source.

“I will take it upon myself, sir,” observes Sapsea loftily, “to answer
for Mr. Jasper’s neck. I will tell Durdles to be careful of it. He will
mind what _I_ say. How is it at present endangered?” he inquires,
looking about him with magnificent patronage.

“Only by my making a moonlight expedition with Durdles among the tombs,
vaults, towers, and ruins,” returns Jasper. “You remember suggesting,
when you brought us together, that, as a lover of the picturesque, it
might be worth my while?”

“I remember!” replies the auctioneer. And the solemn idiot really
believes that he does remember.

“Profiting by your hint,” pursues Jasper, “I have had some day-rambles
with the extraordinary old fellow, and we are to make a moonlight
hole-and-corner exploration to-night.”

“And here he is,” says the Dean.

Durdles with his dinner-bundle in his hand, is indeed beheld slouching
towards them. Slouching nearer, and perceiving the Dean, he pulls off
his hat, and is slouching away with it under his arm, when Mr. Sapsea
stops him.

“Mind you take care of my friend,” is the injunction Mr. Sapsea lays
upon him.

“What friend o’ yourn is dead?” asks Durdles. “No orders has come in
for any friend o’ yourn.”

“I mean my live friend there.”

“O! him?” says Durdles. “He can take care of himself, can Mister
Jarsper.”

“But do you take care of him too,” says Sapsea.

Whom Durdles (there being command in his tone) surlily surveys from
head to foot.

“With submission to his Reverence the Dean, if you’ll mind what
concerns you, Mr. Sapsea, Durdles he’ll mind what concerns him.”

“You’re out of temper,” says Mr. Sapsea, winking to the company to
observe how smoothly he will manage him. “My friend concerns me, and
Mr. Jasper is my friend. And you are my friend.”

“Don’t you get into a bad habit of boasting,” retorts Durdles, with a
grave cautionary nod. “It’ll grow upon you.”

[Illustration: Durdles cautions Mr. Sapsea against boasting]


“You are out of temper,” says Sapsea again; reddening, but again
sinking to the company.

“I own to it,” returns Durdles; “I don’t like liberties.”

Mr. Sapsea winks a third wink to the company, as who should say: “I
think you will agree with me that I have settled _his_ business;” and
stalks out of the controversy.

Durdles then gives the Dean a good evening, and adding, as he puts his
hat on, “You’ll find me at home, Mister Jarsper, as agreed, when you
want me; I’m a-going home to clean myself,” soon slouches out of sight.
This going home to clean himself is one of the man’s incomprehensible
compromises with inexorable facts; he, and his hat, and his boots, and
his clothes, never showing any trace of cleaning, but being uniformly
in one condition of dust and grit.

The lamplighter now dotting the quiet Close with specks of light, and
running at a great rate up and down his little ladder with that
object—his little ladder under the sacred shadow of whose inconvenience
generations had grown up, and which all Cloisterham would have stood
aghast at the idea of abolishing—the Dean withdraws to his dinner, Mr.
Tope to his tea, and Mr. Jasper to his piano. There, with no light but
that of the fire, he sits chanting choir-music in a low and beautiful
voice, for two or three hours; in short, until it has been for some
time dark, and the moon is about to rise.

Then he closes his piano softly, softly changes his coat for a
pea-jacket, with a goodly wicker-cased bottle in its largest pocket,
and putting on a low-crowned, flap-brimmed hat, goes softly out. Why
does he move so softly to-night? No outward reason is apparent for it.
Can there be any sympathetic reason crouching darkly within him?

Repairing to Durdles’s unfinished house, or hole in the city wall, and
seeing a light within it, he softly picks his course among the
gravestones, monuments, and stony lumber of the yard, already touched
here and there, sidewise, by the rising moon. The two journeymen have
left their two great saws sticking in their blocks of stone; and two
skeleton journeymen out of the Dance of Death might be grinning in the
shadow of their sheltering sentry-boxes, about to slash away at cutting
out the gravestones of the next two people destined to die in
Cloisterham. Likely enough, the two think little of that now, being
alive, and perhaps merry. Curious, to make a guess at the two;—or say
one of the two!

“Ho! Durdles!”

The light moves, and he appears with it at the door. He would seem to
have been “cleaning himself” with the aid of a bottle, jug, and
tumbler; for no other cleansing instruments are visible in the bare
brick room with rafters overhead and no plastered ceiling, into which
he shows his visitor.

“Are you ready?”

“I am ready, Mister Jarsper. Let the old ’uns come out if they dare,
when we go among their tombs. My spirit is ready for ’em.”

“Do you mean animal spirits, or ardent?”

“The one’s the t’other,” answers Durdles, “and I mean ’em both.”

He takes a lantern from a hook, puts a match or two in his pocket
wherewith to light it, should there be need; and they go out together,
dinner-bundle and all.

Surely an unaccountable sort of expedition! That Durdles himself, who
is always prowling among old graves, and ruins, like a Ghoul—that he
should be stealing forth to climb, and dive, and wander without an
object, is nothing extraordinary; but that the Choir-Master or any one
else should hold it worth his while to be with him, and to study
moonlight effects in such company is another affair. Surely an
unaccountable sort of expedition, therefore!

“’Ware that there mound by the yard-gate, Mister Jarsper.”

“I see it. What is it?”

“Lime.”

Mr. Jasper stops, and waits for him to come up, for he lags behind.
“What you call quick-lime?”

“Ay!” says Durdles; “quick enough to eat your boots. With a little
handy stirring, quick enough to eat your bones.”

They go on, presently passing the red windows of the Travellers’
Twopenny, and emerging into the clear moonlight of the Monks’ Vineyard.
This crossed, they come to Minor Canon Corner: of which the greater
part lies in shadow until the moon shall rise higher in the sky.

The sound of a closing house-door strikes their ears, and two men come
out. These are Mr. Crisparkle and Neville. Jasper, with a strange and
sudden smile upon his face, lays the palm of his hand upon the breast
of Durdles, stopping him where he stands.

At that end of Minor Canon Corner the shadow is profound in the
existing state of the light: at that end, too, there is a piece of old
dwarf wall, breast high, the only remaining boundary of what was once a
garden, but is now the thoroughfare. Jasper and Durdles would have
turned this wall in another instant; but, stopping so short, stand
behind it.

“Those two are only sauntering,” Jasper whispers; “they will go out
into the moonlight soon. Let us keep quiet here, or they will detain
us, or want to join us, or what not.”

Durdles nods assent, and falls to munching some fragments from his
bundle. Jasper folds his arms upon the top of the wall, and, with his
chin resting on them, watches. He takes no note whatever of the Minor
Canon, but watches Neville, as though his eye were at the trigger of a
loaded rifle, and he had covered him, and were going to fire. A sense
of destructive power is so expressed in his face, that even Durdles
pauses in his munching, and looks at him, with an unmunched something
in his cheek.

Meanwhile Mr. Crisparkle and Neville walk to and fro, quietly talking
together. What they say, cannot be heard consecutively; but Mr. Jasper
has already distinguished his own name more than once.

“This is the first day of the week,” Mr. Crisparkle can be distinctly
heard to observe, as they turn back; “and the last day of the week is
Christmas Eve.”

“You may be certain of me, sir.”

The echoes were favourable at those points, but as the two approach,
the sound of their talking becomes confused again. The word
“confidence,” shattered by the echoes, but still capable of being
pieced together, is uttered by Mr. Crisparkle. As they draw still
nearer, this fragment of a reply is heard: “Not deserved yet, but shall
be, sir.” As they turn away again, Jasper again hears his own name, in
connection with the words from Mr. Crisparkle: “Remember that I said I
answered for you confidently.” Then the sound of their talk becomes
confused again; they halting for a little while, and some earnest
action on the part of Neville succeeding. When they move once more, Mr.
Crisparkle is seen to look up at the sky, and to point before him. They
then slowly disappear; passing out into the moonlight at the opposite
end of the Corner.

It is not until they are gone, that Mr. Jasper moves. But then he turns
to Durdles, and bursts into a fit of laughter. Durdles, who still has
that suspended something in his cheek, and who sees nothing to laugh
at, stares at him until Mr. Jasper lays his face down on his arms to
have his laugh out. Then Durdles bolts the something, as if desperately
resigning himself to indigestion.

Among those secluded nooks there is very little stir or movement after
dark. There is little enough in the high tide of the day, but there is
next to none at night. Besides that the cheerfully frequented High
Street lies nearly parallel to the spot (the old Cathedral rising
between the two), and is the natural channel in which the Cloisterham
traffic flows, a certain awful hush pervades the ancient pile, the
cloisters, and the churchyard, after dark, which not many people care
to encounter. Ask the first hundred citizens of Cloisterham, met at
random in the streets at noon, if they believed in Ghosts, they would
tell you no; but put them to choose at night between these eerie
Precincts and the thoroughfare of shops, and you would find that
ninety-nine declared for the longer round and the more frequented way.
The cause of this is not to be found in any local superstition that
attaches to the Precincts—albeit a mysterious lady, with a child in her
arms and a rope dangling from her neck, has been seen flitting about
there by sundry witnesses as intangible as herself—but it is to be
sought in the innate shrinking of dust with the breath of life in it
from dust out of which the breath of life has passed; also, in the
widely diffused, and almost as widely unacknowledged, reflection: “If
the dead do, under any circumstances, become visible to the living,
these are such likely surroundings for the purpose that I, the living,
will get out of them as soon as I can.” Hence, when Mr. Jasper and
Durdles pause to glance around them, before descending into the crypt
by a small side door, of which the latter has a key, the whole expanse
of moonlight in their view is utterly deserted. One might fancy that
the tide of life was stemmed by Mr. Jasper’s own gatehouse. The murmur
of the tide is heard beyond; but no wave passes the archway, over which
his lamp burns red behind his curtain, as if the building were a
Lighthouse.

They enter, locking themselves in, descend the rugged steps, and are
down in the Crypt. The lantern is not wanted, for the moonlight strikes
in at the groined windows, bare of glass, the broken frames for which
cast patterns on the ground. The heavy pillars which support the roof
engender masses of black shade, but between them there are lanes of
light. Up and down these lanes they walk, Durdles discoursing of the
“old uns” he yet counts on disinterring, and slapping a wall, in which
he considers “a whole family on ’em” to be stoned and earthed up, just
as if he were a familiar friend of the family. The taciturnity of
Durdles is for the time overcome by Mr. Jasper’s wicker bottle, which
circulates freely;—in the sense, that is to say, that its contents
enter freely into Mr. Durdles’s circulation, while Mr. Jasper only
rinses his mouth once, and casts forth the rinsing.

They are to ascend the great Tower. On the steps by which they rise to
the Cathedral, Durdles pauses for new store of breath. The steps are
very dark, but out of the darkness they can see the lanes of light they
have traversed. Durdles seats himself upon a step. Mr. Jasper seats
himself upon another. The odour from the wicker bottle (which has
somehow passed into Durdles’s keeping) soon intimates that the cork has
been taken out; but this is not ascertainable through the sense of
sight, since neither can descry the other. And yet, in talking, they
turn to one another, as though their faces could commune together.

“This is good stuff, Mister Jarsper!”

“It is very good stuff, I hope.—I bought it on purpose.”

“They don’t show, you see, the old uns don’t, Mister Jarsper!”

“It would be a more confused world than it is, if they could.”

“Well, it _would_ lead towards a mixing of things,” Durdles acquiesces:
pausing on the remark, as if the idea of ghosts had not previously
presented itself to him in a merely inconvenient light, domestically or
chronologically. “But do you think there may be Ghosts of other things,
though not of men and women?”

“What things? Flower-beds and watering-pots? Horses and harness?”

“No. Sounds.”

“What sounds?”

“Cries.”

“What cries do you mean? Chairs to mend?”

“No. I mean screeches. Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Jarsper. Wait a bit till
I put the bottle right.” Here the cork is evidently taken out again,
and replaced again. “There! _Now_ it’s right! This time last year, only
a few days later, I happened to have been doing what was correct by the
season, in the way of giving it the welcome it had a right to expect,
when them town-boys set on me at their worst. At length I gave ’em the
slip, and turned in here. And here I fell asleep. And what woke me? The
ghost of a cry. The ghost of one terrific shriek, which shriek was
followed by the ghost of the howl of a dog: a long, dismal, woeful
howl, such as a dog gives when a person’s dead. That was _my_ last
Christmas Eve.”

“What do you mean?” is the very abrupt, and, one might say, fierce
retort.

“I mean that I made inquiries everywhere about, and, that no living
ears but mine heard either that cry or that howl. So I say they was
both ghosts; though why they came to me, I’ve never made out.”

“I thought you were another kind of man,” says Jasper, scornfully.

“So I thought myself,” answers Durdles with his usual composure; “and
yet I was picked out for it.”

Jasper had risen suddenly, when he asked him what he meant, and he now
says, “Come; we shall freeze here; lead the way.”

Durdles complies, not over-steadily; opens the door at the top of the
steps with the key he has already used; and so emerges on the Cathedral
level, in a passage at the side of the chancel. Here, the moonlight is
so very bright again that the colours of the nearest stained-glass
window are thrown upon their faces. The appearance of the unconscious
Durdles, holding the door open for his companion to follow, as if from
the grave, is ghastly enough, with a purple hand across his face, and a
yellow splash upon his brow; but he bears the close scrutiny of his
companion in an insensible way, although it is prolonged while the
latter fumbles among his pockets for a key confided to him that will
open an iron gate, so to enable them to pass to the staircase of the
great tower.

“That and the bottle are enough for you to carry,” he says, giving it
to Durdles; “hand your bundle to me; I am younger and longer-winded
than you.” Durdles hesitates for a moment between bundle and bottle;
but gives the preference to the bottle as being by far the better
company, and consigns the dry weight to his fellow-explorer.

Then they go up the winding staircase of the great tower, toilsomely,
turning and turning, and lowering their heads to avoid the stairs
above, or the rough stone pivot around which they twist. Durdles has
lighted his lantern, by drawing from the cold, hard wall a spark of
that mysterious fire which lurks in everything, and, guided by this
speck, they clamber up among the cobwebs and the dust. Their way lies
through strange places. Twice or thrice they emerge into level,
low-arched galleries, whence they can look down into the moonlit nave;
and where Durdles, waving his lantern, waves the dim angels’ heads upon
the corbels of the roof, seeming to watch their progress. Anon they
turn into narrower and steeper staircases, and the night-air begins to
blow upon them, and the chirp of some startled jackdaw or frightened
rook precedes the heavy beating of wings in a confined space, and the
beating down of dust and straws upon their heads. At last, leaving
their light behind a stair—for it blows fresh up here—they look down on
Cloisterham, fair to see in the moonlight: its ruined habitations and
sanctuaries of the dead, at the tower’s base: its moss-softened
red-tiled roofs and red-brick houses of the living, clustered beyond:
its river winding down from the mist on the horizon, as though that
were its source, and already heaving with a restless knowledge of its
approach towards the sea.

Once again, an unaccountable expedition this! Jasper (always moving
softly with no visible reason) contemplates the scene, and especially
that stillest part of it which the Cathedral overshadows. But he
contemplates Durdles quite as curiously, and Durdles is by times
conscious of his watchful eyes.

Only by times, because Durdles is growing drowsy. As aëronauts lighten
the load they carry, when they wish to rise, similarly Durdles has
lightened the wicker bottle in coming up. Snatches of sleep surprise
him on his legs, and stop him in his talk. A mild fit of calenture
seizes him, in which he deems that the ground so far below, is on a
level with the tower, and would as lief walk off the tower into the air
as not. Such is his state when they begin to come down. And as
aëronauts make themselves heavier when they wish to descend, similarly
Durdles charges himself with more liquid from the wicker bottle, that
he may come down the better.

The iron gate attained and locked—but not before Durdles has tumbled
twice, and cut an eyebrow open once—they descend into the crypt again,
with the intent of issuing forth as they entered. But, while returning
among those lanes of light, Durdles becomes so very uncertain, both of
foot and speech, that he half drops, half throws himself down, by one
of the heavy pillars, scarcely less heavy than itself, and indistinctly
appeals to his companion for forty winks of a second each.

“If you will have it so, or must have it so,” replies Jasper, “I’ll not
leave you here. Take them, while I walk to and fro.”

Durdles is asleep at once; and in his sleep he dreams a dream.

It is not much of a dream, considering the vast extent of the domains
of dreamland, and their wonderful productions; it is only remarkable
for being unusually restless and unusually real. He dreams of lying
there, asleep, and yet counting his companion’s footsteps as he walks
to and fro. He dreams that the footsteps die away into distance of time
and of space, and that something touches him, and that something falls
from his hand. Then something clinks and gropes about, and he dreams
that he is alone for so long a time, that the lanes of light take new
directions as the moon advances in her course. From succeeding
unconsciousness he passes into a dream of slow uneasiness from cold;
and painfully awakes to a perception of the lanes of light—really
changed, much as he had dreamed—and Jasper walking among them, beating
his hands and feet.

“Holloa!” Durdles cries out, unmeaningly alarmed.

“Awake at last?” says Jasper, coming up to him. “Do you know that your
forties have stretched into thousands?”

“No.”

“They have though.”

“What’s the time?”

“Hark! The bells are going in the Tower!”

They strike four quarters, and then the great bell strikes.

“Two!” cries Durdles, scrambling up; “why didn’t you try to wake me,
Mister Jarsper?”

“I did. I might as well have tried to wake the dead—your own family of
dead, up in the corner there.”

“Did you touch me?”

“Touch you! Yes. Shook you.”

As Durdles recalls that touching something in his dream, he looks down
on the pavement, and sees the key of the crypt door lying close to
where he himself lay.

“I dropped you, did I?” he says, picking it up, and recalling that part
of his dream. As he gathers himself up again into an upright position,
or into a position as nearly upright as he ever maintains, he is again
conscious of being watched by his companion.

“Well?” says Jasper, smiling, “are you quite ready? Pray don’t hurry.”

“Let me get my bundle right, Mister Jarsper, and I’m with you.” As he
ties it afresh, he is once more conscious that he is very narrowly
observed.

“What do you suspect me of, Mister Jarsper?” he asks, with drunken
displeasure. “Let them as has any suspicions of Durdles name ’em.”

“I’ve no suspicions of you, my good Mr. Durdles; but I have suspicions
that my bottle was filled with something stiffer than either of us
supposed. And I also have suspicions,” Jasper adds, taking it from the
pavement and turning it bottom upwards, “that it’s empty.”

Durdles condescends to laugh at this. Continuing to chuckle when his
laugh is over, as though remonstrant with himself on his drinking
powers, he rolls to the door and unlocks it. They both pass out, and
Durdles relocks it, and pockets his key.

“A thousand thanks for a curious and interesting night,” says Jasper,
giving him his hand; “you can make your own way home?”

“I should think so!” answers Durdles. “If you was to offer Durdles the
affront to show him his way home, he wouldn’t go home.

Durdles wouldn’t go home till morning;
And _then_ Durdles wouldn’t go home,


Durdles wouldn’t.” This with the utmost defiance.

“Good-night, then.”

“Good-night, Mister Jarsper.”

Each is turning his own way, when a sharp whistle rends the silence,
and the jargon is yelped out:

Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten.
Widdy widdy wy!
Then—E—don’t—go—then—I—shy—
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!”


Instantly afterwards, a rapid fire of stones rattles at the Cathedral
wall, and the hideous small boy is beheld opposite, dancing in the
moonlight.

“What! Is that baby-devil on the watch there!” cries Jasper in a fury:
so quickly roused, and so violent, that he seems an older devil
himself. “I shall shed the blood of that impish wretch! I know I shall
do it!” Regardless of the fire, though it hits him more than once, he
rushes at Deputy, collars him, and tries to bring him across. But
Deputy is not to be so easily brought across. With a diabolical insight
into the strongest part of his position, he is no sooner taken by the
throat than he curls up his legs, forces his assailant to hang him, as
it were, and gurgles in his throat, and screws his body, and twists, as
already undergoing the first agonies of strangulation. There is nothing
for it but to drop him. He instantly gets himself together, backs over
to Durdles, and cries to his assailant, gnashing the great gap in front
of his mouth with rage and malice:

“I’ll blind yer, s’elp me! I’ll stone yer eyes out, s’elp me! If I
don’t have yer eyesight, bellows me!” At the same time dodging behind
Durdles, and snarling at Jasper, now from this side of him, and now
from that: prepared, if pounced upon, to dart away in all manner of
curvilinear directions, and, if run down after all, to grovel in the
dust, and cry: “Now, hit me when I’m down! Do it!”

“Don’t hurt the boy, Mister Jarsper,” urges Durdles, shielding him.
“Recollect yourself.”

“He followed us to-night, when we first came here!”

“Yer lie, I didn’t!” replies Deputy, in his one form of polite
contradiction.

“He has been prowling near us ever since!”

“Yer lie, I haven’t,” returns Deputy. “I’d only jist come out for my
’elth when I see you two a-coming out of the Kin-freederel. If

I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten!”


(with the usual rhythm and dance, though dodging behind Durdles), “it
ain’t _any_ fault, is it?”

“Take him home, then,” retorts Jasper, ferociously, though with a
strong check upon himself, “and let my eyes be rid of the sight of
you!”

Deputy, with another sharp whistle, at once expressing his relief, and
his commencement of a milder stoning of Mr. Durdles, begins stoning
that respectable gentleman home, as if he were a reluctant ox. Mr.
Jasper goes to his gatehouse, brooding. And thus, as everything comes
to an end, the unaccountable expedition comes to an end—for the time.




CHAPTER XIII.
BOTH AT THEIR BEST


Miss Twinkleton’s establishment was about to undergo a serene hush. The
Christmas recess was at hand. What had once, and at no remote period,
been called, even by the erudite Miss Twinkleton herself, “the half,”
but what was now called, as being more elegant, and more strictly
collegiate, “the term,” would expire to-morrow. A noticeable relaxation
of discipline had for some few days pervaded the Nuns’ House. Club
suppers had occurred in the bedrooms, and a dressed tongue had been
carved with a pair of scissors, and handed round with the curling
tongs. Portions of marmalade had likewise been distributed on a service
of plates constructed of curlpaper; and cowslip wine had been quaffed
from the small squat measuring glass in which little Rickitts (a junior
of weakly constitution) took her steel drops daily. The housemaids had
been bribed with various fragments of riband, and sundry pairs of shoes
more or less down at heel, to make no mention of crumbs in the beds;
the airiest costumes had been worn on these festive occasions; and the
daring Miss Ferdinand had even surprised the company with a sprightly
solo on the comb-and-curlpaper, until suffocated in her own pillow by
two flowing-haired executioners.

Nor were these the only tokens of dispersal. Boxes appeared in the
bedrooms (where they were capital at other times), and a surprising
amount of packing took place, out of all proportion to the amount
packed. Largess, in the form of odds and ends of cold cream and
pomatum, and also of hairpins, was freely distributed among the
attendants. On charges of inviolable secrecy, confidences were
interchanged respecting golden youth of England expected to call, “at
home,” on the first opportunity. Miss Giggles (deficient in sentiment)
did indeed profess that she, for her part, acknowledged such homage by
making faces at the golden youth; but this young lady was outvoted by
an immense majority.

On the last night before a recess, it was always expressly made a point
of honour that nobody should go to sleep, and that Ghosts should be
encouraged by all possible means. This compact invariably broke down,
and all the young ladies went to sleep very soon, and got up very
early.

The concluding ceremony came off at twelve o’clock on the day of
departure; when Miss Twinkleton, supported by Mrs. Tisher, held a
drawing-room in her own apartment (the globes already covered with
brown Holland), where glasses of white-wine and plates of cut
pound-cake were discovered on the table. Miss Twinkleton then said:
Ladies, another revolving year had brought us round to that festive
period at which the first feelings of our nature bounded in our—Miss
Twinkleton was annually going to add “bosoms,” but annually stopped on
the brink of that expression, and substituted “hearts.” Hearts; our
hearts. Hem! Again a revolving year, ladies, had brought us to a pause
in our studies—let us hope our greatly advanced studies—and, like the
mariner in his bark, the warrior in his tent, the captive in his
dungeon, and the traveller in his various conveyances, we yearned for
home. Did we say, on such an occasion, in the opening words of Mr.
Addison’s impressive tragedy:

“The dawn is overcast, the morning lowers,
And heavily in clouds brings on the day,
The great, th’ important day—?”


Not so. From horizon to zenith all was _couleur de rose_, for all was
redolent of our relations and friends. Might _we_ find _them_
prospering as _we_ expected; might _they_ find _us_ prospering as
_they_ expected! Ladies, we would now, with our love to one another,
wish one another good-bye, and happiness, until we met again. And when
the time should come for our resumption of those pursuits which (here a
general depression set in all round), pursuits which, pursuits
which;—then let us ever remember what was said by the Spartan General,
in words too trite for repetition, at the battle it were superfluous to
specify.

The handmaidens of the establishment, in their best caps, then handed
the trays, and the young ladies sipped and crumbled, and the bespoken
coaches began to choke the street. Then leave-taking was not long
about; and Miss Twinkleton, in saluting each young lady’s cheek,
confided to her an exceedingly neat letter, addressed to her next
friend at law, “with Miss Twinkleton’s best compliments” in the corner.
This missive she handed with an air as if it had not the least
connexion with the bill, but were something in the nature of a delicate
and joyful surprise.

So many times had Rosa seen such dispersals, and so very little did she
know of any other Home, that she was contented to remain where she was,
and was even better contented than ever before, having her latest
friend with her. And yet her latest friendship had a blank place in it
of which she could not fail to be sensible. Helena Landless, having
been a party to her brother’s revelation about Rosa, and having entered
into that compact of silence with Mr. Crisparkle, shrank from any
allusion to Edwin Drood’s name. Why she so avoided it, was mysterious
to Rosa, but she perfectly perceived the fact. But for the fact, she
might have relieved her own little perplexed heart of some of its
doubts and hesitations, by taking Helena into her confidence. As it
was, she had no such vent: she could only ponder on her own
difficulties, and wonder more and more why this avoidance of Edwin’s
name should last, now that she knew—for so much Helena had told
her—that a good understanding was to be reëstablished between the two
young men, when Edwin came down.

It would have made a pretty picture, so many pretty girls kissing Rosa
in the cold porch of the Nuns’ House, and that sunny little creature
peeping out of it (unconscious of sly faces carved on spout and gable
peeping at her), and waving farewells to the departing coaches, as if
she represented the spirit of rosy youth abiding in the place to keep
it bright and warm in its desertion. The hoarse High Street became
musical with the cry, in various silvery voices, “Good-bye, Rosebud
darling!” and the effigy of Mr. Sapsea’s father over the opposite
doorway seemed to say to mankind: “Gentlemen, favour me with your
attention to this charming little last lot left behind, and bid with a
spirit worthy of the occasion!” Then the staid street, so unwontedly
sparkling, youthful, and fresh for a few rippling moments, ran dry, and
Cloisterham was itself again.

[Illustration: “Good-bye, Rosebud darling”]


If Rosebud in her bower now waited Edwin Drood’s coming with an uneasy
heart, Edwin for his part was uneasy too. With far less force of
purpose in his composition than the childish beauty, crowned by
acclamation fairy queen of Miss Twinkleton’s establishment, he had a
conscience, and Mr. Grewgious had pricked it. That gentleman’s steady
convictions of what was right and what was wrong in such a case as his,
were neither to be frowned aside nor laughed aside. They would not be
moved. But for the dinner in Staple Inn, and but for the ring he
carried in the breast pocket of his coat, he would have drifted into
their wedding-day without another pause for real thought, loosely
trusting that all would go well, left alone. But that serious putting
him on his truth to the living and the dead had brought him to a check.
He must either give the ring to Rosa, or he must take it back. Once put
into this narrowed way of action, it was curious that he began to
consider Rosa’s claims upon him more unselfishly than he had ever
considered them before, and began to be less sure of himself than he
had ever been in all his easy-going days.

“I will be guided by what she says, and by how we get on,” was his
decision, walking from the gatehouse to the Nuns’ House. “Whatever
comes of it, I will bear his words in mind, and try to be true to the
living and the dead.”

Rosa was dressed for walking. She expected him. It was a bright, frosty
day, and Miss Twinkleton had already graciously sanctioned fresh air.
Thus they got out together before it became necessary for either Miss
Twinkleton, or the deputy high-priest Mrs. Tisher, to lay even so much
as one of those usual offerings on the shrine of Propriety.

“My dear Eddy,” said Rosa, when they had turned out of the High Street,
and had got among the quiet walks in the neighbourhood of the Cathedral
and the river: “I want to say something very serious to you. I have
been thinking about it for a long, long time.”

“I want to be serious with you too, Rosa dear. I mean to be serious and
earnest.”

“Thank you, Eddy. And you will not think me unkind because I begin,
will you? You will not think I speak for myself only, because I speak
first? That would not be generous, would it? And I know you are
generous!”

He said, “I hope I am not ungenerous to you, Rosa.” He called her Pussy
no more. Never again.

“And there is no fear,” pursued Rosa, “of our quarrelling, is there?
Because, Eddy,” clasping her hand on his arm, “we have so much reason
to be very lenient to each other!”

“We will be, Rosa.”

“That’s a dear good boy! Eddy, let us be courageous. Let us change to
brother and sister from this day forth.”

“Never be husband and wife?”

“Never!”

Neither spoke again for a little while. But after that pause he said,
with some effort:

“Of course I know that this has been in both our minds, Rosa, and of
course I am in honour bound to confess freely that it does not
originate with you.”

“No, nor with you, dear,” she returned, with pathetic earnestness.
“That sprung up between us. You are not truly happy in our engagement;
I am not truly happy in it. O, I am so sorry, so sorry!” And there she
broke into tears.

“I am deeply sorry too, Rosa. Deeply sorry for you.”

“And I for you, poor boy! And I for you!”

This pure young feeling, this gentle and forbearing feeling of each
towards the other, brought with it its reward in a softening light that
seemed to shine on their position. The relations between them did not
look wilful, or capricious, or a failure, in such a light; they became
elevated into something more self-denying, honourable, affectionate,
and true.

“If we knew yesterday,” said Rosa, as she dried her eyes, “and we did
know yesterday, and on many, many yesterdays, that we were far from
right together in those relations which were not of our own choosing,
what better could we do to-day than change them? It is natural that we
should be sorry, and you see how sorry we both are; but how much better
to be sorry now than then!”

“When, Rosa?”

“When it would be too late. And then we should be angry, besides.”

Another silence fell upon them.

“And you know,” said Rosa innocently, “you couldn’t like me then; and
you can always like me now, for I shall not be a drag upon you, or a
worry to you. And I can always like you now, and your sister will not
tease or trifle with you. I often did when I was not your sister, and I
beg your pardon for it.”

“Don’t let us come to that, Rosa; or I shall want more pardoning than I
like to think of.”

“No, indeed, Eddy; you are too hard, my generous boy, upon yourself.
Let us sit down, brother, on these ruins, and let me tell you how it
was with us. I think I know, for I have considered about it very much
since you were here last time. You liked me, didn’t you? You thought I
was a nice little thing?”

“Everybody thinks that, Rosa.”

“Do they?” She knitted her brow musingly for a moment, and then flashed
out with the bright little induction: “Well, but say they do. Surely it
was not enough that you should think of me only as other people did;
now, was it?”

The point was not to be got over. It was not enough.

“And that is just what I mean; that is just how it was with us,” said
Rosa. “You liked me very well, and you had grown used to me, and had
grown used to the idea of our being married. You accepted the situation
as an inevitable kind of thing, didn’t you? It was to be, you thought,
and why discuss or dispute it?”

It was new and strange to him to have himself presented to himself so
clearly, in a glass of her holding up. He had always patronised her, in
his superiority to her share of woman’s wit. Was that but another
instance of something radically amiss in the terms on which they had
been gliding towards a life-long bondage?

“All this that I say of you is true of me as well, Eddy. Unless it was,
I might not be bold enough to say it. Only, the difference between us
was, that by little and little there crept into my mind a habit of
thinking about it, instead of dismissing it. My life is not so busy as
yours, you see, and I have not so many things to think of. So I thought
about it very much, and I cried about it very much too (though that was
not your fault, poor boy); when all at once my guardian came down, to
prepare for my leaving the Nuns’ House. I tried to hint to him that I
was not quite settled in my mind, but I hesitated and failed, and he
didn’t understand me. But he is a good, good man. And he put before me
so kindly, and yet so strongly, how seriously we ought to consider, in
our circumstances, that I resolved to speak to you the next moment we
were alone and grave. And if I seemed to come to it easily just now,
because I came to it all at once, don’t think it was so really, Eddy,
for O, it was very, very hard, and O, I am very, very sorry!”

Her full heart broke into tears again. He put his arm about her waist,
and they walked by the river-side together.

“Your guardian has spoken to me too, Rosa dear. I saw him before I left
London.” His right hand was in his breast, seeking the ring; but he
checked it, as he thought: “If I am to take it back, why should I tell
her of it?”

“And that made you more serious about it, didn’t it, Eddy? And if I had
not spoken to you, as I have, you would have spoken to me? I hope you
can tell me so? I don’t like it to be _all_ my doing, though it _is_ so
much better for us.”

“Yes, I should have spoken; I should have put everything before you; I
came intending to do it. But I never could have spoken to you as you
have spoken to me, Rosa.”

“Don’t say you mean so coldly or unkindly, Eddy, please, if you can
help it.”

“I mean so sensibly and delicately, so wisely and affectionately.”

“That’s my dear brother!” She kissed his hand in a little rapture. “The
dear girls will be dreadfully disappointed,” added Rosa, laughing, with
the dewdrops glistening in her bright eyes. “They have looked forward
to it so, poor pets!”

“Ah! but I fear it will be a worse disappointment to Jack,” said Edwin
Drood, with a start. “I never thought of Jack!”

Her swift and intent look at him as he said the words could no more be
recalled than a flash of lightning can. But it appeared as though she
would have instantly recalled it, if she could; for she looked down,
confused, and breathed quickly.

“You don’t doubt its being a blow to Jack, Rosa?”

She merely replied, and that evasively and hurriedly: Why should she?
She had not thought about it. He seemed, to her, to have so little to
do with it.

“My dear child! can you suppose that any one so wrapped up in
another—Mrs. Tope’s expression: not mine—as Jack is in me, could fail
to be struck all of a heap by such a sudden and complete change in my
life? I say sudden, because it will be sudden to _him_, you know.”

She nodded twice or thrice, and her lips parted as if she would have
assented. But she uttered no sound, and her breathing was no slower.

“How shall I tell Jack?” said Edwin, ruminating. If he had been less
occupied with the thought, he must have seen her singular emotion. “I
never thought of Jack. It must be broken to him, before the town-crier
knows it. I dine with the dear fellow to-morrow and next day—Christmas
Eve and Christmas Day—but it would never do to spoil his feast-days. He
always worries about me, and moddley-coddleys in the merest trifles.
The news is sure to overset him. How on earth shall this be broken to
Jack?”

“He must be told, I suppose?” said Rosa.

“My dear Rosa! who ought to be in our confidence, if not Jack?”

“My guardian promised to come down, if I should write and ask him. I am
going to do so. Would you like to leave it to him?”

“A bright idea!” cried Edwin. “The other trustee. Nothing more natural.
He comes down, he goes to Jack, he relates what we have agreed upon,
and he states our case better than we could. He has already spoken
feelingly to you, he has already spoken feelingly to me, and he’ll put
the whole thing feelingly to Jack. That’s it! I am not a coward, Rosa,
but to tell you a secret, I am a little afraid of Jack.”

“No, no! you are not afraid of him!” cried Rosa, turning white, and
clasping her hands.

“Why, sister Rosa, sister Rosa, what do you see from the turret?” said
Edwin, rallying her. “My dear girl!”

“You frightened me.”

“Most unintentionally, but I am as sorry as if I had meant to do it.
Could you possibly suppose for a moment, from any loose way of speaking
of mine, that I was literally afraid of the dear fond fellow? What I
mean is, that he is subject to a kind of paroxysm, or fit—I saw him in
it once—and I don’t know but that so great a surprise, coming upon him
direct from me whom he is so wrapped up in, might bring it on perhaps.
Which—and this is the secret I was going to tell you—is another reason
for your guardian’s making the communication. He is so steady, precise,
and exact, that he will talk Jack’s thoughts into shape, in no time:
whereas with me Jack is always impulsive and hurried, and, I may say,
almost womanish.”

Rosa seemed convinced. Perhaps from her own very different point of
view of “Jack,” she felt comforted and protected by the interposition
of Mr. Grewgious between herself and him.

And now, Edwin Drood’s right hand closed again upon the ring in its
little case, and again was checked by the consideration: “It is
certain, now, that I am to give it back to him; then why should I tell
her of it?” That pretty sympathetic nature which could be so sorry for
him in the blight of their childish hopes of happiness together, and
could so quietly find itself alone in a new world to weave fresh
wreaths of such flowers as it might prove to bear, the old world’s
flowers being withered, would be grieved by those sorrowful jewels; and
to what purpose? Why should it be? They were but a sign of broken joys
and baseless projects; in their very beauty they were (as the
unlikeliest of men had said) almost a cruel satire on the loves, hopes,
plans, of humanity, which are able to forecast nothing, and are so much
brittle dust. Let them be. He would restore them to her guardian when
he came down; he in his turn would restore them to the cabinet from
which he had unwillingly taken them; and there, like old letters or old
vows, or other records of old aspirations come to nothing, they would
be disregarded, until, being valuable, they were sold into circulation
again, to repeat their former round.

Let them be. Let them lie unspoken of, in his breast. However
distinctly or indistinctly he entertained these thoughts, he arrived at
the conclusion, Let them be. Among the mighty store of wonderful chains
that are for ever forging, day and night, in the vast iron-works of
time and circumstance, there was one chain forged in the moment of that
small conclusion, riveted to the foundations of heaven and earth, and
gifted with invincible force to hold and drag.

They walked on by the river. They began to speak of their separate
plans. He would quicken his departure from England, and she would
remain where she was, at least as long as Helena remained. The poor
dear girls should have their disappointment broken to them gently, and,
as the first preliminary, Miss Twinkleton should be confided in by
Rosa, even in advance of the reappearance of Mr. Grewgious. It should
be made clear in all quarters that she and Edwin were the best of
friends. There had never been so serene an understanding between them
since they were first affianced. And yet there was one reservation on
each side; on hers, that she intended through her guardian to withdraw
herself immediately from the tuition of her music-master; on his, that
he did already entertain some wandering speculations whether it might
ever come to pass that he would know more of Miss Landless.

The bright, frosty day declined as they walked and spoke together. The
sun dipped in the river far behind them, and the old city lay red
before them, as their walk drew to a close. The moaning water cast its
seaweed duskily at their feet, when they turned to leave its margin;
and the rooks hovered above them with hoarse cries, darker splashes in
the darkening air.

“I will prepare Jack for my flitting soon,” said Edwin, in a low voice,
“and I will but see your guardian when he comes, and then go before
they speak together. It will be better done without my being by. Don’t
you think so?”

“Yes.”

“We know we have done right, Rosa?”

“Yes.”

“We know we are better so, even now?”

“And shall be far, far better so by-and-by.”

Still there was that lingering tenderness in their hearts towards the
old positions they were relinquishing, that they prolonged their
parting. When they came among the elm-trees by the Cathedral, where
they had last sat together, they stopped as by consent, and Rosa raised
her face to his, as she had never raised it in the old days;—for they
were old already.

“God bless you, dear! Good-bye!”

“God bless you, dear! Good-bye!”

They kissed each other fervently.

“Now, please take me home, Eddy, and let me be by myself.”

“Don’t look round, Rosa,” he cautioned her, as he drew her arm through
his, and led her away. “Didn’t you see Jack?”

“No! Where?”

“Under the trees. He saw us, as we took leave of each other. Poor
fellow! he little thinks we have parted. This will be a blow to him, I
am much afraid!”

She hurried on, without resting, and hurried on until they had passed
under the gatehouse into the street; once there, she asked:

“Has he followed us? You can look without seeming to. Is he behind?”

“No. Yes, he is! He has just passed out under the gateway. The dear,
sympathetic old fellow likes to keep us in sight. I am afraid he will
be bitterly disappointed!”

She pulled hurriedly at the handle of the hoarse old bell, and the gate
soon opened. Before going in, she gave him one last, wide, wondering
look, as if she would have asked him with imploring emphasis: “O! don’t
you understand?” And out of that look he vanished from her view.




CHAPTER XIV.
WHEN SHALL THESE THREE MEET AGAIN?


Christmas Eve in Cloisterham. A few strange faces in the streets; a few
other faces, half strange and half familiar, once the faces of
Cloisterham children, now the faces of men and women who come back from
the outer world at long intervals to find the city wonderfully shrunken
in size, as if it had not washed by any means well in the meanwhile. To
these, the striking of the Cathedral clock, and the cawing of the rooks
from the Cathedral tower, are like voices of their nursery time. To
such as these, it has happened in their dying hours afar off, that they
have imagined their chamber-floor to be strewn with the autumnal leaves
fallen from the elm-trees in the Close: so have the rustling sounds and
fresh scents of their earliest impressions revived when the circle of
their lives was very nearly traced, and the beginning and the end were
drawing close together.

Seasonable tokens are about. Red berries shine here and there in the
lattices of Minor Canon Corner; Mr. and Mrs. Tope are daintily sticking
sprigs of holly into the carvings and sconces of the Cathedral stalls,
as if they were sticking them into the coat-button-holes of the Dean
and Chapter. Lavish profusion is in the shops: particularly in the
articles of currants, raisins, spices, candied peel, and moist sugar.
An unusual air of gallantry and dissipation is abroad; evinced in an
immense bunch of mistletoe hanging in the greengrocer’s shop doorway,
and a poor little Twelfth Cake, culminating in the figure of a
Harlequin—such a very poor little Twelfth Cake, that one would rather
called it a Twenty-fourth Cake or a Forty-eighth Cake—to be raffled for
at the pastrycook’s, terms one shilling per member. Public amusements
are not wanting. The Wax-Work which made so deep an impression on the
reflective mind of the Emperor of China is to be seen by particular
desire during Christmas Week only, on the premises of the bankrupt
livery-stable-keeper up the lane; and a new grand comic Christmas
pantomime is to be produced at the Theatre: the latter heralded by the
portrait of Signor Jacksonini the clown, saying “How do you do
to-morrow?” quite as large as life, and almost as miserably. In short,
Cloisterham is up and doing: though from this description the High
School and Miss Twinkleton’s are to be excluded. From the former
establishment the scholars have gone home, every one of them in love
with one of Miss Twinkleton’s young ladies (who knows nothing about
it); and only the handmaidens flutter occasionally in the windows of
the latter. It is noticed, by the bye, that these damsels become,
within the limits of decorum, more skittish when thus intrusted with
the concrete representation of their sex, than when dividing the
representation with Miss Twinkleton’s young ladies.

Three are to meet at the gatehouse to-night. How does each one of the
three get through the day?

Neville Landless, though absolved from his books for the time by Mr.
Crisparkle—whose fresh nature is by no means insensible to the charms
of a holiday—reads and writes in his quiet room, with a concentrated
air, until it is two hours past noon. He then sets himself to clearing
his table, to arranging his books, and to tearing up and burning his
stray papers. He makes a clean sweep of all untidy accumulations, puts
all his drawers in order, and leaves no note or scrap of paper
undestroyed, save such memoranda as bear directly on his studies. This
done, he turns to his wardrobe, selects a few articles of ordinary
wear—among them, change of stout shoes and socks for walking—and packs
these in a knapsack. This knapsack is new, and he bought it in the High
Street yesterday. He also purchased, at the same time and at the same
place, a heavy walking-stick; strong in the handle for the grip of the
hand, and iron-shod. He tries this, swings it, poises it, and lays it
by, with the knapsack, on a window-seat. By this time his arrangements
are complete.

He dresses for going out, and is in the act of going—indeed has left
his room, and has met the Minor Canon on the staircase, coming out of
his bedroom upon the same story—when he turns back again for his
walking-stick, thinking he will carry it now. Mr. Crisparkle, who has
paused on the staircase, sees it in his hand on his immediately
reappearing, takes it from him, and asks him with a smile how he
chooses a stick?

“Really I don’t know that I understand the subject,” he answers. “I
chose it for its weight.”

“Much too heavy, Neville; _much_ too heavy.”

“To rest upon in a long walk, sir?”

“Rest upon?” repeats Mr. Crisparkle, throwing himself into pedestrian
form. “You don’t rest upon it; you merely balance with it.”

“I shall know better, with practice, sir. I have not lived in a walking
country, you know.”

“True,” says Mr. Crisparkle. “Get into a little training, and we will
have a few score miles together. I should leave you nowhere now. Do you
come back before dinner?”

“I think not, as we dine early.”

Mr. Crisparkle gives him a bright nod and a cheerful good-bye;
expressing (not without intention) absolute confidence and ease.

Neville repairs to the Nuns’ House, and requests that Miss Landless may
be informed that her brother is there, by appointment. He waits at the
gate, not even crossing the threshold; for he is on his parole not to
put himself in Rosa’s way.

His sister is at least as mindful of the obligation they have taken on
themselves as he can be, and loses not a moment in joining him. They
meet affectionately, avoid lingering there, and walk towards the upper
inland country.

“I am not going to tread upon forbidden ground, Helena,” says Neville,
when they have walked some distance and are turning; “you will
understand in another moment that I cannot help referring to—what shall
I say?—my infatuation.”

“Had you not better avoid it, Neville? You know that I can hear
nothing.”

“You can hear, my dear, what Mr. Crisparkle has heard, and heard with
approval.”

“Yes; I can hear so much.”

“Well, it is this. I am not only unsettled and unhappy myself, but I am
conscious of unsettling and interfering with other people. How do I
know that, but for my unfortunate presence, you, and—and—the rest of
that former party, our engaging guardian excepted, might be dining
cheerfully in Minor Canon Corner to-morrow? Indeed it probably would be
so. I can see too well that I am not high in the old lady’s opinion,
and it is easy to understand what an irksome clog I must be upon the
hospitalities of her orderly house—especially at this time of year—when
I must be kept asunder from this person, and there is such a reason for
my not being brought into contact with that person, and an unfavourable
reputation has preceded me with such another person; and so on. I have
put this very gently to Mr. Crisparkle, for you know his self-denying
ways; but still I have put it. What I have laid much greater stress
upon at the same time is, that I am engaged in a miserable struggle
with myself, and that a little change and absence may enable me to come
through it the better. So, the weather being bright and hard, I am
going on a walking expedition, and intend taking myself out of
everybody’s way (my own included, I hope) to-morrow morning.”

“When to come back?”

“In a fortnight.”

“And going quite alone?”

“I am much better without company, even if there were any one but you
to bear me company, my dear Helena.”

“Mr. Crisparkle entirely agrees, you say?”

“Entirely. I am not sure but that at first he was inclined to think it
rather a moody scheme, and one that might do a brooding mind harm. But
we took a moonlight walk last Monday night, to talk it over at leisure,
and I represented the case to him as it really is. I showed him that I
do want to conquer myself, and that, this evening well got over, it is
surely better that I should be away from here just now, than here. I
could hardly help meeting certain people walking together here, and
that could do no good, and is certainly not the way to forget. A
fortnight hence, that chance will probably be over, for the time; and
when it again arises for the last time, why, I can again go away.
Farther, I really do feel hopeful of bracing exercise and wholesome
fatigue. You know that Mr. Crisparkle allows such things their full
weight in the preservation of his own sound mind in his own sound body,
and that his just spirit is not likely to maintain one set of natural
laws for himself and another for me. He yielded to my view of the
matter, when convinced that I was honestly in earnest; and so, with his
full consent, I start to-morrow morning. Early enough to be not only
out of the streets, but out of hearing of the bells, when the good
people go to church.”

Helena thinks it over, and thinks well of it. Mr. Crisparkle doing so,
she would do so; but she does originally, out of her own mind, think
well of it, as a healthy project, denoting a sincere endeavour and an
active attempt at self-correction. She is inclined to pity him, poor
fellow, for going away solitary on the great Christmas festival; but
she feels it much more to the purpose to encourage him. And she does
encourage him.

He will write to her?

He will write to her every alternate day, and tell her all his
adventures.

Does he send clothes on in advance of him?

“My dear Helena, no. Travel like a pilgrim, with wallet and staff. My
wallet—or my knapsack—is packed, and ready for strapping on; and here
is my staff!”

He hands it to her; she makes the same remark as Mr. Crisparkle, that
it is very heavy; and gives it back to him, asking what wood it is?
Iron-wood.

Up to this point he has been extremely cheerful. Perhaps, the having to
carry his case with her, and therefore to present it in its brightest
aspect, has roused his spirits. Perhaps, the having done so with
success, is followed by a revulsion. As the day closes in, and the
city-lights begin to spring up before them, he grows depressed.

“I wish I were not going to this dinner, Helena.”

“Dear Neville, is it worth while to care much about it? Think how soon
it will be over.”

“How soon it will be over!” he repeats gloomily. “Yes. But I don’t like
it.”

There may be a moment’s awkwardness, she cheeringly represents to him,
but it can only last a moment. He is quite sure of himself.

“I wish I felt as sure of everything else, as I feel of myself,” he
answers her.

“How strangely you speak, dear! What do you mean?”

“Helena, I don’t know. I only know that I don’t like it. What a strange
dead weight there is in the air!”

She calls his attention to those copperous clouds beyond the river, and
says that the wind is rising. He scarcely speaks again, until he takes
leave of her, at the gate of the Nuns’ House. She does not immediately
enter, when they have parted, but remains looking after him along the
street. Twice he passes the gatehouse, reluctant to enter. At length,
the Cathedral clock chiming one quarter, with a rapid turn he hurries
in.

And so _he_ goes up the postern stair.

Edwin Drood passes a solitary day. Something of deeper moment than he
had thought, has gone out of his life; and in the silence of his own
chamber he wept for it last night. Though the image of Miss Landless
still hovers in the background of his mind, the pretty little
affectionate creature, so much firmer and wiser than he had supposed,
occupies its stronghold. It is with some misgiving of his own
unworthiness that he thinks of her, and of what they might have been to
one another, if he had been more in earnest some time ago; if he had
set a higher value on her; if, instead of accepting his lot in life as
an inheritance of course, he had studied the right way to its
appreciation and enhancement. And still, for all this, and though there
is a sharp heartache in all this, the vanity and caprice of youth
sustain that handsome figure of Miss Landless in the background of his
mind.

That was a curious look of Rosa’s when they parted at the gate. Did it
mean that she saw below the surface of his thoughts, and down into
their twilight depths? Scarcely that, for it was a look of astonished
and keen inquiry. He decides that he cannot understand it, though it
was remarkably expressive.

As he only waits for Mr. Grewgious now, and will depart immediately
after having seen him, he takes a sauntering leave of the ancient city
and its neighbourhood. He recalls the time when Rosa and he walked here
or there, mere children, full of the dignity of being engaged. Poor
children! he thinks, with a pitying sadness.

Finding that his watch has stopped, he turns into the jeweller’s shop,
to have it wound and set. The jeweller is knowing on the subject of a
bracelet, which he begs leave to submit, in a general and quite aimless
way. It would suit (he considers) a young bride, to perfection;
especially if of a rather diminutive style of beauty. Finding the
bracelet but coldly looked at, the jeweller invites attention to a tray
of rings for gentlemen; here is a style of ring, now, he remarks—a very
chaste signet—which gentlemen are much given to purchasing, when
changing their condition. A ring of a very responsible appearance. With
the date of their wedding-day engraved inside, several gentlemen have
preferred it to any other kind of memento.

The rings are as coldly viewed as the bracelet. Edwin tells the tempter
that he wears no jewellery but his watch and chain, which were his
father’s; and his shirt-pin.

“That I was aware of,” is the jeweller’s reply, “for Mr. Jasper dropped
in for a watch-glass the other day, and, in fact, I showed these
articles to him, remarking that if he _should_ wish to make a present
to a gentleman relative, on any particular occasion—But he said with a
smile that he had an inventory in his mind of all the jewellery his
gentleman relative ever wore; namely, his watch and chain, and his
shirt-pin.” Still (the jeweller considers) that might not apply to all
times, though applying to the present time. “Twenty minutes past two,
Mr. Drood, I set your watch at. Let me recommend you not to let it run
down, sir.”

Edwin takes his watch, puts it on, and goes out, thinking: “Dear old
Jack! If I were to make an extra crease in my neckcloth, he would think
it worth noticing!”

He strolls about and about, to pass the time until the dinner-hour. It
somehow happens that Cloisterham seems reproachful to him to-day; has
fault to find with him, as if he had not used it well; but is far more
pensive with him than angry. His wonted carelessness is replaced by a
wistful looking at, and dwelling upon, all the old landmarks. He will
soon be far away, and may never see them again, he thinks. Poor youth!
Poor youth!

As dusk draws on, he paces the Monks’ Vineyard. He has walked to and
fro, full half an hour by the Cathedral chimes, and it has closed in
dark, before he becomes quite aware of a woman crouching on the ground
near a wicket gate in a corner. The gate commands a cross bye-path,
little used in the gloaming; and the figure must have been there all
the time, though he has but gradually and lately made it out.

He strikes into that path, and walks up to the wicket. By the light of
a lamp near it, he sees that the woman is of a haggard appearance, and
that her weazen chin is resting on her hands, and that her eyes are
staring—with an unwinking, blind sort of steadfastness—before her.

Always kindly, but moved to be unusually kind this evening, and having
bestowed kind words on most of the children and aged people he has met,
he at once bends down, and speaks to this woman.

“Are you ill?”

“No, deary,” she answers, without looking at him, and with no departure
from her strange blind stare.

“Are you blind?”

“No, deary.”

“Are you lost, homeless, faint? What is the matter, that you stay here
in the cold so long, without moving?”

By slow and stiff efforts, she appears to contract her vision until it
can rest upon him; and then a curious film passes over her, and she
begins to shake.

He straightens himself, recoils a step, and looks down at her in a
dread amazement; for he seems to know her.

“Good Heaven!” he thinks, next moment. “Like Jack that night!”

As he looks down at her, she looks up at him, and whimpers: “My lungs
is weakly; my lungs is dreffle bad. Poor me, poor me, my cough is
rattling dry!” and coughs in confirmation horribly.

“Where do you come from?”

“Come from London, deary.” (Her cough still rending her.)

“Where are you going to?”

“Back to London, deary. I came here, looking for a needle in a
haystack, and I ain’t found it. Look’ee, deary; give me
three-and-sixpence, and don’t you be afeard for me. I’ll get back to
London then, and trouble no one. I’m in a business.—Ah, me! It’s slack,
it’s slack, and times is very bad!—but I can make a shift to live by
it.”

“Do you eat opium?”

“Smokes it,” she replies with difficulty, still racked by her cough.
“Give me three-and-sixpence, and I’ll lay it out well, and get back. If
you don’t give me three-and-sixpence, don’t give me a brass farden. And
if you do give me three-and-sixpence, deary, I’ll tell you something.”

He counts the money from his pocket, and puts it in her hand. She
instantly clutches it tight, and rises to her feet with a croaking
laugh of satisfaction.

“Bless ye! Hark’ee, dear genl’mn. What’s your Chris’en name?”

“Edwin.”

“Edwin, Edwin, Edwin,” she repeats, trailing off into a drowsy
repetition of the word; and then asks suddenly: “Is the short of that
name Eddy?”

“It is sometimes called so,” he replies, with the colour starting to
his face.

“Don’t sweethearts call it so?” she asks, pondering.

“How should I know?”

“Haven’t you a sweetheart, upon your soul?”

“None.”

She is moving away, with another “Bless ye, and thank’ee, deary!” when
he adds: “You were to tell me something; you may as well do so.”

“So I was, so I was. Well, then. Whisper. You be thankful that your
name ain’t Ned.”

He looks at her quite steadily, as he asks: “Why?”

“Because it’s a bad name to have just now.”

“How a bad name?”

“A threatened name. A dangerous name.”

“The proverb says that threatened men live long,” he tells her,
lightly.

“Then Ned—so threatened is he, wherever he may be while I am a-talking
to you, deary—should live to all eternity!” replies the woman.

She has leaned forward to say it in his ear, with her forefinger
shaking before his eyes, and now huddles herself together, and with
another “Bless ye, and thank’ee!” goes away in the direction of the
Travellers’ Lodging House.

This is not an inspiriting close to a dull day. Alone, in a sequestered
place, surrounded by vestiges of old time and decay, it rather has a
tendency to call a shudder into being. He makes for the better-lighted
streets, and resolves as he walks on to say nothing of this to-night,
but to mention it to Jack (who alone calls him Ned), as an odd
coincidence, to-morrow; of course only as a coincidence, and not as
anything better worth remembering.

Still, it holds to him, as many things much better worth remembering
never did. He has another mile or so, to linger out before the
dinner-hour; and, when he walks over the bridge and by the river, the
woman’s words are in the rising wind, in the angry sky, in the troubled
water, in the flickering lights. There is some solemn echo of them even
in the Cathedral chime, which strikes a sudden surprise to his heart as
he turns in under the archway of the gatehouse.

And so _he_ goes up the postern stair.

John Jasper passes a more agreeable and cheerful day than either of his
guests. Having no music-lessons to give in the holiday season, his time
is his own, but for the Cathedral services. He is early among the
shopkeepers, ordering little table luxuries that his nephew likes. His
nephew will not be with him long, he tells his provision-dealers, and
so must be petted and made much of. While out on his hospitable
preparations, he looks in on Mr. Sapsea; and mentions that dear Ned,
and that inflammable young spark of Mr. Crisparkle’s, are to dine at
the gatehouse to-day, and make up their difference. Mr. Sapsea is by no
means friendly towards the inflammable young spark. He says that his
complexion is “Un-English.” And when Mr. Sapsea has once declared
anything to be Un-English, he considers that thing everlastingly sunk
in the bottomless pit.

John Jasper is truly sorry to hear Mr. Sapsea speak thus, for he knows
right well that Mr. Sapsea never speaks without a meaning, and that he
has a subtle trick of being right. Mr. Sapsea (by a very remarkable
coincidence) is of exactly that opinion.

Mr. Jasper is in beautiful voice this day. In the pathetic supplication
to have his heart inclined to keep this law, he quite astonishes his
fellows by his melodious power. He has never sung difficult music with
such skill and harmony, as in this day’s Anthem. His nervous
temperament is occasionally prone to take difficult music a little too
quickly; to-day, his time is perfect.

These results are probably attained through a grand composure of the
spirits. The mere mechanism of his throat is a little tender, for he
wears, both with his singing-robe and with his ordinary dress, a large
black scarf of strong close-woven silk, slung loosely round his neck.
But his composure is so noticeable, that Mr. Crisparkle speaks of it as
they come out from Vespers.

“I must thank you, Jasper, for the pleasure with which I have heard you
to-day. Beautiful! Delightful! You could not have so outdone yourself,
I hope, without being wonderfully well.”

“I _am_ wonderfully well.”

“Nothing unequal,” says the Minor Canon, with a smooth motion of his
hand: “nothing unsteady, nothing forced, nothing avoided; all
thoroughly done in a masterly manner, with perfect self-command.”

“Thank you. I hope so, if it is not too much to say.”

“One would think, Jasper, you had been trying a new medicine for that
occasional indisposition of yours.”

“No, really? That’s well observed; for I have.”

“Then stick to it, my good fellow,” says Mr. Crisparkle, clapping him
on the shoulder with friendly encouragement, “stick to it.”

“I will.”

“I congratulate you,” Mr. Crisparkle pursues, as they come out of the
Cathedral, “on all accounts.”

“Thank you again. I will walk round to the Corner with you, if you
don’t object; I have plenty of time before my company come; and I want
to say a word to you, which I think you will not be displeased to
hear.”

“What is it?”

“Well. We were speaking, the other evening, of my black humours.”

Mr. Crisparkle’s face falls, and he shakes his head deploringly.

“I said, you know, that I should make you an antidote to those black
humours; and you said you hoped I would consign them to the flames.”

“And I still hope so, Jasper.”

“With the best reason in the world! I mean to burn this year’s Diary at
the year’s end.”

“Because you—?” Mr. Crisparkle brightens greatly as he thus begins.

“You anticipate me. Because I feel that I have been out of sorts,
gloomy, bilious, brain-oppressed, whatever it may be. You said I had
been exaggerative. So I have.”

Mr. Crisparkle’s brightened face brightens still more.

“I couldn’t see it then, because I _was_ out of sorts; but I am in a
healthier state now, and I acknowledge it with genuine pleasure. I made
a great deal of a very little; that’s the fact.”

“It does me good,” cries Mr. Crisparkle, “to hear you say it!”

“A man leading a monotonous life,” Jasper proceeds, “and getting his
nerves, or his stomach, out of order, dwells upon an idea until it
loses its proportions. That was my case with the idea in question. So I
shall burn the evidence of my case, when the book is full, and begin
the next volume with a clearer vision.”

“This is better,” says Mr. Crisparkle, stopping at the steps of his own
door to shake hands, “than I could have hoped.”

“Why, naturally,” returns Jasper. “You had but little reason to hope
that I should become more like yourself. You are always training
yourself to be, mind and body, as clear as crystal, and you always are,
and never change; whereas I am a muddy, solitary, moping weed. However,
I have got over that mope. Shall I wait, while you ask if Mr. Neville
has left for my place? If not, he and I may walk round together.”

“I think,” says Mr. Crisparkle, opening the entrance-door with his key,
“that he left some time ago; at least I know he left, and I think he
has not come back. But I’ll inquire. You won’t come in?”

“My company wait,” said Jasper, with a smile.

The Minor Canon disappears, and in a few moments returns. As he
thought, Mr. Neville has not come back; indeed, as he remembers now,
Mr. Neville said he would probably go straight to the gatehouse.

“Bad manners in a host!” says Jasper. “My company will be there before
me! What will you bet that I don’t find my company embracing?”

“I will bet—or I would, if ever I did bet,” returns Mr. Crisparkle,
“that your company will have a gay entertainer this evening.”

Jasper nods, and laughs good-night!

He retraces his steps to the Cathedral door, and turns down past it to
the gatehouse. He sings, in a low voice and with delicate expression,
as he walks along. It still seems as if a false note were not within
his power to-night, and as if nothing could hurry or retard him.
Arriving thus under the arched entrance of his dwelling, he pauses for
an instant in the shelter to pull off that great black scarf, and bang
it in a loop upon his arm. For that brief time, his face is knitted and
stern. But it immediately clears, as he resumes his singing, and his
way.

And so _he_ goes up the postern stair.

The red light burns steadily all the evening in the lighthouse on the
margin of the tide of busy life. Softened sounds and hum of traffic
pass it and flow on irregularly into the lonely Precincts; but very
little else goes by, save violent rushes of wind. It comes on to blow a
boisterous gale.

The Precincts are never particularly well lighted; but the strong
blasts of wind blowing out many of the lamps (in some instances
shattering the frames too, and bringing the glass rattling to the
ground), they are unusually dark to-night. The darkness is augmented
and confused, by flying dust from the earth, dry twigs from the trees,
and great ragged fragments from the rooks’ nests up in the tower. The
trees themselves so toss and creak, as this tangible part of the
darkness madly whirls about, that they seem in peril of being torn out
of the earth: while ever and again a crack, and a rushing fall, denote
that some large branch has yielded to the storm.

Not such power of wind has blown for many a winter night. Chimneys
topple in the streets, and people hold to posts and corners, and to one
another, to keep themselves upon their feet. The violent rushes abate
not, but increase in frequency and fury until at midnight, when the
streets are empty, the storm goes thundering along them, rattling at
all the latches, and tearing at all the shutters, as if warning the
people to get up and fly with it, rather than have the roofs brought
down upon their brains.

Still, the red light burns steadily. Nothing is steady but the red
light.

All through the night the wind blows, and abates not. But early in the
morning, when there is barely enough light in the east to dim the
stars, it begins to lull. From that time, with occasional wild charges,
like a wounded monster dying, it drops and sinks; and at full daylight
it is dead.

It is then seen that the hands of the Cathedral clock are torn off;
that lead from the roof has been stripped away, rolled up, and blown
into the Close; and that some stones have been displaced upon the
summit of the great tower. Christmas morning though it be, it is
necessary to send up workmen, to ascertain the extent of the damage
done. These, led by Durdles, go aloft; while Mr. Tope and a crowd of
early idlers gather down in Minor Canon Corner, shading their eyes and
watching for their appearance up there.

This cluster is suddenly broken and put aside by the hands of Mr.
Jasper; all the gazing eyes are brought down to the earth by his loudly
inquiring of Mr. Crisparkle, at an open window:

“Where is my nephew?”

“He has not been here. Is he not with you?”

“No. He went down to the river last night, with Mr. Neville, to look at
the storm, and has not been back. Call Mr. Neville!”

“He left this morning, early.”

“Left this morning early? Let me in! let me in!”

There is no more looking up at the tower, now. All the assembled eyes
are turned on Mr. Jasper, white, half-dressed, panting, and clinging to
the rail before the Minor Canon’s house.




CHAPTER XV.
IMPEACHED


Neville Landless had started so early and walked at so good a pace,
that when the church-bells began to ring in Cloisterham for morning
service, he was eight miles away. As he wanted his breakfast by that
time, having set forth on a crust of bread, he stopped at the next
roadside tavern to refresh.

Visitors in want of breakfast—unless they were horses or cattle, for
which class of guests there was preparation enough in the way of
water-trough and hay—were so unusual at the sign of The Tilted Wagon,
that it took a long time to get the wagon into the track of tea and
toast and bacon. Neville in the interval, sitting in a sanded parlour,
wondering in how long a time after he had gone, the sneezy fire of damp
fagots would begin to make somebody else warm.

Indeed, The Tilted Wagon, as a cool establishment on the top of a hill,
where the ground before the door was puddled with damp hoofs and
trodden straw; where a scolding landlady slapped a moist baby (with one
red sock on and one wanting), in the bar; where the cheese was cast
aground upon a shelf, in company with a mouldy tablecloth and a
green-handled knife, in a sort of cast-iron canoe; where the pale-faced
bread shed tears of crumb over its shipwreck in another canoe; where
the family linen, half washed and half dried, led a public life of
lying about; where everything to drink was drunk out of mugs, and
everything else was suggestive of a rhyme to mugs; The Tilted Wagon,
all these things considered, hardly kept its painted promise of
providing good entertainment for Man and Beast. However, Man, in the
present case, was not critical, but took what entertainment he could
get, and went on again after a longer rest than he needed.

He stopped at some quarter of a mile from the house, hesitating whether
to pursue the road, or to follow a cart track between two high
hedgerows, which led across the slope of a breezy heath, and evidently
struck into the road again by-and-by. He decided in favour of this
latter track, and pursued it with some toil; the rise being steep, and
the way worn into deep ruts.

He was labouring along, when he became aware of some other pedestrians
behind him. As they were coming up at a faster pace than his, he stood
aside, against one of the high banks, to let them pass. But their
manner was very curious. Only four of them passed. Other four slackened
speed, and loitered as intending to follow him when he should go on.
The remainder of the party (half-a-dozen perhaps) turned, and went back
at a great rate.

He looked at the four behind him, and he looked at the four before him.
They all returned his look. He resumed his way. The four in advance
went on, constantly looking back; the four in the rear came closing up.

When they all ranged out from the narrow track upon the open slope of
the heath, and this order was maintained, let him diverge as he would
to either side, there was no longer room to doubt that he was beset by
these fellows. He stopped, as a last test; and they all stopped.

“Why do you attend upon me in this way?” he asked the whole body. “Are
you a pack of thieves?”

“Don’t answer him,” said one of the number; he did not see which.
“Better be quiet.”

“Better be quiet?” repeated Neville. “Who said so?”

Nobody replied.

“It’s good advice, whichever of you skulkers gave it,” he went on
angrily. “I will not submit to be penned in between four men there, and
four men there. I wish to pass, and I mean to pass, those four in
front.”

They were all standing still; himself included.

“If eight men, or four men, or two men, set upon one,” he proceeded,
growing more enraged, “the one has no chance but to set his mark upon
some of them. And, by the Lord, I’ll do it, if I am interrupted any
farther!”

Shouldering his heavy stick, and quickening his pace, he shot on to
pass the four ahead. The largest and strongest man of the number
changed swiftly to the side on which he came up, and dexterously closed
with him and went down with him; but not before the heavy stick had
descended smartly.

“Let him be!” said this man in a suppressed voice, as they struggled
together on the grass. “Fair play! His is the build of a girl to mine,
and he’s got a weight strapped to his back besides. Let him alone. I’ll
manage him.”

After a little rolling about, in a close scuffle which caused the faces
of both to be besmeared with blood, the man took his knee from
Neville’s chest, and rose, saying: “There! Now take him arm-in-arm, any
two of you!”

It was immediately done.

“As to our being a pack of thieves, Mr. Landless,” said the man, as he
spat out some blood, and wiped more from his face; “you know better
than that at midday. We wouldn’t have touched you if you hadn’t forced
us. We’re going to take you round to the high road, anyhow, and you’ll
find help enough against thieves there, if you want it.—Wipe his face,
somebody; see how it’s a-trickling down him!”

When his face was cleansed, Neville recognised in the speaker, Joe,
driver of the Cloisterham omnibus, whom he had seen but once, and that
on the day of his arrival.

“And what I recommend you for the present, is, don’t talk, Mr.
Landless. You’ll find a friend waiting for you, at the high road—gone
ahead by the other way when we split into two parties—and you had much
better say nothing till you come up with him. Bring that stick along,
somebody else, and let’s be moving!”

Utterly bewildered, Neville stared around him and said not a word.
Walking between his two conductors, who held his arms in theirs, he
went on, as in a dream, until they came again into the high road, and
into the midst of a little group of people. The men who had turned back
were among the group; and its central figures were Mr. Jasper and Mr.
Crisparkle. Neville’s conductors took him up to the Minor Canon, and
there released him, as an act of deference to that gentleman.

“What is all this, sir? What is the matter? I feel as if I had lost my
senses!” cried Neville, the group closing in around him.

“Where is my nephew?” asked Mr. Jasper, wildly.

“Where is your nephew?” repeated Neville, “Why do you ask me?”

“I ask you,” retorted Jasper, “because you were the last person in his
company, and he is not to be found.”

“Not to be found!” cried Neville, aghast.

“Stay, stay,” said Mr. Crisparkle. “Permit me, Jasper. Mr. Neville, you
are confounded; collect your thoughts; it is of great importance that
you should collect your thoughts; attend to me.”

“I will try, sir, but I seem mad.”

“You left Mr. Jasper last night with Edwin Drood?”

“Yes.”

“At what hour?”

“Was it at twelve o’clock?” asked Neville, with his hand to his
confused head, and appealing to Jasper.

“Quite right,” said Mr. Crisparkle; “the hour Mr. Jasper has already
named to me. You went down to the river together?”

“Undoubtedly. To see the action of the wind there.”

“What followed? How long did you stay there?”

“About ten minutes; I should say not more. We then walked together to
your house, and he took leave of me at the door.”

“Did he say that he was going down to the river again?”

“No. He said that he was going straight back.”

The bystanders looked at one another, and at Mr. Crisparkle. To whom
Mr. Jasper, who had been intensely watching Neville, said, in a low,
distinct, suspicious voice: “What are those stains upon his dress?”

All eyes were turned towards the blood upon his clothes.

“And here are the same stains upon this stick!” said Jasper, taking it
from the hand of the man who held it. “I know the stick to be his, and
he carried it last night. What does this mean?”

“In the name of God, say what it means, Neville!” urged Mr. Crisparkle.

“That man and I,” said Neville, pointing out his late adversary, “had a
struggle for the stick just now, and you may see the same marks on him,
sir. What was I to suppose, when I found myself molested by eight
people? Could I dream of the true reason when they would give me none
at all?”

They admitted that they had thought it discreet to be silent, and that
the struggle had taken place. And yet the very men who had seen it
looked darkly at the smears which the bright cold air had already
dried.

“We must return, Neville,” said Mr. Crisparkle; “of course you will be
glad to come back to clear yourself?”

“Of course, sir.”

“Mr. Landless will walk at my side,” the Minor Canon continued, looking
around him. “Come, Neville!”

They set forth on the walk back; and the others, with one exception,
straggled after them at various distances. Jasper walked on the other
side of Neville, and never quitted that position. He was silent, while
Mr. Crisparkle more than once repeated his former questions, and while
Neville repeated his former answers; also, while they both hazarded
some explanatory conjectures. He was obstinately silent, because Mr.
Crisparkle’s manner directly appealed to him to take some part in the
discussion, and no appeal would move his fixed face. When they drew
near to the city, and it was suggested by the Minor Canon that they
might do well in calling on the Mayor at once, he assented with a stern
nod; but he spake no word until they stood in Mr. Sapsea’s parlour.

Mr. Sapsea being informed by Mr. Crisparkle of the circumstances under
which they desired to make a voluntary statement before him, Mr. Jasper
broke silence by declaring that he placed his whole reliance, humanly
speaking, on Mr. Sapsea’s penetration. There was no conceivable reason
why his nephew should have suddenly absconded, unless Mr. Sapsea could
suggest one, and then he would defer. There was no intelligible
likelihood of his having returned to the river, and been accidentally
drowned in the dark, unless it should appear likely to Mr. Sapsea, and
then again he would defer. He washed his hands as clean as he could of
all horrible suspicions, unless it should appear to Mr. Sapsea that
some such were inseparable from his last companion before his
disappearance (not on good terms with previously), and then, once more,
he would defer. His own state of mind, he being distracted with doubts,
and labouring under dismal apprehensions, was not to be safely trusted;
but Mr. Sapsea’s was.

Mr. Sapsea expressed his opinion that the case had a dark look; in
short (and here his eyes rested full on Neville’s countenance), an
Un-English complexion. Having made this grand point, he wandered into a
denser haze and maze of nonsense than even a mayor might have been
expected to disport himself in, and came out of it with the brilliant
discovery that to take the life of a fellow-creature was to take
something that didn’t belong to you. He wavered whether or no he should
at once issue his warrant for the committal of Neville Landless to
jail, under circumstances of grave suspicion; and he might have gone so
far as to do it but for the indignant protest of the Minor Canon: who
undertook for the young man’s remaining in his own house, and being
produced by his own hands, whenever demanded. Mr. Jasper then
understood Mr. Sapsea to suggest that the river should be dragged, that
its banks should be rigidly examined, that particulars of the
disappearance should be sent to all outlying places and to London, and
that placards and advertisements should be widely circulated imploring
Edwin Drood, if for any unknown reason he had withdrawn himself from
his uncle’s home and society, to take pity on that loving kinsman’s
sore bereavement and distress, and somehow inform him that he was yet
alive. Mr. Sapsea was perfectly understood, for this was exactly his
meaning (though he had said nothing about it); and measures were taken
towards all these ends immediately.

It would be difficult to determine which was the more oppressed with
horror and amazement: Neville Landless, or John Jasper. But that
Jasper’s position forced him to be active, while Neville’s forced him
to be passive, there would have been nothing to choose between them.
Each was bowed down and broken.

With the earliest light of the next morning, men were at work upon the
river, and other men—most of whom volunteered for the service—were
examining the banks. All the livelong day the search went on; upon the
river, with barge and pole, and drag and net; upon the muddy and rushy
shore, with jack-boots, hatchet, spade, rope, dogs, and all imaginable
appliances. Even at night, the river was specked with lanterns, and
lurid with fires; far-off creeks, into which the tide washed as it
changed, had their knots of watchers, listening to the lapping of the
stream, and looking out for any burden it might bear; remote shingly
causeways near the sea, and lonely points off which there was a race of
water, had their unwonted flaring cressets and rough-coated figures
when the next day dawned; but no trace of Edwin Drood revisited the
light of the sun.

All that day, again, the search went on. Now, in barge and boat; and
now ashore among the osiers, or tramping amidst mud and stakes and
jagged stones in low-lying places, where solitary watermarks and
signals of strange shapes showed like spectres, John Jasper worked and
toiled. But to no purpose; for still no trace of Edwin Drood revisited
the light of the sun.

Setting his watches for that night again, so that vigilant eyes should
be kept on every change of tide, he went home exhausted. Unkempt and
disordered, bedaubed with mud that had dried upon him, and with much of
his clothing torn to rags, he had but just dropped into his easy-chair,
when Mr. Grewgious stood before him.

“This is strange news,” said Mr. Grewgious.

“Strange and fearful news.”

Jasper had merely lifted up his heavy eyes to say it, and now dropped
them again as he drooped, worn out, over one side of his easy-chair.

Mr. Grewgious smoothed his head and face, and stood looking at the
fire.

“How is your ward?” asked Jasper, after a time, in a faint, fatigued
voice.

“Poor little thing! You may imagine her condition.”

“Have you seen his sister?” inquired Jasper, as before.

“Whose?”

The curtness of the counter-question, and the cool, slow manner in
which, as he put it, Mr. Grewgious moved his eyes from the fire to his
companion’s face, might at any other time have been exasperating. In
his depression and exhaustion, Jasper merely opened his eyes to say:
“The suspected young man’s.”

“Do you suspect him?” asked Mr. Grewgious.

“I don’t know what to think. I cannot make up my mind.”

“Nor I,” said Mr. Grewgious. “But as you spoke of him as the suspected
young man, I thought you _had_ made up your mind.—I have just left Miss
Landless.”

[Illustration: Mr. Grewgious has his suspicions]


“What is her state?”

“Defiance of all suspicion, and unbounded faith in her brother.”

“Poor thing!”

“However,” pursued Mr. Grewgious, “it is not of her that I came to
speak. It is of my ward. I have a communication to make that will
surprise you. At least, it has surprised me.”

Jasper, with a groaning sigh, turned wearily in his chair.

“Shall I put it off till to-morrow?” said Mr. Grewgious. “Mind, I warn
you, that I think it will surprise you!”

More attention and concentration came into John Jasper’s eyes as they
caught sight of Mr. Grewgious smoothing his head again, and again
looking at the fire; but now, with a compressed and determined mouth.

“What is it?” demanded Jasper, becoming upright in his chair.

“To be sure,” said Mr. Grewgious, provokingly slowly and internally, as
he kept his eyes on the fire: “I might have known it sooner; she gave
me the opening; but I am such an exceedingly Angular man, that it never
occurred to me; I took all for granted.”

“What is it?” demanded Jasper once more.

Mr. Grewgious, alternately opening and shutting the palms of his hands
as he warmed them at the fire, and looking fixedly at him sideways, and
never changing either his action or his look in all that followed, went
on to reply.

“This young couple, the lost youth and Miss Rosa, my ward, though so
long betrothed, and so long recognising their betrothal, and so near
being married—”

Mr. Grewgious saw a staring white face, and two quivering white lips,
in the easy-chair, and saw two muddy hands gripping its sides. But for
the hands, he might have thought he had never seen the face.

“—This young couple came gradually to the discovery (made on both sides
pretty equally, I think), that they would be happier and better, both
in their present and their future lives, as affectionate friends, or
say rather as brother and sister, than as husband and wife.”

Mr. Grewgious saw a lead-coloured face in the easy-chair, and on its
surface dreadful starting drops or bubbles, as if of steel.

“This young couple formed at length the healthy resolution of
interchanging their discoveries, openly, sensibly, and tenderly. They
met for that purpose. After some innocent and generous talk, they
agreed to dissolve their existing, and their intended, relations, for
ever and ever.”

Mr. Grewgious saw a ghastly figure rise, open-mouthed, from the
easy-chair, and lift its outspread hands towards its head.

“One of this young couple, and that one your nephew, fearful, however,
that in the tenderness of your affection for him you would be bitterly
disappointed by so wide a departure from his projected life, forbore to
tell you the secret, for a few days, and left it to be disclosed by me,
when I should come down to speak to you, and he would be gone. I speak
to you, and he is gone.”

Mr. Grewgious saw the ghastly figure throw back its head, clutch its
hair with its hands, and turn with a writhing action from him.

“I have now said all I have to say: except that this young couple
parted, firmly, though not without tears and sorrow, on the evening
when you last saw them together.”

Mr. Grewgious heard a terrible shriek, and saw no ghastly figure,
sitting or standing; saw nothing but a heap of torn and miry clothes
upon the floor.

Not changing his action even then, he opened and shut the palms of his
hands as he warmed them, and looked down at it.




CHAPTER XVI.
DEVOTED


When John Jasper recovered from his fit or swoon, he found himself
being tended by Mr. and Mrs. Tope, whom his visitor had summoned for
the purpose. His visitor, wooden of aspect, sat stiffly in a chair,
with his hands upon his knees, watching his recovery.

“There! You’ve come to nicely now, sir,” said the tearful Mrs. Tope;
“you were thoroughly worn out, and no wonder!”

“A man,” said Mr. Grewgious, with his usual air of repeating a lesson,
“cannot have his rest broken, and his mind cruelly tormented, and his
body overtaxed by fatigue, without being thoroughly worn out.”

“I fear I have alarmed you?” Jasper apologised faintly, when he was
helped into his easy-chair.

“Not at all, I thank you,” answered Mr. Grewgious.

“You are too considerate.”

“Not at all, I thank you,” answered Mr. Grewgious again.

“You must take some wine, sir,” said Mrs. Tope, “and the jelly that I
had ready for you, and that you wouldn’t put your lips to at noon,
though I warned you what would come of it, you know, and you not
breakfasted; and you must have a wing of the roast fowl that has been
put back twenty times if it’s been put back once. It shall all be on
table in five minutes, and this good gentleman belike will stop and see
you take it.”

This good gentleman replied with a snort, which might mean yes, or no,
or anything or nothing, and which Mrs. Tope would have found highly
mystifying, but that her attention was divided by the service of the
table.

“You will take something with me?” said Jasper, as the cloth was laid.

“I couldn’t get a morsel down my throat, I thank you,” answered Mr.
Grewgious.

Jasper both ate and drank almost voraciously. Combined with the hurry
in his mode of doing it, was an evident indifference to the taste of
what he took, suggesting that he ate and drank to fortify himself
against any other failure of the spirits, far more than to gratify his
palate. Mr. Grewgious in the meantime sat upright, with no expression
in his face, and a hard kind of imperturbably polite protest all over
him: as though he would have said, in reply to some invitation to
discourse; “I couldn’t originate the faintest approach to an
observation on any subject whatever, I thank you.”

“Do you know,” said Jasper, when he had pushed away his plate and
glass, and had sat meditating for a few minutes: “do you know that I
find some crumbs of comfort in the communication with which you have so
much amazed me?”

“_Do_ you?” returned Mr. Grewgious, pretty plainly adding the unspoken
clause: “I don’t, I thank you!”

“After recovering from the shock of a piece of news of my dear boy, so
entirely unexpected, and so destructive of all the castles I had built
for him; and after having had time to think of it; yes.”

“I shall be glad to pick up your crumbs,” said Mr. Grewgious, dryly.

“Is there not, or is there—if I deceive myself, tell me so, and shorten
my pain—is there not, or is there, hope that, finding himself in this
new position, and becoming sensitively alive to the awkward burden of
explanation, in this quarter, and that, and the other, with which it
would load him, he avoided the awkwardness, and took to flight?”

“Such a thing might be,” said Mr. Grewgious, pondering.

“Such a thing has been. I have read of cases in which people, rather
than face a seven days’ wonder, and have to account for themselves to
the idle and impertinent, have taken themselves away, and been long
unheard of.”

“I believe such things have happened,” said Mr. Grewgious, pondering
still.

“When I had, and could have, no suspicion,” pursued Jasper, eagerly
following the new track, “that the dear lost boy had withheld anything
from me—most of all, such a leading matter as this—what gleam of light
was there for me in the whole black sky? When I supposed that his
intended wife was here, and his marriage close at hand, how could I
entertain the possibility of his voluntarily leaving this place, in a
manner that would be so unaccountable, capricious, and cruel? But now
that I know what you have told me, is there no little chink through
which day pierces? Supposing him to have disappeared of his own act, is
not his disappearance more accountable and less cruel? The fact of his
having just parted from your ward, is in itself a sort of reason for
his going away. It does not make his mysterious departure the less
cruel to me, it is true; but it relieves it of cruelty to her.”

Mr. Grewgious could not but assent to this.

“And even as to me,” continued Jasper, still pursuing the new track,
with ardour, and, as he did so, brightening with hope: “he knew that
you were coming to me; he knew that you were intrusted to tell me what
you have told me; if your doing so has awakened a new train of thought
in my perplexed mind, it reasonably follows that, from the same
premises, he might have foreseen the inferences that I should draw.
Grant that he did foresee them; and even the cruelty to me—and who am
I!—John Jasper, Music Master, vanishes!”—

Once more, Mr. Grewgious could not but assent to this.

“I have had my distrusts, and terrible distrusts they have been,” said
Jasper; “but your disclosure, overpowering as it was at first—showing
me that my own dear boy had had a great disappointing reservation from
me, who so fondly loved him, kindles hope within me. You do not
extinguish it when I state it, but admit it to be a reasonable hope. I
begin to believe it possible:” here he clasped his hands: “that he may
have disappeared from among us of his own accord, and that he may yet
be alive and well.”

Mr. Crisparkle came in at the moment. To whom Mr. Jasper repeated:

“I begin to believe it possible that he may have disappeared of his own
accord, and may yet be alive and well.”

Mr. Crisparkle taking a seat, and inquiring: “Why so?” Mr. Jasper
repeated the arguments he had just set forth. If they had been less
plausible than they were, the good Minor Canon’s mind would have been
in a state of preparation to receive them, as exculpatory of his
unfortunate pupil. But he, too, did really attach great importance to
the lost young man’s having been, so immediately before his
disappearance, placed in a new and embarrassing relation towards every
one acquainted with his projects and affairs; and the fact seemed to
him to present the question in a new light.

“I stated to Mr. Sapsea, when we waited on him,” said Jasper: as he
really had done: “that there was no quarrel or difference between the
two young men at their last meeting. We all know that their first
meeting was unfortunately very far from amicable; but all went smoothly
and quietly when they were last together at my house. My dear boy was
not in his usual spirits; he was depressed—I noticed that—and I am
bound henceforth to dwell upon the circumstance the more, now that I
know there was a special reason for his being depressed: a reason,
moreover, which may possibly have induced him to absent himself.”

“I pray to Heaven it may turn out so!” exclaimed Mr. Crisparkle.

“_I_ pray to Heaven it may turn out so!” repeated Jasper. “You know—and
Mr. Grewgious should now know likewise—that I took a great
prepossession against Mr. Neville Landless, arising out of his furious
conduct on that first occasion. You know that I came to you, extremely
apprehensive, on my dear boy’s behalf, of his mad violence. You know
that I even entered in my Diary, and showed the entry to you, that I
had dark forebodings against him. Mr. Grewgious ought to be possessed
of the whole case. He shall not, through any suppression of mine, be
informed of a part of it, and kept in ignorance of another part of it.
I wish him to be good enough to understand that the communication he
has made to me has hopefully influenced my mind, in spite of its having
been, before this mysterious occurrence took place, profoundly
impressed against young Landless.”

This fairness troubled the Minor Canon much. He felt that he was not as
open in his own dealing. He charged against himself reproachfully that
he had suppressed, so far, the two points of a second strong outbreak
of temper against Edwin Drood on the part of Neville, and of the
passion of jealousy having, to his own certain knowledge, flamed up in
Neville’s breast against him. He was convinced of Neville’s innocence
of any part in the ugly disappearance; and yet so many little
circumstances combined so wofully against him, that he dreaded to add
two more to their cumulative weight. He was among the truest of men;
but he had been balancing in his mind, much to its distress, whether
his volunteering to tell these two fragments of truth, at this time,
would not be tantamount to a piecing together of falsehood in the place
of truth.

However, here was a model before him. He hesitated no longer.
Addressing Mr. Grewgious, as one placed in authority by the revelation
he had brought to bear on the mystery (and surpassingly Angular Mr.
Grewgious became when he found himself in that unexpected position),
Mr. Crisparkle bore his testimony to Mr. Jasper’s strict sense of
justice, and, expressing his absolute confidence in the complete
clearance of his pupil from the least taint of suspicion, sooner or
later, avowed that his confidence in that young gentleman had been
formed, in spite of his confidential knowledge that his temper was of
the hottest and fiercest, and that it was directly incensed against Mr.
Jasper’s nephew, by the circumstance of his romantically supposing
himself to be enamoured of the same young lady. The sanguine reaction
manifest in Mr. Jasper was proof even against this unlooked-for
declaration. It turned him paler; but he repeated that he would cling
to the hope he had derived from Mr. Grewgious; and that if no trace of
his dear boy were found, leading to the dreadful inference that he had
been made away with, he would cherish unto the last stretch of
possibility the idea, that he might have absconded of his own wild
will.

Now, it fell out that Mr. Crisparkle, going away from this conference
still very uneasy in his mind, and very much troubled on behalf of the
young man whom he held as a kind of prisoner in his own house, took a
memorable night walk.

He walked to Cloisterham Weir.

He often did so, and consequently there was nothing remarkable in his
footsteps tending that way. But the preoccupation of his mind so
hindered him from planning any walk, or taking heed of the objects he
passed, that his first consciousness of being near the Weir, was
derived from the sound of the falling water close at hand.

“How did I come here!” was his first thought, as he stopped.

“Why did I come here!” was his second.

Then, he stood intently listening to the water. A familiar passage in
his reading, about airy tongues that syllable men’s names, rose so
unbidden to his ear, that he put it from him with his hand, as if it
were tangible.

It was starlight. The Weir was full two miles above the spot to which
the young men had repaired to watch the storm. No search had been made
up here, for the tide had been running strongly down, at that time of
the night of Christmas Eve, and the likeliest places for the discovery
of a body, if a fatal accident had happened under such circumstances,
all lay—both when the tide ebbed, and when it flowed again—between that
spot and the sea. The water came over the Weir, with its usual sound on
a cold starlight night, and little could be seen of it; yet Mr.
Crisparkle had a strange idea that something unusual hung about the
place.

He reasoned with himself: What was it? Where was it? Put it to the
proof. Which sense did it address?

No sense reported anything unusual there. He listened again, and his
sense of hearing again checked the water coming over the Weir, with its
usual sound on a cold starlight night.

Knowing very well that the mystery with which his mind was occupied,
might of itself give the place this haunted air, he strained those
hawk’s eyes of his for the correction of his sight. He got closer to
the Weir, and peered at its well-known posts and timbers. Nothing in
the least unusual was remotely shadowed forth. But he resolved that he
would come back early in the morning.

The Weir ran through his broken sleep, all night, and he was back again
at sunrise. It was a bright frosty morning. The whole composition
before him, when he stood where he had stood last night, was clearly
discernible in its minutest details. He had surveyed it closely for
some minutes, and was about to withdraw his eyes, when they were
attracted keenly to one spot.

He turned his back upon the Weir, and looked far away at the sky, and
at the earth, and then looked again at that one spot. It caught his
sight again immediately, and he concentrated his vision upon it. He
could not lose it now, though it was but such a speck in the landscape.
It fascinated his sight. His hands began plucking off his coat. For it
struck him that at that spot—a corner of the Weir—something glistened,
which did not move and come over with the glistening water-drops, but
remained stationary.

He assured himself of this, he threw off his clothes, he plunged into
the icy water, and swam for the spot. Climbing the timbers, he took
from them, caught among their interstices by its chain, a gold watch,
bearing engraved upon its back E. D.

He brought the watch to the bank, swam to the Weir again, climbed it,
and dived off. He knew every hole and corner of all the depths, and
dived and dived and dived, until he could bear the cold no more. His
notion was, that he would find the body; he only found a shirt-pin
sticking in some mud and ooze.

With these discoveries he returned to Cloisterham, and, taking Neville
Landless with him, went straight to the Mayor. Mr. Jasper was sent for,
the watch and shirt-pin were identified, Neville was detained, and the
wildest frenzy and fatuity of evil report rose against him. He was of
that vindictive and violent nature, that but for his poor sister, who
alone had influence over him, and out of whose sight he was never to be
trusted, he would be in the daily commission of murder. Before coming
to England he had caused to be whipped to death sundry
“Natives”—nomadic persons, encamping now in Asia, now in Africa, now in
the West Indies, and now at the North Pole—vaguely supposed in
Cloisterham to be always black, always of great virtue, always calling
themselves Me, and everybody else Massa or Missie (according to sex),
and always reading tracts of the obscurest meaning, in broken English,
but always accurately understanding them in the purest mother tongue.
He had nearly brought Mrs. Crisparkle’s grey hairs with sorrow to the
grave. (Those original expressions were Mr. Sapsea’s.) He had
repeatedly said he would have Mr. Crisparkle’s life. He had repeatedly
said he would have everybody’s life, and become in effect the last man.
He had been brought down to Cloisterham, from London, by an eminent
Philanthropist, and why? Because that Philanthropist had expressly
declared: “I owe it to my fellow-creatures that he should be, in the
words of BENTHAM, where he is the cause of the greatest danger to the
smallest number.”

These dropping shots from the blunderbusses of blunderheadedness might
not have hit him in a vital place. But he had to stand against a
trained and well-directed fire of arms of precision too. He had
notoriously threatened the lost young man, and had, according to the
showing of his own faithful friend and tutor who strove so hard for
him, a cause of bitter animosity (created by himself, and stated by
himself), against that ill-starred fellow. He had armed himself with an
offensive weapon for the fatal night, and he had gone off early in the
morning, after making preparations for departure. He had been found
with traces of blood on him; truly, they might have been wholly caused
as he represented, but they might not, also. On a search-warrant being
issued for the examination of his room, clothes, and so forth, it was
discovered that he had destroyed all his papers, and rearranged all his
possessions, on the very afternoon of the disappearance. The watch
found at the Weir was challenged by the jeweller as one he had wound
and set for Edwin Drood, at twenty minutes past two on that same
afternoon; and it had run down, before being cast into the water; and
it was the jeweller’s positive opinion that it had never been re-wound.
This would justify the hypothesis that the watch was taken from him not
long after he left Mr. Jasper’s house at midnight, in company with the
last person seen with him, and that it had been thrown away after being
retained some hours. Why thrown away? If he had been murdered, and so
artfully disfigured, or concealed, or both, as that the murderer hoped
identification to be impossible, except from something that he wore,
assuredly the murderer would seek to remove from the body the most
lasting, the best known, and the most easily recognisable, things upon
it. Those things would be the watch and shirt-pin. As to his
opportunities of casting them into the river; if he were the object of
these suspicions, they were easy. For, he had been seen by many
persons, wandering about on that side of the city—indeed on all sides
of it—in a miserable and seemingly half-distracted manner. As to the
choice of the spot, obviously such criminating evidence had better take
its chance of being found anywhere, rather than upon himself, or in his
possession. Concerning the reconciliatory nature of the appointed
meeting between the two young men, very little could be made of that in
young Landless’s favour; for it distinctly appeared that the meeting
originated, not with him, but with Mr. Crisparkle, and that it had been
urged on by Mr. Crisparkle; and who could say how unwillingly, or in
what ill-conditioned mood, his enforced pupil had gone to it? The more
his case was looked into, the weaker it became in every point. Even the
broad suggestion that the lost young man had absconded, was rendered
additionally improbable on the showing of the young lady from whom he
had so lately parted; for; what did she say, with great earnestness and
sorrow, when interrogated? That he had, expressly and enthusiastically,
planned with her, that he would await the arrival of her guardian, Mr.
Grewgious. And yet, be it observed, he disappeared before that
gentleman appeared.

On the suspicions thus urged and supported, Neville was detained, and
re-detained, and the search was pressed on every hand, and Jasper
laboured night and day. But nothing more was found. No discovery being
made, which proved the lost man to be dead, it at length became
necessary to release the person suspected of having made away with him.
Neville was set at large. Then, a consequence ensued which Mr.
Crisparkle had too well foreseen. Neville must leave the place, for the
place shunned him and cast him out. Even had it not been so, the dear
old china shepherdess would have worried herself to death with fears
for her son, and with general trepidation occasioned by their having
such an inmate. Even had that not been so, the authority to which the
Minor Canon deferred officially, would have settled the point.

“Mr. Crisparkle,” quoth the Dean, “human justice may err, but it must
act according to its lights. The days of taking sanctuary are past.
This young man must not take sanctuary with us.”

“You mean that he must leave my house, sir?”

“Mr. Crisparkle,” returned the prudent Dean, “I claim no authority in
your house. I merely confer with you, on the painful necessity you find
yourself under, of depriving this young man of the great advantages of
your counsel and instruction.”

“It is very lamentable, sir,” Mr. Crisparkle represented.

“Very much so,” the Dean assented.

“And if it be a necessity—” Mr. Crisparkle faltered.

“As you unfortunately find it to be,” returned the Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle bowed submissively: “It is hard to prejudge his case,
sir, but I am sensible that—”

“Just so. Perfectly. As you say, Mr. Crisparkle,” interposed the Dean,
nodding his head smoothly, “there is nothing else to be done. No doubt,
no doubt. There is no alternative, as your good sense has discovered.”

“I am entirely satisfied of his perfect innocence, sir, nevertheless.”

“We-e-ell!” said the Dean, in a more confidential tone, and slightly
glancing around him, “I would not say so, generally. Not generally.
Enough of suspicion attaches to him to—no, I think I would not say so,
generally.”

Mr. Crisparkle bowed again.

“It does not become us, perhaps,” pursued the Dean, “to be partisans.
Not partisans. We clergy keep our hearts warm and our heads cool, and
we hold a judicious middle course.”

“I hope you do not object, sir, to my having stated in public,
emphatically, that he will reappear here, whenever any new suspicion
may be awakened, or any new circumstance may come to light in this
extraordinary matter?”

“Not at all,” returned the Dean. “And yet, do you know, I don’t think,”
with a very nice and neat emphasis on those two words: “I _don’t think_
I would state it emphatically. State it? Ye-e-es! But emphatically?
No-o-o. I _think_ not. In point of fact, Mr. Crisparkle, keeping our
hearts warm and our heads cool, we clergy need do nothing
emphatically.”

So Minor Canon Row knew Neville Landless no more; and he went
whithersoever he would, or could, with a blight upon his name and fame.

It was not until then that John Jasper silently resumed his place in
the choir. Haggard and red-eyed, his hopes plainly had deserted him,
his sanguine mood was gone, and all his worst misgivings had come back.
A day or two afterwards, while unrobing, he took his Diary from a
pocket of his coat, turned the leaves, and with an impressive look, and
without one spoken word, handed this entry to Mr. Crisparkle to read:

“My dear boy is murdered. The discovery of the watch and shirt-pin
convinces me that he was murdered that night, and that his jewellery
was taken from him to prevent identification by its means. All the
delusive hopes I had founded on his separation from his betrothed wife,
I give to the winds. They perish before this fatal discovery. I now
swear, and record the oath on this page, That I nevermore will discuss
this mystery with any human creature until I hold the clue to it in my
hand. That I never will relax in my secrecy or in my search. That I
will fasten the crime of the murder of my dear dead boy upon the
murderer. And, That I devote myself to his destruction.”




CHAPTER XVII.
PHILANTHROPY, PROFESSIONAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL


Full half a year had come and gone, and Mr. Crisparkle sat in a
waiting-room in the London chief offices of the Haven of Philanthropy,
until he could have audience of Mr. Honeythunder.

In his college days of athletic exercises, Mr. Crisparkle had known
professors of the Noble Art of fisticuffs, and had attended two or
three of their gloved gatherings. He had now an opportunity of
observing that as to the phrenological formation of the backs of their
heads, the Professing Philanthropists were uncommonly like the
Pugilists. In the development of all those organs which constitute, or
attend, a propensity to “pitch into” your fellow-creatures, the
Philanthropists were remarkably favoured. There were several Professors
passing in and out, with exactly the aggressive air upon them of being
ready for a turn-up with any Novice who might happen to be on hand,
that Mr. Crisparkle well remembered in the circles of the Fancy.
Preparations were in progress for a moral little Mill somewhere on the
rural circuit, and other Professors were backing this or that
Heavy-Weight as good for such or such speech-making hits, so very much
after the manner of the sporting publicans, that the intended
Resolutions might have been Rounds. In an official manager of these
displays much celebrated for his platform tactics, Mr. Crisparkle
recognised (in a suit of black) the counterpart of a deceased
benefactor of his species, an eminent public character, once known to
fame as Frosty-faced Fogo, who in days of yore superintended the
formation of the magic circle with the ropes and stakes. There were
only three conditions of resemblance wanting between these Professors
and those. Firstly, the Philanthropists were in very bad training: much
too fleshy, and presenting, both in face and figure, a superabundance
of what is known to Pugilistic Experts as Suet Pudding. Secondly, the
Philanthropists had not the good temper of the Pugilists, and used
worse language. Thirdly, their fighting code stood in great need of
revision, as empowering them not only to bore their man to the ropes,
but to bore him to the confines of distraction; also to hit him when he
was down, hit him anywhere and anyhow, kick him, stamp upon him, gouge
him, and maul him behind his back without mercy. In these last
particulars the Professors of the Noble Art were much nobler than the
Professors of Philanthropy.

Mr. Crisparkle was so completely lost in musing on these similarities
and dissimilarities, at the same time watching the crowd which came and
went by, always, as it seemed, on errands of antagonistically snatching
something from somebody, and never giving anything to anybody, that his
name was called before he heard it. On his at length responding, he was
shown by a miserably shabby and underpaid stipendiary Philanthropist
(who could hardly have done worse if he had taken service with a
declared enemy of the human race) to Mr. Honeythunder’s room.

“Sir,” said Mr. Honeythunder, in his tremendous voice, like a
schoolmaster issuing orders to a boy of whom he had a bad opinion, “sit
down.”

Mr. Crisparkle seated himself.

Mr. Honeythunder having signed the remaining few score of a few
thousand circulars, calling upon a corresponding number of families
without means to come forward, stump up instantly, and be
Philanthropists, or go to the Devil, another shabby stipendiary
Philanthropist (highly disinterested, if in earnest) gathered these
into a basket and walked off with them.

“Now, Mr. Crisparkle,” said Mr. Honeythunder, turning his chair half
round towards him when they were alone, and squaring his arms with his
hands on his knees, and his brows knitted, as if he added, I am going
to make short work of _you_: “Now, Mr. Crisparkle, we entertain
different views, you and I, sir, of the sanctity of human life.”

“Do we?” returned the Minor Canon.

“We do, sir.”

“Might I ask you,” said the Minor Canon: “what are your views on that
subject?”

“That human life is a thing to be held sacred, sir.”

“Might I ask you,” pursued the Minor Canon as before: “what you suppose
to be my views on that subject?”

“By George, sir!” returned the Philanthropist, squaring his arms still
more, as he frowned on Mr. Crisparkle: “they are best known to
yourself.”

“Readily admitted. But you began by saying that we took different
views, you know. Therefore (or you could not say so) you must have set
up some views as mine. Pray, what views _have_ you set up as mine?”

“Here is a man—and a young man,” said Mr. Honeythunder, as if that made
the matter infinitely worse, and he could have easily borne the loss of
an old one, “swept off the face of the earth by a deed of violence.
What do you call that?”

“Murder,” said the Minor Canon.

“What do you call the doer of that deed, sir?

“A murderer,” said the Minor Canon.

“I am glad to hear you admit so much, sir,” retorted Mr. Honeythunder,
in his most offensive manner; “and I candidly tell you that I didn’t
expect it.” Here he lowered heavily at Mr. Crisparkle again.

“Be so good as to explain what you mean by those very unjustifiable
expressions.”

“I don’t sit here, sir,” returned the Philanthropist, raising his voice
to a roar, “to be browbeaten.”

“As the only other person present, no one can possibly know that better
than I do,” returned the Minor Canon very quietly. “But I interrupt
your explanation.”

“Murder!” proceeded Mr. Honeythunder, in a kind of boisterous reverie,
with his platform folding of his arms, and his platform nod of
abhorrent reflection after each short sentiment of a word. “Bloodshed!
Abel! Cain! I hold no terms with Cain. I repudiate with a shudder the
red hand when it is offered me.”

Instead of instantly leaping into his chair and cheering himself
hoarse, as the Brotherhood in public meeting assembled would infallibly
have done on this cue, Mr. Crisparkle merely reversed the quiet
crossing of his legs, and said mildly: “Don’t let me interrupt your
explanation—when you begin it.”

“The Commandments say, no murder. NO murder, sir!” proceeded Mr.
Honeythunder, platformally pausing as if he took Mr. Crisparkle to task
for having distinctly asserted that they said: You may do a little
murder, and then leave off.

“And they also say, you shall bear no false witness,” observed Mr.
Crisparkle.

“Enough!” bellowed Mr. Honeythunder, with a solemnity and severity that
would have brought the house down at a meeting, “E—e—nough! My late
wards being now of age, and I being released from a trust which I
cannot contemplate without a thrill of horror, there are the accounts
which you have undertaken to accept on their behalf, and there is a
statement of the balance which you have undertaken to receive, and
which you cannot receive too soon. And let me tell you, sir, I wish
that, as a man and a Minor Canon, you were better employed,” with a
nod. “Better employed,” with another nod. “Bet—ter em—ployed!” with
another and the three nods added up.

Mr. Crisparkle rose; a little heated in the face, but with perfect
command of himself.

“Mr. Honeythunder,” he said, taking up the papers referred to: “my
being better or worse employed than I am at present is a matter of
taste and opinion. You might think me better employed in enrolling
myself a member of your Society.”

“Ay, indeed, sir!” retorted Mr. Honeythunder, shaking his head in a
threatening manner. “It would have been better for you if you had done
that long ago!”

“I think otherwise.”

“Or,” said Mr. Honeythunder, shaking his head again, “I might think one
of your profession better employed in devoting himself to the discovery
and punishment of guilt than in leaving that duty to be undertaken by a
layman.”

“I may regard my profession from a point of view which teaches me that
its first duty is towards those who are in necessity and tribulation,
who are desolate and oppressed,” said Mr. Crisparkle. “However, as I
have quite clearly satisfied myself that it is no part of my profession
to make professions, I say no more of that. But I owe it to Mr.
Neville, and to Mr. Neville’s sister (and in a much lower degree to
myself), to say to you that I _know_ I was in the full possession and
understanding of Mr. Neville’s mind and heart at the time of this
occurrence; and that, without in the least colouring or concealing what
was to be deplored in him and required to be corrected, I feel certain
that his tale is true. Feeling that certainty, I befriend him. As long
as that certainty shall last, I will befriend him. And if any
consideration could shake me in this resolve, I should be so ashamed of
myself for my meanness, that no man’s good opinion—no, nor no
woman’s—so gained, could compensate me for the loss of my own.”

Good fellow! manly fellow! And he was so modest, too. There was no more
self-assertion in the Minor Canon than in the schoolboy who had stood
in the breezy playing-fields keeping a wicket. He was simply and
staunchly true to his duty alike in the large case and in the small. So
all true souls ever are. So every true soul ever was, ever is, and ever
will be. There is nothing little to the really great in spirit.

“Then who do you make out did the deed?” asked Mr. Honeythunder,
turning on him abruptly.

“Heaven forbid,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “that in my desire to clear one
man I should lightly criminate another! I accuse no one.”

“Tcha!” ejaculated Mr. Honeythunder with great disgust; for this was by
no means the principle on which the Philanthropic Brotherhood usually
proceeded. “And, sir, you are not a disinterested witness, we must bear
in mind.”

“How am I an interested one?” inquired Mr. Crisparkle, smiling
innocently, at a loss to imagine.

“There was a certain stipend, sir, paid to you for your pupil, which
may have warped your judgment a bit,” said Mr. Honeythunder, coarsely.

“Perhaps I expect to retain it still?” Mr. Crisparkle returned,
enlightened; “do you mean that too?”

“Well, sir,” returned the professional Philanthropist, getting up and
thrusting his hands down into his trousers-pockets, “I don’t go about
measuring people for caps. If people find I have any about me that fit
’em, they can put ’em on and wear ’em, if they like. That’s their look
out: not mine.”

Mr. Crisparkle eyed him with a just indignation, and took him to task
thus:

“Mr. Honeythunder, I hoped when I came in here that I might be under no
necessity of commenting on the introduction of platform manners or
platform manœuvres among the decent forbearances of private life. But
you have given me such a specimen of both, that I should be a fit
subject for both if I remained silent respecting them. They are
detestable.”

“They don’t suit _you_, I dare say, sir.”

“They are,” repeated Mr. Crisparkle, without noticing the interruption,
“detestable. They violate equally the justice that should belong to
Christians, and the restraints that should belong to gentlemen. You
assume a great crime to have been committed by one whom I, acquainted
with the attendant circumstances, and having numerous reasons on my
side, devoutly believe to be innocent of it. Because I differ from you
on that vital point, what is your platform resource? Instantly to turn
upon me, charging that I have no sense of the enormity of the crime
itself, but am its aider and abettor! So, another time—taking me as
representing your opponent in other cases—you set up a platform
credulity; a moved and seconded and carried-unanimously profession of
faith in some ridiculous delusion or mischievous imposition. I decline
to believe it, and you fall back upon your platform resource of
proclaiming that I believe nothing; that because I will not bow down to
a false God of your making, I deny the true God! Another time you make
the platform discovery that War is a calamity, and you propose to
abolish it by a string of twisted resolutions tossed into the air like
the tail of a kite. I do not admit the discovery to be yours in the
least, and I have not a grain of faith in your remedy. Again, your
platform resource of representing me as revelling in the horrors of a
battle-field like a fiend incarnate! Another time, in another of your
undiscriminating platform rushes, you would punish the sober for the
drunken. I claim consideration for the comfort, convenience, and
refreshment of the sober; and you presently make platform proclamation
that I have a depraved desire to turn Heaven’s creatures into swine and
wild beasts! In all such cases your movers, and your seconders, and
your supporters—your regular Professors of all degrees, run amuck like
so many mad Malays; habitually attributing the lowest and basest
motives with the utmost recklessness (let me call your attention to a
recent instance in yourself for which you should blush), and quoting
figures which you know to be as wilfully onesided as a statement of any
complicated account that should be all Creditor side and no Debtor, or
all Debtor side and no Creditor. Therefore it is, Mr. Honeythunder,
that I consider the platform a sufficiently bad example and a
sufficiently bad school, even in public life; but hold that, carried
into private life, it becomes an unendurable nuisance.”

“These are strong words, sir!” exclaimed the Philanthropist.

“I hope so,” said Mr. Crisparkle. “Good morning.”

He walked out of the Haven at a great rate, but soon fell into his
regular brisk pace, and soon had a smile upon his face as he went
along, wondering what the china shepherdess would have said if she had
seen him pounding Mr. Honeythunder in the late little lively affair.
For Mr. Crisparkle had just enough of harmless vanity to hope that he
had hit hard, and to glow with the belief that he had trimmed the
Philanthropic Jacket pretty handsomely.

He took himself to Staple Inn, but not to P. J. T. and Mr. Grewgious.
Full many a creaking stair he climbed before he reached some attic
rooms in a corner, turned the latch of their unbolted door, and stood
beside the table of Neville Landless.

An air of retreat and solitude hung about the rooms and about their
inhabitant. He was much worn, and so were they. Their sloping ceilings,
cumbrous rusty locks and grates, and heavy wooden bins and beams,
slowly mouldering withal, had a prisonous look, and he had the haggard
face of a prisoner. Yet the sunlight shone in at the ugly
garret-window, which had a penthouse to itself thrust out among the
tiles; and on the cracked and smoke-blackened parapet beyond, some of
the deluded sparrows of the place rheumatically hopped, like little
feathered cripples who had left their crutches in their nests; and
there was a play of living leaves at hand that changed the air, and
made an imperfect sort of music in it that would have been melody in
the country.

The rooms were sparely furnished, but with good store of books.
Everything expressed the abode of a poor student. That Mr. Crisparkle
had been either chooser, lender, or donor of the books, or that he
combined the three characters, might have been easily seen in the
friendly beam of his eyes upon them as he entered.

“How goes it, Neville?”

“I am in good heart, Mr. Crisparkle, and working away.”

“I wish your eyes were not quite so large and not quite so bright,”
said the Minor Canon, slowly releasing the hand he had taken in his.

“They brighten at the sight of you,” returned Neville. “If you were to
fall away from me, they would soon be dull enough.”

“Rally, rally!” urged the other, in a stimulating tone. “Fight for it,
Neville!”

“If I were dying, I feel as if a word from you would rally me; if my
pulse had stopped, I feel as if your touch would make it beat again,”
said Neville. “But I _have_ rallied, and am doing famously.”

Mr. Crisparkle turned him with his face a little more towards the
light.

“I want to see a ruddier touch here, Neville,” he said, indicating his
own healthy cheek by way of pattern. “I want more sun to shine upon
you.”

Neville drooped suddenly, as he replied in a lowered voice: “I am not
hardy enough for that, yet. I may become so, but I cannot bear it yet.
If you had gone through those Cloisterham streets as I did; if you had
seen, as I did, those averted eyes, and the better sort of people
silently giving me too much room to pass, that I might not touch them
or come near them, you wouldn’t think it quite unreasonable that I
cannot go about in the daylight.”

“My poor fellow!” said the Minor Canon, in a tone so purely sympathetic
that the young man caught his hand, “I never said it was unreasonable;
never thought so. But I should like you to do it.”

“And that would give me the strongest motive to do it. But I cannot
yet. I cannot persuade myself that the eyes of even the stream of
strangers I pass in this vast city look at me without suspicion. I feel
marked and tainted, even when I go out—as I do only—at night. But the
darkness covers me then, and I take courage from it.”

Mr. Crisparkle laid a hand upon his shoulder, and stood looking down at
him.

“If I could have changed my name,” said Neville, “I would have done so.
But as you wisely pointed out to me, I can’t do that, for it would look
like guilt. If I could have gone to some distant place, I might have
found relief in that, but the thing is not to be thought of, for the
same reason. Hiding and escaping would be the construction in either
case. It seems a little hard to be so tied to a stake, and innocent;
but I don’t complain.”

“And you must expect no miracle to help you, Neville,” said Mr.
Crisparkle, compassionately.

“No, sir, I know that. The ordinary fulness of time and circumstances
is all I have to trust to.”

“It will right you at last, Neville.”

“So I believe, and I hope I may live to know it.”

But perceiving that the despondent mood into which he was falling cast
a shadow on the Minor Canon, and (it may be) feeling that the broad
hand upon his shoulder was not then quite as steady as its own natural
strength had rendered it when it first touched him just now, he
brightened and said:

“Excellent circumstances for study, anyhow! and you know, Mr.
Crisparkle, what need I have of study in all ways. Not to mention that
you have advised me to study for the difficult profession of the law,
specially, and that of course I am guiding myself by the advice of such
a friend and helper. Such a good friend and helper!”

He took the fortifying hand from his shoulder, and kissed it. Mr.
Crisparkle beamed at the books, but not so brightly as when he had
entered.

“I gather from your silence on the subject that my late guardian is
adverse, Mr. Crisparkle?”

The Minor Canon answered: “Your late guardian is a—a most unreasonable
person, and it signifies nothing to any reasonable person whether he is
_ad_verse, _per_verse, or the _re_verse.”

“Well for me that I have enough with economy to live upon,” sighed
Neville, half wearily and half cheerily, “while I wait to be learned,
and wait to be righted! Else I might have proved the proverb, that
while the grass grows, the steed starves!”

He opened some books as he said it, and was soon immersed in their
interleaved and annotated passages; while Mr. Crisparkle sat beside
him, expounding, correcting, and advising. The Minor Canon’s Cathedral
duties made these visits of his difficult to accomplish, and only to be
compassed at intervals of many weeks. But they were as serviceable as
they were precious to Neville Landless.

When they had got through such studies as they had in hand, they stood
leaning on the window-sill, and looking down upon the patch of garden.
“Next week,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “you will cease to be alone, and will
have a devoted companion.”

“And yet,” returned Neville, “this seems an uncongenial place to bring
my sister to.”

“I don’t think so,” said the Minor Canon. “There is duty to be done
here; and there are womanly feeling, sense, and courage wanted here.”

“I meant,” explained Neville, “that the surroundings are so dull and
unwomanly, and that Helena can have no suitable friend or society
here.”

“You have only to remember,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “that you are here
yourself, and that she has to draw you into the sunlight.”

They were silent for a little while, and then Mr. Crisparkle began
anew.

“When we first spoke together, Neville, you told me that your sister
had risen out of the disadvantages of your past lives as superior to
you as the tower of Cloisterham Cathedral is higher than the chimneys
of Minor Canon Corner. Do you remember that?”

“Right well!”

“I was inclined to think it at the time an enthusiastic flight. No
matter what I think it now. What I would emphasise is, that under the
head of Pride your sister is a great and opportune example to you.”

“Under _all_ heads that are included in the composition of a fine
character, she is.”

“Say so; but take this one. Your sister has learnt how to govern what
is proud in her nature. She can dominate it even when it is wounded
through her sympathy with you. No doubt she has suffered deeply in
those same streets where you suffered deeply. No doubt her life is
darkened by the cloud that darkens yours. But bending her pride into a
grand composure that is not haughty or aggressive, but is a sustained
confidence in you and in the truth, she has won her way through those
streets until she passes along them as high in the general respect as
any one who treads them. Every day and hour of her life since Edwin
Drood’s disappearance, she has faced malignity and folly—for you—as
only a brave nature well directed can. So it will be with her to the
end. Another and weaker kind of pride might sink broken-hearted, but
never such a pride as hers: which knows no shrinking, and can get no
mastery over her.”

The pale cheek beside him flushed under the comparison, and the hint
implied in it.

“I will do all I can to imitate her,” said Neville.

“Do so, and be a truly brave man, as she is a truly brave woman,”
answered Mr. Crisparkle stoutly. “It is growing dark. Will you go my
way with me, when it is quite dark? Mind! it is not I who wait for
darkness.”

Neville replied, that he would accompany him directly. But Mr.
Crisparkle said he had a moment’s call to make on Mr. Grewgious as an
act of courtesy, and would run across to that gentleman’s chambers, and
rejoin Neville on his own doorstep, if he would come down there to meet
him.

Mr. Grewgious, bolt upright as usual, sat taking his wine in the dusk
at his open window; his wineglass and decanter on the round table at
his elbow; himself and his legs on the window-seat; only one hinge in
his whole body, like a bootjack.

“How do you do, reverend sir?” said Mr. Grewgious, with abundant offers
of hospitality, which were as cordially declined as made. “And how is
your charge getting on over the way in the set that I had the pleasure
of recommending to you as vacant and eligible?”

Mr. Crisparkle replied suitably.

“I am glad you approve of them,” said Mr. Grewgious, “because I
entertain a sort of fancy for having him under my eye.”

As Mr. Grewgious had to turn his eye up considerably before he could
see the chambers, the phrase was to be taken figuratively and not
literally.

“And how did you leave Mr. Jasper, reverend sir?” said Mr. Grewgious.

Mr. Crisparkle had left him pretty well.

“And where did you leave Mr. Jasper, reverend sir?” Mr. Crisparkle had
left him at Cloisterham.

“And when did you leave Mr. Jasper, reverend sir?” That morning.

“Umps!” said Mr. Grewgious. “He didn’t say he was coming, perhaps?”

“Coming where?”

“Anywhere, for instance?” said Mr. Grewgious.

“No.”

“Because here he is,” said Mr. Grewgious, who had asked all these
questions, with his preoccupied glance directed out at window. “And he
don’t look agreeable, does he?”

Mr. Crisparkle was craning towards the window, when Mr. Grewgious
added:

“If you will kindly step round here behind me, in the gloom of the
room, and will cast your eye at the second-floor landing window in
yonder house, I think you will hardly fail to see a slinking individual
in whom I recognise our local friend.”

“You are right!” cried Mr. Crisparkle.

“Umps!” said Mr. Grewgious. Then he added, turning his face so abruptly
that his head nearly came into collision with Mr. Crisparkle’s: “what
should you say that our local friend was up to?”

The last passage he had been shown in the Diary returned on Mr.
Crisparkle’s mind with the force of a strong recoil, and he asked Mr.
Grewgious if he thought it possible that Neville was to be harassed by
the keeping of a watch upon him?

“A watch?” repeated Mr. Grewgious musingly. “Ay!”

“Which would not only of itself haunt and torture his life,” said Mr.
Crisparkle warmly, “but would expose him to the torment of a
perpetually reviving suspicion, whatever he might do, or wherever he
might go.”

“Ay!” said Mr. Grewgious musingly still. “Do I see him waiting for
you?”

“No doubt you do.”

“Then _would_ you have the goodness to excuse my getting up to see you
out, and to go out to join him, and to go the way that you were going,
and to take no notice of our local friend?” said Mr. Grewgious. “I
entertain a sort of fancy for having _him_ under my eye to-night, do
you know?”

Mr. Crisparkle, with a significant nod complied; and rejoining Neville,
went away with him. They dined together, and parted at the yet
unfinished and undeveloped railway station: Mr. Crisparkle to get home;
Neville to walk the streets, cross the bridges, make a wide round of
the city in the friendly darkness, and tire himself out.

It was midnight when he returned from his solitary expedition and
climbed his staircase. The night was hot, and the windows of the
staircase were all wide open. Coming to the top, it gave him a passing
chill of surprise (there being no rooms but his up there) to find a
stranger sitting on the window-sill, more after the manner of a
venturesome glazier than an amateur ordinarily careful of his neck; in
fact, so much more outside the window than inside, as to suggest the
thought that he must have come up by the water-spout instead of the
stairs.

The stranger said nothing until Neville put his key in his door; then,
seeming to make sure of his identity from the action, he spoke:

“I beg your pardon,” he said, coming from the window with a frank and
smiling air, and a prepossessing address; “the beans.”

Neville was quite at a loss.

“Runners,” said the visitor. “Scarlet. Next door at the back.”

“O,” returned Neville. “And the mignonette and wall-flower?”

“The same,” said the visitor.

“Pray walk in.”

“Thank you.”

Neville lighted his candles, and the visitor sat down. A handsome
gentleman, with a young face, but with an older figure in its
robustness and its breadth of shoulder; say a man of eight-and-twenty,
or at the utmost thirty; so extremely sunburnt that the contrast
between his brown visage and the white forehead shaded out of doors by
his hat, and the glimpses of white throat below the neckerchief, would
have been almost ludicrous but for his broad temples, bright blue eyes,
clustering brown hair, and laughing teeth.

“I have noticed,” said he; “—my name is Tartar.”

Neville inclined his head.

“I have noticed (excuse me) that you shut yourself up a good deal, and
that you seem to like my garden aloft here. If you would like a little
more of it, I could throw out a few lines and stays between my windows
and yours, which the runners would take to directly. And I have some
boxes, both of mignonette and wall-flower, that I could shove on along
the gutter (with a boathook I have by me) to your windows, and draw
back again when they wanted watering or gardening, and shove on again
when they were ship-shape; so that they would cause you no trouble. I
couldn’t take this liberty without asking your permission, so I venture
to ask it. Tartar, corresponding set, next door.”

“You are very kind.”

“Not at all. I ought to apologise for looking in so late. But having
noticed (excuse me) that you generally walk out at night, I thought I
should inconvenience you least by awaiting your return. I am always
afraid of inconveniencing busy men, being an idle man.”

“I should not have thought so, from your appearance.”

“No? I take it as a compliment. In fact, I was bred in the Royal Navy,
and was First Lieutenant when I quitted it. But, an uncle disappointed
in the service leaving me his property on condition that I left the
Navy, I accepted the fortune, and resigned my commission.”

“Lately, I presume?”

“Well, I had had twelve or fifteen years of knocking about first. I
came here some nine months before you; I had had one crop before you
came. I chose this place, because, having served last in a little
corvette, I knew I should feel more at home where I had a constant
opportunity of knocking my head against the ceiling. Besides, it would
never do for a man who had been aboard ship from his boyhood to turn
luxurious all at once. Besides, again; having been accustomed to a very
short allowance of land all my life, I thought I’d feel my way to the
command of a landed estate, by beginning in boxes.”

Whimsically as this was said, there was a touch of merry earnestness in
it that made it doubly whimsical.

“However,” said the Lieutenant, “I have talked quite enough about
myself. It is not my way, I hope; it has merely been to present myself
to you naturally. If you will allow me to take the liberty I have
described, it will be a charity, for it will give me something more to
do. And you are not to suppose that it will entail any interruption or
intrusion on you, for that is far from my intention.”

Neville replied that he was greatly obliged, and that he thankfully
accepted the kind proposal.

“I am very glad to take your windows in tow,” said the Lieutenant.
“From what I have seen of you when I have been gardening at mine, and
you have been looking on, I have thought you (excuse me) rather too
studious and delicate. May I ask, is your health at all affected?”

“I have undergone some mental distress,” said Neville, confused, “which
has stood me in the stead of illness.”

“Pardon me,” said Mr. Tartar.

With the greatest delicacy he shifted his ground to the windows again,
and asked if he could look at one of them. On Neville’s opening it, he
immediately sprang out, as if he were going aloft with a whole watch in
an emergency, and were setting a bright example.

“For Heaven’s sake,” cried Neville, “don’t do that! Where are you going
Mr. Tartar? You’ll be dashed to pieces!”

“All well!” said the Lieutenant, coolly looking about him on the
housetop. “All taut and trim here. Those lines and stays shall be
rigged before you turn out in the morning. May I take this short cut
home, and say good-night?”

“Mr. Tartar!” urged Neville. “Pray! It makes me giddy to see you!”

But Mr. Tartar, with a wave of his hand and the deftness of a cat, had
already dipped through his scuttle of scarlet runners without breaking
a leaf, and “gone below.”

Mr. Grewgious, his bedroom window-blind held aside with his hand,
happened at the moment to have Neville’s chambers under his eye for the
last time that night. Fortunately his eye was on the front of the house
and not the back, or this remarkable appearance and disappearance might
have broken his rest as a phenomenon. But Mr. Grewgious seeing nothing
there, not even a light in the windows, his gaze wandered from the
windows to the stars, as if he would have read in them something that
was hidden from him. Many of us would, if we could; but none of us so
much as know our letters in the stars yet—or seem likely to do it, in
this state of existence—and few languages can be read until their
alphabets are mastered.




CHAPTER XVIII.
A SETTLER IN CLOISTERHAM


At about this time a stranger appeared in Cloisterham; a white-haired
personage, with black eyebrows. Being buttoned up in a tightish blue
surtout, with a buff waistcoat and gray trousers, he had something of a
military air, but he announced himself at the Crozier (the orthodox
hotel, where he put up with a portmanteau) as an idle dog who lived
upon his means; and he farther announced that he had a mind to take a
lodging in the picturesque old city for a month or two, with a view of
settling down there altogether. Both announcements were made in the
coffee-room of the Crozier, to all whom it might or might not concern,
by the stranger as he stood with his back to the empty fireplace,
waiting for his fried sole, veal cutlet, and pint of sherry. And the
waiter (business being chronically slack at the Crozier) represented
all whom it might or might not concern, and absorbed the whole of the
information.

This gentleman’s white head was unusually large, and his shock of white
hair was unusually thick and ample. “I suppose, waiter,” he said,
shaking his shock of hair, as a Newfoundland dog might shake his before
sitting down to dinner, “that a fair lodging for a single buffer might
be found in these parts, eh?”

The waiter had no doubt of it.

“Something old,” said the gentleman. “Take my hat down for a moment
from that peg, will you? No, I don’t want it; look into it. What do you
see written there?”

The waiter read: “Datchery.”

“Now you know my name,” said the gentleman; “Dick Datchery. Hang it up
again. I was saying something old is what I should prefer, something
odd and out of the way; something venerable, architectural, and
inconvenient.”

“We have a good choice of inconvenient lodgings in the town, sir, I
think,” replied the waiter, with modest confidence in its resources
that way; “indeed, I have no doubt that we could suit you that far,
however particular you might be. But a architectural lodging!” That
seemed to trouble the waiter’s head, and he shook it.

“Anything Cathedraly, now,” Mr. Datchery suggested.

“Mr. Tope,” said the waiter, brightening, as he rubbed his chin with
his hand, “would be the likeliest party to inform in that line.”

“Who is Mr. Tope?” inquired Dick Datchery.

The waiter explained that he was the Verger, and that Mrs. Tope had
indeed once upon a time let lodgings herself or offered to let them;
but that as nobody had ever taken them, Mrs. Tope’s window-bill, long a
Cloisterham Institution, had disappeared; probably had tumbled down one
day, and never been put up again.

“I’ll call on Mrs. Tope,” said Mr. Datchery, “after dinner.”

So when he had done his dinner, he was duly directed to the spot, and
sallied out for it. But the Crozier being an hotel of a most retiring
disposition, and the waiter’s directions being fatally precise, he soon
became bewildered, and went boggling about and about the Cathedral
Tower, whenever he could catch a glimpse of it, with a general
impression on his mind that Mrs. Tope’s was somewhere very near it, and
that, like the children in the game of hot boiled beans and very good
butter, he was warm in his search when he saw the Tower, and cold when
he didn’t see it.

He was getting very cold indeed when he came upon a fragment of
burial-ground in which an unhappy sheep was grazing. Unhappy, because a
hideous small boy was stoning it through the railings, and had already
lamed it in one leg, and was much excited by the benevolent
sportsmanlike purpose of breaking its other three legs, and bringing it
down.

“’It ’im agin!” cried the boy, as the poor creature leaped; “and made a
dint in his wool.”

“Let him be!” said Mr. Datchery. “Don’t you see you have lamed him?”

“Yer lie,” returned the sportsman. “’E went and lamed isself. I see ’im
do it, and I giv’ ’im a shy as a Widdy-warning to ’im not to go
a-bruisin’ ’is master’s mutton any more.”

“Come here.”

“I won’t; I’ll come when yer can ketch me.”

“Stay there then, and show me which is Mr. Tope’s.”

“Ow can I stay here and show you which is Topeseses, when Topeseses is
t’other side the Kinfreederal, and over the crossings, and round ever
so many comers? Stoo-pid! Ya-a-ah!”

“Show me where it is, and I’ll give you something.”

“Come on, then.”

This brisk dialogue concluded, the boy led the way, and by-and-by
stopped at some distance from an arched passage, pointing.

“Lookie yonder. You see that there winder and door?”

“That’s Tope’s?”

“Yer lie; it ain’t. That’s Jarsper’s.”

“Indeed?” said Mr. Datchery, with a second look of some interest.

“Yes, and I ain’t a-goin’ no nearer ’IM, I tell yer.”

“Why not?”

“’Cos I ain’t a-goin’ to be lifted off my legs and ’ave my braces bust
and be choked; not if I knows it, and not by ’Im. Wait till I set a
jolly good flint a-flyin’ at the back o’ ’is jolly old ’ed some day!
Now look t’other side the harch; not the side where Jarsper’s door is;
t’other side.”

“I see.”

“A little way in, o’ that side, there’s a low door, down two steps.
That’s Topeseses with ’is name on a hoval plate.”

“Good. See here,” said Mr. Datchery, producing a shilling. “You owe me
half of this.”

“Yer lie! I don’t owe yer nothing; I never seen yer.”

“I tell you you owe me half of this, because I have no sixpence in my
pocket. So the next time you meet me you shall do something else for
me, to pay me.”

“All right, give us ’old.”

“What is your name, and where do you live?”

“Deputy. Travellers’ Twopenny, ’cross the green.”

The boy instantly darted off with the shilling, lest Mr. Datchery
should repent, but stopped at a safe distance, on the happy chance of
his being uneasy in his mind about it, to goad him with a demon dance
expressive of its irrevocability.

Mr. Datchery, taking off his hat to give that shock of white hair of
his another shake, seemed quite resigned, and betook himself whither he
had been directed.

Mr. Tope’s official dwelling, communicating by an upper stair with Mr.
Jasper’s (hence Mrs. Tope’s attendance on that gentleman), was of very
modest proportions, and partook of the character of a cool dungeon. Its
ancient walls were massive, and its rooms rather seemed to have been
dug out of them, than to have been designed beforehand with any
reference to them. The main door opened at once on a chamber of no
describable shape, with a groined roof, which in its turn opened on
another chamber of no describable shape, with another groined roof:
their windows small, and in the thickness of the walls. These two
chambers, close as to their atmosphere, and swarthy as to their
illumination by natural light, were the apartments which Mrs. Tope had
so long offered to an unappreciative city. Mr. Datchery, however, was
more appreciative. He found that if he sat with the main door open he
would enjoy the passing society of all comers to and fro by the
gateway, and would have light enough. He found that if Mr. and Mrs.
Tope, living overhead, used for their own egress and ingress a little
side stair that came plump into the Precincts by a door opening
outward, to the surprise and inconvenience of a limited public of
pedestrians in a narrow way, he would be alone, as in a separate
residence. He found the rent moderate, and everything as quaintly
inconvenient as he could desire. He agreed, therefore, to take the
lodging then and there, and money down, possession to be had next
evening, on condition that reference was permitted him to Mr. Jasper as
occupying the gatehouse, of which on the other side of the gateway, the
Verger’s hole-in-the-wall was an appanage or subsidiary part.

The poor dear gentleman was very solitary and very sad, Mrs. Tope said,
but she had no doubt he would “speak for her.” Perhaps Mr. Datchery had
heard something of what had occurred there last winter?

Mr. Datchery had as confused a knowledge of the event in question, on
trying to recall it, as he well could have. He begged Mrs. Tope’s
pardon when she found it incumbent on her to correct him in every
detail of his summary of the facts, but pleaded that he was merely a
single buffer getting through life upon his means as idly as he could,
and that so many people were so constantly making away with so many
other people, as to render it difficult for a buffer of an easy temper
to preserve the circumstances of the several cases unmixed in his mind.

Mr. Jasper proving willing to speak for Mrs. Tope, Mr. Datchery, who
had sent up his card, was invited to ascend the postern staircase. The
Mayor was there, Mr. Tope said; but he was not to be regarded in the
light of company, as he and Mr. Jasper were great friends.

“I beg pardon,” said Mr. Datchery, making a leg with his hat under his
arm, as he addressed himself equally to both gentlemen; “a selfish
precaution on my part, and not personally interesting to anybody but
myself. But as a buffer living on his means, and having an idea of
doing it in this lovely place in peace and quiet, for remaining span of
life, I beg to ask if the Tope family are quite respectable?”

Mr. Jasper could answer for that without the slightest hesitation.

“That is enough, sir,” said Mr. Datchery.

“My friend the Mayor,” added Mr. Jasper, presenting Mr. Datchery with a
courtly motion of his hand towards that potentate; “whose
recommendation is actually much more important to a stranger than that
of an obscure person like myself, will testify in their behalf, I am
sure.”

“The Worshipful the Mayor,” said Mr. Datchery, with a low bow, “places
me under an infinite obligation.”

“Very good people, sir, Mr. and Mrs. Tope,” said Mr. Sapsea, with
condescension. “Very good opinions. Very well behaved. Very respectful.
Much approved by the Dean and Chapter.”

“The Worshipful the Mayor gives them a character,” said Mr. Datchery,
“of which they may indeed be proud. I would ask His Honour (if I might
be permitted) whether there are not many objects of great interest in
the city which is under his beneficent sway?”

“We are, sir,” returned Mr. Sapsea, “an ancient city, and an
ecclesiastical city. We are a constitutional city, as it becomes such a
city to be, and we uphold and maintain our glorious privileges.”

“His Honour,” said Mr. Datchery, bowing, “inspires me with a desire to
know more of the city, and confirms me in my inclination to end my days
in the city.”

“Retired from the Army, sir?” suggested Mr. Sapsea.

“His Honour the Mayor does me too much credit,” returned Mr. Datchery.

“Navy, sir?” suggested Mr. Sapsea.

“Again,” repeated Mr. Datchery, “His Honour the Mayor does me too much
credit.”

“Diplomacy is a fine profession,” said Mr. Sapsea, as a general remark.

“There, I confess, His Honour the Mayor is too many for me,” said Mr.
Datchery, with an ingenious smile and bow; “even a diplomatic bird must
fall to such a gun.”

Now this was very soothing. Here was a gentleman of a great, not to say
a grand, address, accustomed to rank and dignity, really setting a fine
example how to behave to a Mayor. There was something in that
third-person style of being spoken to, that Mr. Sapsea found
particularly recognisant of his merits and position.

“But I crave pardon,” said Mr. Datchery. “His Honour the Mayor will
bear with me, if for a moment I have been deluded into occupying his
time, and have forgotten the humble claims upon my own, of my hotel,
the Crozier.”

“Not at all, sir,” said Mr. Sapsea. “I am returning home, and if you
would like to take the exterior of our Cathedral in your way, I shall
be glad to point it out.”

“His Honour the Mayor,” said Mr. Datchery, “is more than kind and
gracious.”

As Mr. Datchery, when he had made his acknowledgments to Mr. Jasper,
could not be induced to go out of the room before the Worshipful, the
Worshipful led the way down-stairs; Mr. Datchery following with his hat
under his arm, and his shock of white hair streaming in the evening
breeze.

“Might I ask His Honour,” said Mr. Datchery, “whether that gentleman we
have just left is the gentleman of whom I have heard in the
neighbourhood as being much afflicted by the loss of a nephew, and
concentrating his life on avenging the loss?”

“That is the gentleman. John Jasper, sir.”

“Would His Honour allow me to inquire whether there are strong
suspicions of any one?”

“More than suspicions, sir,” returned Mr. Sapsea; “all but
certainties.”

“Only think now!” cried Mr. Datchery.

“But proof, sir, proof must be built up stone by stone,” said the
Mayor. “As I say, the end crowns the work. It is not enough that
justice should be morally certain; she must be immorally
certain—legally, that is.”

“His Honour,” said Mr. Datchery, “reminds me of the nature of the law.
Immoral. How true!”

“As I say, sir,” pompously went on the Mayor, “the arm of the law is a
strong arm, and a long arm. That is the way I put it. A strong arm and
a long arm.”

“How forcible!—And yet, again, how true!” murmured Mr. Datchery.

“And without betraying, what I call the secrets of the prison-house,”
said Mr. Sapsea; “the secrets of the prison-house is the term I used on
the bench.”

“And what other term than His Honour’s would express it?” said Mr.
Datchery.

“Without, I say, betraying them, I predict to you, knowing the iron
will of the gentleman we have just left (I take the bold step of
calling it iron, on account of its strength), that in this case the
long arm will reach, and the strong arm will strike.—This is our
Cathedral, sir. The best judges are pleased to admire it, and the best
among our townsmen own to being a little vain of it.”

All this time Mr. Datchery had walked with his hat under his arm, and
his white hair streaming. He had an odd momentary appearance upon him
of having forgotten his hat, when Mr. Sapsea now touched it; and he
clapped his hand up to his head as if with some vague expectation of
finding another hat upon it.

“Pray be covered, sir,” entreated Mr. Sapsea; magnificently plying: “I
shall not mind it, I assure you.”

“His Honour is very good, but I do it for coolness,” said Mr. Datchery.

Then Mr. Datchery admired the Cathedral, and Mr. Sapsea pointed it out
as if he himself had invented and built it: there were a few details
indeed of which he did not approve, but those he glossed over, as if
the workmen had made mistakes in his absence. The Cathedral disposed
of, he led the way by the churchyard, and stopped to extol the beauty
of the evening—by chance—in the immediate vicinity of Mrs. Sapsea’s
epitaph.

“And by the by,” said Mr. Sapsea, appearing to descend from an
elevation to remember it all of a sudden; like Apollo shooting down
from Olympus to pick up his forgotten lyre; “_that_ is one of our small
lions. The partiality of our people has made it so, and strangers have
been seen taking a copy of it now and then. I am not a judge of it
myself, for it is a little work of my own. But it was troublesome to
turn, sir; I may say, difficult to turn with elegance.”

Mr. Datchery became so ecstatic over Mr. Sapsea’s composition, that, in
spite of his intention to end his days in Cloisterham, and therefore
his probably having in reserve many opportunities of copying it, he
would have transcribed it into his pocket-book on the spot, but for the
slouching towards them of its material producer and perpetuator,
Durdles, whom Mr. Sapsea hailed, not sorry to show him a bright example
of behaviour to superiors.

“Ah, Durdles! This is the mason, sir; one of our Cloisterham worthies;
everybody here knows Durdles. Mr. Datchery, Durdles a gentleman who is
going to settle here.”

“I wouldn’t do it if I was him,” growled Durdles. “We’re a heavy lot.”

“You surely don’t speak for yourself, Mr. Durdles,” returned Mr.
Datchery, “any more than for His Honour.”

“Who’s His Honour?” demanded Durdles.

“His Honour the Mayor.”

“I never was brought afore him,” said Durdles, with anything but the
look of a loyal subject of the mayoralty, “and it’ll be time enough for
me to Honour him when I am. Until which, and when, and where,

‘Mister Sapsea is his name,
    England is his nation,
Cloisterham’s his dwelling-place,
    Aukshneer’s his occupation.’”


Here, Deputy (preceded by a flying oyster-shell) appeared upon the
scene, and requested to have the sum of threepence instantly “chucked”
to him by Mr. Durdles, whom he had been vainly seeking up and down, as
lawful wages overdue. While that gentleman, with his bundle under his
arm, slowly found and counted out the money, Mr. Sapsea informed the
new settler of Durdles’s habits, pursuits, abode, and reputation. “I
suppose a curious stranger might come to see you, and your works, Mr.
Durdles, at any odd time?” said Mr. Datchery upon that.

“Any gentleman is welcome to come and see me any evening if he brings
liquor for two with him,” returned Durdles, with a penny between his
teeth and certain halfpence in his hands; “or if he likes to make it
twice two, he’ll be doubly welcome.”

“I shall come. Master Deputy, what do you owe me?”

“A job.”

“Mind you pay me honestly with the job of showing me Mr. Durdles’s
house when I want to go there.”

Deputy, with a piercing broadside of whistle through the whole gap in
his mouth, as a receipt in full for all arrears, vanished.

The Worshipful and the Worshipper then passed on together until they
parted, with many ceremonies, at the Worshipful’s door; even then the
Worshipper carried his hat under his arm, and gave his streaming white
hair to the breeze.

Said Mr. Datchery to himself that night, as he looked at his white hair
in the gas-lighted looking-glass over the coffee-room chimneypiece at
the Crozier, and shook it out: “For a single buffer, of an easy temper,
living idly on his means, I have had a rather busy afternoon!”




CHAPTER XIX.
SHADOW ON THE SUN-DIAL


Again Miss Twinkleton has delivered her valedictory address, with the
accompaniments of white-wine and pound-cake, and again the young ladies
have departed to their several homes. Helena Landless has left the
Nuns’ House to attend her brother’s fortunes, and pretty Rosa is alone.

Cloisterham is so bright and sunny in these summer days, that the
Cathedral and the monastery-ruin show as if their strong walls were
transparent. A soft glow seems to shine from within them, rather than
upon them from without, such is their mellowness as they look forth on
the hot corn-fields and the smoking roads that distantly wind among
them. The Cloisterham gardens blush with ripening fruit. Time was when
travel-stained pilgrims rode in clattering parties through the city’s
welcome shades; time is when wayfarers, leading a gipsy life between
haymaking time and harvest, and looking as if they were just made of
the dust of the earth, so very dusty are they, lounge about on cool
doorsteps, trying to mend their unmendable shoes, or giving them to
the city kennels as a hopeless job, and seeking others in the bundles
that they carry, along with their yet unused sickles swathed in bands
of straw. At all the more public pumps there is much cooling of bare
feet, together with much bubbling and gurgling of drinking with hand to
spout on the part of these Bedouins; the Cloisterham police meanwhile
looking askant from their beats with suspicion, and manifest impatience
that the intruders should depart from within the civic bounds, and once
more fry themselves on the simmering high-roads.

On the afternoon of such a day, when the last Cathedral service is
done, and when that side of the High Street on which the Nuns’ House
stands is in grateful shade, save where its quaint old garden opens to
the west between the boughs of trees, a servant informs Rosa, to her
terror, that Mr. Jasper desires to see her.

If he had chosen his time for finding her at a disadvantage, he could
have done no better. Perhaps he has chosen it. Helena Landless is gone,
Mrs. Tisher is absent on leave, Miss Twinkleton (in her amateur state
of existence) has contributed herself and a veal pie to a picnic.

“O why, why, why, did you say I was at home!” cried Rosa, helplessly.

The maid replies, that Mr. Jasper never asked the question.

That he said he knew she was at home, and begged she might be told that
he asked to see her.

“What shall I do! what shall I do!” thinks Rosa, clasping her hands.

Possessed by a kind of desperation, she adds in the next breath, that
she will come to Mr. Jasper in the garden. She shudders at the thought
of being shut up with him in the house; but many of its windows command
the garden, and she can be seen as well as heard there, and can shriek
in the free air and run away. Such is the wild idea that flutters
through her mind.

She has never seen him since the fatal night, except when she was
questioned before the Mayor, and then he was present in gloomy
watchfulness, as representing his lost nephew and burning to avenge
him. She hangs her garden-hat on her arm, and goes out. The moment she
sees him from the porch, leaning on the sun-dial, the old horrible
feeling of being compelled by him, asserts its hold upon her. She feels
that she would even then go back, but that he draws her feet towards
him. She cannot resist, and sits down, with her head bent, on the
garden-seat beside the sun-dial. She cannot look up at him for
abhorrence, but she has perceived that he is dressed in deep mourning.
So is she. It was not so at first; but the lost has long been given up,
and mourned for, as dead.

He would begin by touching her hand. She feels the intention, and draws
her hand back. His eyes are then fixed upon her, she knows, though her
own see nothing but the grass.

“I have been waiting,” he begins, “for some time, to be summoned back
to my duty near you.”

After several times forming her lips, which she knows he is closely
watching, into the shape of some other hesitating reply, and then into
none, she answers: “Duty, sir?”

“The duty of teaching you, serving you as your faithful music-master.”

“I have left off that study.”

“Not left off, I think. Discontinued. I was told by your guardian that
you discontinued it under the shock that we have all felt so acutely.
When will you resume?”

“Never, sir.”

“Never? You could have done no more if you had loved my dear boy.”

“I did love him!” cried Rosa, with a flash of anger.

“Yes; but not quite—not quite in the right way, shall I say? Not in the
intended and expected way. Much as my dear boy was, unhappily, too
self-conscious and self-satisfied (I’ll draw no parallel between him
and you in that respect) to love as he should have loved, or as any one
in his place would have loved—must have loved!”

She sits in the same still attitude, but shrinking a little more.

“Then, to be told that you discontinued your study with me, was to be
politely told that you abandoned it altogether?” he suggested.

“Yes,” says Rosa, with sudden spirit, “The politeness was my
guardian’s, not mine. I told him that I was resolved to leave off, and
that I was determined to stand by my resolution.”

“And you still are?”

“I still am, sir. And I beg not to be questioned any more about it. At
all events, I will not answer any more; I have that in my power.”

She is so conscious of his looking at her with a gloating admiration of
the touch of anger on her, and the fire and animation it brings with
it, that even as her spirit rises, it falls again, and she struggles
with a sense of shame, affront, and fear, much as she did that night at
the piano.

“I will not question you any more, since you object to it so much; I
will confess—”

“I do not wish to hear you, sir,” cries Rosa, rising.

This time he does touch her with his outstretched hand. In shrinking
from it, she shrinks into her seat again.

“We must sometimes act in opposition to our wishes,” he tells her in a
low voice. “You must do so now, or do more harm to others than you can
ever set right.”

“What harm?”

“Presently, presently. You question _me_, you see, and surely that’s
not fair when you forbid me to question you. Nevertheless, I will
answer the question presently. Dearest Rosa! Charming Rosa!”

She starts up again.

This time he does not touch her. But his face looks so wicked and
menacing, as he stands leaning against the sun-dial-setting, as it
were, his black mark upon the very face of day—that her flight is
arrested by horror as she looks at him.

“I do not forget how many windows command a view of us,” he says,
glancing towards them. “I will not touch you again; I will come no
nearer to you than I am. Sit down, and there will be no mighty wonder
in your music-master’s leaning idly against a pedestal and speaking
with you, remembering all that has happened, and our shares in it. Sit
down, my beloved.”

She would have gone once more—was all but gone—and once more his face,
darkly threatening what would follow if she went, has stopped her.
Looking at him with the expression of the instant frozen on her face,
she sits down on the seat again.

“Rosa, even when my dear boy was affianced to you, I loved you madly;
even when I thought his happiness in having you for his wife was
certain, I loved you madly; even when I strove to make him more
ardently devoted to you, I loved you madly; even when he gave me the
picture of your lovely face so carelessly traduced by him, which I
feigned to hang always in my sight for his sake, but worshipped in
torment for years, I loved you madly; in the distasteful work of the
day, in the wakeful misery of the night, girded by sordid realities, or
wandering through Paradises and Hells of visions into which I rushed,
carrying your image in my arms, I loved you madly.”

If anything could make his words more hideous to her than they are in
themselves, it would be the contrast between the violence of his look
and delivery, and the composure of his assumed attitude.

“I endured it all in silence. So long as you were his, or so long as I
supposed you to be his, I hid my secret loyally. Did I not?”

This lie, so gross, while the mere words in which it is told are so
true, is more than Rosa can endure. She answers with kindling
indignation: “You were as false throughout, sir, as you are now. You
were false to him, daily and hourly. You know that you made my life
unhappy by your pursuit of me. You know that you made me afraid to open
his generous eyes, and that you forced me, for his own trusting, good,
good sake, to keep the truth from him, that you were a bad, bad man!”

His preservation of his easy attitude rendering his working features
and his convulsive hands absolutely diabolical, he returns, with a
fierce extreme of admiration:

“How beautiful you are! You are more beautiful in anger than in repose.
I don’t ask you for your love; give me yourself and your hatred; give
me yourself and that pretty rage; give me yourself and that enchanting
scorn; it will be enough for me.”

Impatient tears rise to the eyes of the trembling little beauty, and
her face flames; but as she again rises to leave him in indignation,
and seek protection within the house, he stretches out his hand towards
the porch, as though he invited her to enter it.

“I told you, you rare charmer, you sweet witch, that you must stay and
hear me, or do more harm than can ever be undone. You asked me what
harm. Stay, and I will tell you. Go, and I will do it!”

Again Rosa quails before his threatening face, though innocent of its
meaning, and she remains. Her panting breathing comes and goes as if it
would choke her; but with a repressive hand upon her bosom, she
remains.

“I have made my confession that my love is mad. It is so mad, that had
the ties between me and my dear lost boy been one silken thread less
strong, I might have swept even him from your side, when you favoured
him.”

A film comes over the eyes she raises for an instant, as though he had
turned her faint.

“Even him,” he repeats. “Yes, even him! Rosa, you see me and you hear
me. Judge for yourself whether any other admirer shall love you and
live, whose life is in my hand.”

“What do you mean, sir?”

“I mean to show you how mad my love is. It was hawked through the late
inquiries by Mr. Crisparkle, that young Landless had confessed to him
that he was a rival of my lost boy. That is an inexpiable offence in my
eyes. The same Mr. Crisparkle knows under my hand that I have devoted
myself to the murderer’s discovery and destruction, be he whom he
might, and that I determined to discuss the mystery with no one until I
should hold the clue in which to entangle the murderer as in a net. I
have since worked patiently to wind and wind it round him; and it is
slowly winding as I speak.”

[Illustration: Jasper’s sacrifices]


“Your belief, if you believe in the criminality of Mr. Landless, is not
Mr. Crisparkle’s belief, and he is a good man,” Rosa retorts.

“My belief is my own; and I reserve it, worshipped of my soul!
Circumstances may accumulate so strongly _even against an innocent
man_, that directed, sharpened, and pointed, they may slay him. One
wanting link discovered by perseverance against a guilty man, proves
his guilt, however slight its evidence before, and he dies. Young
Landless stands in deadly peril either way.”

“If you really suppose,” Rosa pleads with him, turning paler, “that I
favour Mr. Landless, or that Mr. Landless has ever in any way addressed
himself to me, you are wrong.”

He puts that from him with a slighting action of his hand and a curled
lip.

“I was going to show you how madly I love you. More madly now than
ever, for I am willing to renounce the second object that has arisen in
my life to divide it with you; and henceforth to have no object in
existence but you only. Miss Landless has become your bosom friend. You
care for her peace of mind?”

“I love her dearly.”

“You care for her good name?”

“I have said, sir, I love her dearly.”

“I am unconsciously,” he observes with a smile, as he folds his hands
upon the sun-dial and leans his chin upon them, so that his talk would
seem from the windows (faces occasionally come and go there) to be of
the airiest and playfullest—“I am unconsciously giving offence by
questioning again. I will simply make statements, therefore, and not
put questions. You do care for your bosom friend’s good name, and you
do care for her peace of mind. Then remove the shadow of the gallows
from her, dear one!”

“You dare propose to me to—”

“Darling, I dare propose to you. Stop there. If it be bad to idolise
you, I am the worst of men; if it be good, I am the best. My love for
you is above all other love, and my truth to you is above all other
truth. Let me have hope and favour, and I am a forsworn man for your
sake.”

Rosa puts her hands to her temples, and, pushing back her hair, looks
wildly and abhorrently at him, as though she were trying to piece
together what it is his deep purpose to present to her only in
fragments.

“Reckon up nothing at this moment, angel, but the sacrifices that I lay
at those dear feet, which I could fall down among the vilest ashes and
kiss, and put upon my head as a poor savage might. There is my fidelity
to my dear boy after death. Tread upon it!”

With an action of his hands, as though he cast down something precious.

“There is the inexpiable offence against my adoration of you. Spurn
it!”

With a similar action.

“There are my labours in the cause of a just vengeance for six toiling
months. Crush them!”

With another repetition of the action.

“There is my past and my present wasted life. There is the desolation
of my heart and my soul. There is my peace; there is my despair. Stamp
them into the dust; so that you take me, were it even mortally hating
me!”

The frightful vehemence of the man, now reaching its full height, so
additionally terrifies her as to break the spell that has held her to
the spot. She swiftly moves towards the porch; but in an instant he is
at her side, and speaking in her ear.

“Rosa, I am self-repressed again. I am walking calmly beside you to the
house. I shall wait for some encouragement and hope. I shall not strike
too soon. Give me a sign that you attend to me.”

She slightly and constrainedly moves her hand.

“Not a word of this to any one, or it will bring down the blow, as
certainly as night follows day. Another sign that you attend to me.”

She moves her hand once more.

“I love you, love you, love you! If you were to cast me off now—but you
will not—you would never be rid of me. No one should come between us. I
would pursue you to the death.”

The handmaid coming out to open the gate for him, he quietly pulls off
his hat as a parting salute, and goes away with no greater show of
agitation than is visible in the effigy of Mr. Sapsea’s father
opposite. Rosa faints in going up-stairs, and is carefully carried to
her room and laid down on her bed. A thunderstorm is coming on, the
maids say, and the hot and stifling air has overset the pretty dear: no
wonder; they have felt their own knees all of a tremble all day long.




CHAPTER XX.
A FLIGHT


Rosa no sooner came to herself than the whole of the late interview was
before her. It even seemed as if it had pursued her into her
insensibility, and she had not had a moment’s unconsciousness of it.
What to do, she was at a frightened loss to know: the only one clear
thought in her mind was, that she must fly from this terrible man.

But where could she take refuge, and how could she go? She had never
breathed her dread of him to any one but Helena. If she went to Helena,
and told her what had passed, that very act might bring down the
irreparable mischief that he threatened he had the power, and that she
knew he had the will, to do. The more fearful he appeared to her
excited memory and imagination, the more alarming her responsibility
appeared; seeing that a slight mistake on her part, either in action or
delay, might let his malevolence loose on Helena’s brother.

Rosa’s mind throughout the last six months had been stormily confused.
A half-formed, wholly unexpressed suspicion tossed in it, now heaving
itself up, and now sinking into the deep; now gaining palpability, and
now losing it. Jasper’s self-absorption in his nephew when he was
alive, and his unceasing pursuit of the inquiry how he came by his
death, if he were dead, were themes so rife in the place, that no one
appeared able to suspect the possibility of foul play at his hands. She
had asked herself the question, “Am I so wicked in my thoughts as to
conceive a wickedness that others cannot imagine?” Then she had
considered, Did the suspicion come of her previous recoiling from him
before the fact? And if so, was not that a proof of its baselessness?
Then she had reflected, “What motive could he have, according to my
accusation?” She was ashamed to answer in her mind, “The motive of
gaining _me_!” And covered her face, as if the lightest shadow of the
idea of founding murder on such an idle vanity were a crime almost as
great.

She ran over in her mind again, all that he had said by the sun-dial in
the garden. He had persisted in treating the disappearance as murder,
consistently with his whole public course since the finding of the
watch and shirt-pin. If he were afraid of the crime being traced out,
would he not rather encourage the idea of a voluntary disappearance? He
had even declared that if the ties between him and his nephew had been
less strong, he might have swept “even him” away from her side. Was
that like his having really done so? He had spoken of laying his six
months’ labours in the cause of a just vengeance at her feet. Would he
have done that, with that violence of passion, if they were a pretence?
Would he have ranged them with his desolate heart and soul, his wasted
life, his peace and his despair? The very first sacrifice that he
represented himself as making for her, was his fidelity to his dear boy
after death. Surely these facts were strong against a fancy that
scarcely dared to hint itself. And yet he was so terrible a man! In
short, the poor girl (for what could she know of the criminal
intellect, which its own professed students perpetually misread,
because they persist in trying to reconcile it with the average
intellect of average men, instead of identifying it as a horrible
wonder apart) could get by no road to any other conclusion than that he
_was_ a terrible man, and must be fled from.

She had been Helena’s stay and comfort during the whole time. She had
constantly assured her of her full belief in her brother’s innocence,
and of her sympathy with him in his misery. But she had never seen him
since the disappearance, nor had Helena ever spoken one word of his
avowal to Mr. Crisparkle in regard of Rosa, though as a part of the
interest of the case it was well known far and wide. He was Helena’s
unfortunate brother, to her, and nothing more. The assurance she had
given her odious suitor was strictly true, though it would have been
better (she considered now) if she could have restrained herself from
so giving it. Afraid of him as the bright and delicate little creature
was, her spirit swelled at the thought of his knowing it from her own
lips.

But where was she to go? Anywhere beyond his reach, was no reply to the
question. Somewhere must be thought of. She determined to go to her
guardian, and to go immediately. The feeling she had imparted to Helena
on the night of their first confidence, was so strong upon her—the
feeling of not being safe from him, and of the solid walls of the old
convent being powerless to keep out his ghostly following of her—that
no reasoning of her own could calm her terrors. The fascination of
repulsion had been upon her so long, and now culminated so darkly, that
she felt as if he had power to bind her by a spell. Glancing out at
window, even now, as she rose to dress, the sight of the sun-dial on
which he had leaned when he declared himself, turned her cold, and made
her shrink from it, as though he had invested it with some awful
quality from his own nature.

She wrote a hurried note to Miss Twinkleton, saying that she had sudden
reason for wishing to see her guardian promptly, and had gone to him;
also, entreating the good lady not to be uneasy, for all was well with
her. She hurried a few quite useless articles into a very little bag,
left the note in a conspicuous place, and went out, softly closing the
gate after her.

It was the first time she had ever been even in Cloisterham High Street
alone. But knowing all its ways and windings very well, she hurried
straight to the corner from which the omnibus departed. It was, at that
very moment, going off.

“Stop and take me, if you please, Joe. I am obliged to go to London.”

In less than another minute she was on her road to the railway, under
Joe’s protection. Joe waited on her when she got there, put her safely
into the railway carriage, and handed in the very little bag after her,
as though it were some enormous trunk, hundredweights heavy, which she
must on no account endeavour to lift.

“Can you go round when you get back, and tell Miss Twinkleton that you
saw me safely off, Joe?”

“It shall be done, Miss.”

“With my love, please, Joe.”

“Yes, Miss—and I wouldn’t mind having it myself!” But Joe did not
articulate the last clause; only thought it.

Now that she was whirling away for London in real earnest, Rosa was at
leisure to resume the thoughts which her personal hurry had checked.
The indignant thought that his declaration of love soiled her; that she
could only be cleansed from the stain of its impurity by appealing to
the honest and true; supported her for a time against her fears, and
confirmed her in her hasty resolution. But as the evening grew darker
and darker, and the great city impended nearer and nearer, the doubts
usual in such cases began to arise. Whether this was not a wild
proceeding, after all; how Mr. Grewgious might regard it; whether she
should find him at the journey’s end; how she would act if he were
absent; what might become of her, alone, in a place so strange and
crowded; how if she had but waited and taken counsel first; whether, if
she could now go back, she would not do it thankfully; a multitude of
such uneasy speculations disturbed her, more and more as they
accumulated. At length the train came into London over the housetops;
and down below lay the gritty streets with their yet un-needed lamps
a-glow, on a hot, light, summer night.

“Hiram Grewgious, Esquire, Staple Inn, London.” This was all Rosa knew
of her destination; but it was enough to send her rattling away again
in a cab, through deserts of gritty streets, where many people crowded
at the corner of courts and byways to get some air, and where many
other people walked with a miserably monotonous noise of shuffling of
feet on hot paving-stones, and where all the people and all their
surroundings were so gritty and so shabby!

There was music playing here and there, but it did not enliven the
case. No barrel-organ mended the matter, and no big drum beat dull care
away. Like the chapel bells that were also going here and there, they
only seemed to evoke echoes from brick surfaces, and dust from
everything. As to the flat wind-instruments, they seemed to have
cracked their hearts and souls in pining for the country.

Her jingling conveyance stopped at last at a fast-closed gateway, which
appeared to belong to somebody who had gone to bed very early, and was
much afraid of housebreakers; Rosa, discharging her conveyance, timidly
knocked at this gateway, and was let in, very little bag and all, by a
watchman.

“Does Mr. Grewgious live here?”

“Mr. Grewgious lives there, Miss,” said the watchman, pointing further
in.

So Rosa went further in, and, when the clocks were striking ten, stood
on P. J. T.’s doorsteps, wondering what P. J. T. had done with his
street-door.

Guided by the painted name of Mr. Grewgious, she went up-stairs and
softly tapped and tapped several times. But no one answering, and Mr.
Grewgious’s door-handle yielding to her touch, she went in, and saw her
guardian sitting on a window-seat at an open window, with a shaded lamp
placed far from him on a table in a corner.

Rosa drew nearer to him in the twilight of the room. He saw her, and he
said, in an undertone: “Good Heaven!”

Rosa fell upon his neck, with tears, and then he said, returning her
embrace:

“My child, my child! I thought you were your mother!—But what, what,
what,” he added, soothingly, “has happened? My dear, what has brought
you here? Who has brought you here?”

“No one. I came alone.”

“Lord bless me!” ejaculated Mr. Grewgious. “Came alone! Why didn’t you
write to me to come and fetch you?”

“I had no time. I took a sudden resolution. Poor, poor Eddy!”

“Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow!”

“His uncle has made love to me. I cannot bear it,” said Rosa, at once
with a burst of tears, and a stamp of her little foot; “I shudder with
horror of him, and I have come to you to protect me and all of us from
him, if you will?”

“I will,” cried Mr. Grewgious, with a sudden rush of amazing energy.
“Damn him!

‘Confound his politics!
Frustrate his knavish tricks!
On Thee his hopes to fix?
        Damn him again!’”


After this most extraordinary outburst, Mr. Grewgious, quite beside
himself, plunged about the room, to all appearance undecided whether he
was in a fit of loyal enthusiasm, or combative denunciation.

He stopped and said, wiping his face: “I beg your pardon, my dear, but
you will be glad to know I feel better. Tell me no more just now, or I
might do it again. You must be refreshed and cheered. What did you take
last? Was it breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper? And what will
you take next? Shall it be breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper?”

The respectful tenderness with which, on one knee before her, he helped
her to remove her hat, and disentangle her pretty hair from it, was
quite a chivalrous sight. Yet who, knowing him only on the surface,
would have expected chivalry—and of the true sort, too; not the
spurious—from Mr. Grewgious?

“Your rest too must be provided for,” he went on; “and you shall have
the prettiest chamber in Furnival’s. Your toilet must be provided for,
and you shall have everything that an unlimited head chambermaid—by
which expression I mean a head chambermaid not limited as to outlay—can
procure. Is that a bag?” he looked hard at it; sooth to say, it
required hard looking at to be seen at all in a dimly lighted room:
“and is it your property, my dear?”

“Yes, sir. I brought it with me.”

“It is not an extensive bag,” said Mr. Grewgious, candidly, “though
admirably calculated to contain a day’s provision for a canary-bird.
Perhaps you brought a canary-bird?”

Rosa smiled and shook her head.

“If you had, he should have been made welcome,” said Mr. Grewgious,
“and I think he would have been pleased to be hung upon a nail outside
and pit himself against our Staple sparrows; whose execution must be
admitted to be not quite equal to their intention. Which is the case
with so many of us! You didn’t say what meal, my dear. Have a nice
jumble of all meals.”

Rosa thanked him, but said she could only take a cup of tea. Mr.
Grewgious, after several times running out, and in again, to mention
such supplementary items as marmalade, eggs, watercresses, salted fish,
and frizzled ham, ran across to Furnival’s without his hat, to give his
various directions. And soon afterwards they were realised in practice,
and the board was spread.

“Lord bless my soul,” cried Mr. Grewgious, putting the lamp upon it,
and taking his seat opposite Rosa; “what a new sensation for a poor old
Angular bachelor, to be sure!”

[Illustration: Mr. Grewgious experiences a new sensation]


Rosa’s expressive little eyebrows asked him what he meant?

“The sensation of having a sweet young presence in the place, that
whitewashes it, paints it, papers it, decorates it with gilding, and
makes it Glorious!” said Mr. Grewgious. “Ah me! Ah me!”

As there was something mournful in his sigh, Rosa, in touching him with
her tea-cup, ventured to touch him with her small hand too.

“Thank you, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Ahem! Let’s talk!”

“Do you always live here, sir?” asked Rosa.

“Yes, my dear.”

“And always alone?”

“Always alone; except that I have daily company in a gentleman by the
name of Bazzard, my clerk.”

“_He_ doesn’t live here?”

“No, he goes his way, after office hours. In fact, he is off duty here,
altogether, just at present; and a firm down-stairs, with which I have
business relations, lend me a substitute. But it would be extremely
difficult to replace Mr. Bazzard.”

“He must be very fond of you,” said Rosa.

“He bears up against it with commendable fortitude if he is,” returned
Mr. Grewgious, after considering the matter. “But I doubt if he is. Not
particularly so. You see, he is discontented, poor fellow.”

“Why isn’t he contented?” was the natural inquiry.

“Misplaced,” said Mr. Grewgious, with great mystery.

Rosa’s eyebrows resumed their inquisitive and perplexed expression.

“So misplaced,” Mr. Grewgious went on, “that I feel constantly
apologetic towards him. And he feels (though he doesn’t mention it)
that I have reason to be.”

Mr. Grewgious had by this time grown so very mysterious, that Rosa did
not know how to go on. While she was thinking about it Mr. Grewgious
suddenly jerked out of himself for the second time:

“Let’s talk. We were speaking of Mr. Bazzard. It’s a secret, and
moreover it is Mr. Bazzard’s secret; but the sweet presence at my table
makes me so unusually expansive, that I feel I must impart it in
inviolable confidence. What do you think Mr. Bazzard has done?”

“O dear!” cried Rosa, drawing her chair a little nearer, and her mind
reverting to Jasper, “nothing dreadful, I hope?”

“He has written a play,” said Mr. Grewgious, in a solemn whisper. “A
tragedy.”

Rosa seemed much relieved.

“And nobody,” pursued Mr. Grewgious in the same tone, “will hear, on
any account whatever, of bringing it out.”

Rosa looked reflective, and nodded her head slowly; as who should say,
“Such things are, and why are they!”

“Now, you know,” said Mr. Grewgious, “_I_ couldn’t write a play.”

“Not a bad one, sir?” said Rosa, innocently, with her eyebrows again in
action.

“No. If I was under sentence of decapitation, and was about to be
instantly decapitated, and an express arrived with a pardon for the
condemned convict Grewgious if he wrote a play, I should be under the
necessity of resuming the block, and begging the executioner to proceed
to extremities,—meaning,” said Mr. Grewgious, passing his hand under
his chin, “the singular number, and this extremity.”

Rosa appeared to consider what she would do if the awkward
supposititious case were hers.

“Consequently,” said Mr. Grewgious, “Mr. Bazzard would have a sense of
my inferiority to himself under any circumstances; but when I am his
master, you know, the case is greatly aggravated.”

Mr. Grewgious shook his head seriously, as if he felt the offence to be
a little too much, though of his own committing.

“How came you to be his master, sir?” asked Rosa.

“A question that naturally follows,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Let’s talk.
Mr. Bazzard’s father, being a Norfolk farmer, would have furiously laid
about him with a flail, a pitch-fork, and every agricultural implement
available for assaulting purposes, on the slightest hint of his son’s
having written a play. So the son, bringing to me the father’s rent
(which I receive), imparted his secret, and pointed out that he was
determined to pursue his genius, and that it would put him in peril of
starvation, and that he was not formed for it.”

“For pursuing his genius, sir?”

“No, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious, “for starvation. It was impossible
to deny the position, that Mr. Bazzard was not formed to be starved,
and Mr. Bazzard then pointed out that it was desirable that I should
stand between him and a fate so perfectly unsuited to his formation. In
that way Mr. Bazzard became my clerk, and he feels it very much.”

“I am glad he is grateful,” said Rosa.

“I didn’t quite mean that, my dear. I mean, that he feels the
degradation. There are some other geniuses that Mr. Bazzard has become
acquainted with, who have also written tragedies, which likewise nobody
will on any account whatever hear of bringing out, and these choice
spirits dedicate their plays to one another in a highly panegyrical
manner. Mr. Bazzard has been the subject of one of these dedications.
Now, you know, I never had a play dedicated to _me_!”

Rosa looked at him as if she would have liked him to be the recipient
of a thousand dedications.

“Which again, naturally, rubs against the grain of Mr. Bazzard,” said
Mr. Grewgious. “He is very short with me sometimes, and then I feel
that he is meditating, ‘This blockhead is my master! A fellow who
couldn’t write a tragedy on pain of death, and who will never have one
dedicated to him with the most complimentary congratulations on the
high position he has taken in the eyes of posterity!’ Very trying, very
trying. However, in giving him directions, I reflect beforehand:
‘Perhaps he may not like this,’ or ‘He might take it ill if I asked
that;’ and so we get on very well. Indeed, better than I could have
expected.”

“Is the tragedy named, sir?” asked Rosa.

“Strictly between ourselves,” answered Mr. Grewgious, “it has a
dreadfully appropriate name. It is called The Thorn of Anxiety. But Mr.
Bazzard hopes—and I hope—that it will come out at last.”

It was not hard to divine that Mr. Grewgious had related the Bazzard
history thus fully, at least quite as much for the recreation of his
ward’s mind from the subject that had driven her there, as for the
gratification of his own tendency to be social and communicative.

“And now, my dear,” he said at this point, “if you are not too tired to
tell me more of what passed to-day—but only if you feel quite able—I
should be glad to hear it. I may digest it the better, if I sleep on it
to-night.”

Rosa, composed now, gave him a faithful account of the interview. Mr.
Grewgious often smoothed his head while it was in progress, and begged
to be told a second time those parts which bore on Helena and Neville.
When Rosa had finished, he sat grave, silent, and meditative for a
while.

“Clearly narrated,” was his only remark at last, “and, I hope, clearly
put away here,” smoothing his head again. “See, my dear,” taking her to
the open window, “where they live! The dark windows over yonder.”

“I may go to Helena to-morrow?” asked Rosa.

“I should like to sleep on that question to-night,” he answered
doubtfully. “But let me take you to your own rest, for you must need
it.”

With that Mr. Grewgious helped her to get her hat on again, and hung
upon his arm the very little bag that was of no earthly use, and led
her by the hand (with a certain stately awkwardness, as if he were
going to walk a minuet) across Holborn, and into Furnival’s Inn. At the
hotel door, he confided her to the Unlimited head chambermaid, and said
that while she went up to see her room, he would remain below, in case
she should wish it exchanged for another, or should find that there was
anything she wanted.

Rosa’s room was airy, clean, comfortable, almost gay. The Unlimited had
laid in everything omitted from the very little bag (that is to say,
everything she could possibly need), and Rosa tripped down the great
many stairs again, to thank her guardian for his thoughtful and
affectionate care of her.

“Not at all, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious, infinitely gratified; “it is
I who thank you for your charming confidence and for your charming
company. Your breakfast will be provided for you in a neat, compact,
and graceful little sitting-room (appropriate to your figure), and I
will come to you at ten o’clock in the morning. I hope you don’t feel
very strange indeed, in this strange place.”

“O no, I feel so safe!”

“Yes, you may be sure that the stairs are fire-proof,” said Mr.
Grewgious, “and that any outbreak of the devouring element would be
perceived and suppressed by the watchmen.”

“I did not mean that,” Rosa replied. “I mean, I feel so safe from him.”

“There is a stout gate of iron bars to keep him out,” said Mr.
Grewgious, smiling; “and Furnival’s is fire-proof, and specially
watched and lighted, and _I_ live over the way!” In the stoutness of
his knight-errantry, he seemed to think the last-named protection all
sufficient. In the same spirit he said to the gate-porter as he went
out, “If some one staying in the hotel should wish to send across the
road to me in the night, a crown will be ready for the messenger.” In
the same spirit, he walked up and down outside the iron gate for the
best part of an hour, with some solicitude; occasionally looking in
between the bars, as if he had laid a dove in a high roost in a cage of
lions, and had it on his mind that she might tumble out.




CHAPTER XXI.
A RECOGNITION


Nothing occurred in the night to flutter the tired dove; and the dove
arose refreshed. With Mr. Grewgious, when the clock struck ten in the
morning, came Mr. Crisparkle, who had come at one plunge out of the
river at Cloisterham.

“Miss Twinkleton was so uneasy, Miss Rosa,” he explained to her, “and
came round to Ma and me with your note, in such a state of wonder,
that, to quiet her, I volunteered on this service by the very first
train to be caught in the morning. I wished at the time that you had
come to me; but now I think it best that you did _as_ you did, and came
to your guardian.”

“I did think of you,” Rosa told him; “but Minor Canon Corner was so
near him—”

“I understand. It was quite natural.”

“I have told Mr. Crisparkle,” said Mr. Grewgious, “all that you told me
last night, my dear. Of course I should have written it to him
immediately; but his coming was most opportune. And it was particularly
kind of him to come, for he had but just gone.”

“Have you settled,” asked Rosa, appealing to them both, “what is to be
done for Helena and her brother?”

“Why really,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “I am in great perplexity. If even
Mr. Grewgious, whose head is much longer than mine, and who is a whole
night’s cogitation in advance of me, is undecided, what must I be!”

The Unlimited here put her head in at the door—after having rapped, and
been authorised to present herself—announcing that a gentleman wished
for a word with another gentleman named Crisparkle, if any such
gentleman were there. If no such gentleman were there, he begged pardon
for being mistaken.

“Such a gentleman is here,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “but is engaged just
now.”

“Is it a dark gentleman?” interposed Rosa, retreating on her guardian.

“No, Miss, more of a brown gentleman.”

“You are sure not with black hair?” asked Rosa, taking courage.

“Quite sure of that, Miss. Brown hair and blue eyes.”

“Perhaps,” hinted Mr. Grewgious, with habitual caution, “it might be
well to see him, reverend sir, if you don’t object. When one is in a
difficulty or at a loss, one never knows in what direction a way out
may chance to open. It is a business principle of mine, in such a case,
not to close up any direction, but to keep an eye on every direction
that may present itself. I could relate an anecdote in point, but that
it would be premature.”

“If Miss Rosa will allow me, then? Let the gentleman come in,” said Mr.
Crisparkle.

The gentleman came in; apologised, with a frank but modest grace, for
not finding Mr. Crisparkle alone; turned to Mr. Crisparkle, and
smilingly asked the unexpected question: “Who am I?”

“You are the gentleman I saw smoking under the trees in Staple Inn, a
few minutes ago.”

“True. There I saw you. Who else am I?”

Mr. Crisparkle concentrated his attention on a handsome face, much
sunburnt; and the ghost of some departed boy seemed to rise, gradually
and dimly, in the room.

The gentleman saw a struggling recollection lighten up the Minor
Canon’s features, and smiling again, said: “What will you have for
breakfast this morning? You are out of jam.”

“Wait a moment!” cried Mr. Crisparkle, raising his right hand. “Give me
another instant! Tartar!”

The two shook hands with the greatest heartiness, and then went the
wonderful length—for Englishmen—of laying their hands each on the
other’s shoulders, and looking joyfully each into the other’s face.

“My old fag!” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“My old master!” said Mr. Tartar.

“You saved me from drowning!” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“After which you took to swimming, you know!” said Mr. Tartar.

“God bless my soul!” said Mr. Crisparkle.

“Amen!” said Mr. Tartar.

And then they fell to shaking hands most heartily again.

“Imagine,” exclaimed Mr. Crisparkle, with glistening eyes: “Miss Rosa
Bud and Mr. Grewgious, imagine Mr. Tartar, when he was the smallest of
juniors, diving for me, catching me, a big heavy senior, by the hair of
the head, and striking out for the shore with me like a water-giant!”

“Imagine my not letting him sink, as I was his fag!” said Mr. Tartar.
“But the truth being that he was my best protector and friend, and did
me more good than all the masters put together, an irrational impulse
seized me to pick him up, or go down with him.”

“Hem! Permit me, sir, to have the honour,” said Mr. Grewgious,
advancing with extended hand, “for an honour I truly esteem it. I am
proud to make your acquaintance. I hope you didn’t take cold. I hope
you were not inconvenienced by swallowing too much water. How have you
been since?”

It was by no means apparent that Mr. Grewgious knew what he said,
though it was very apparent that he meant to say something highly
friendly and appreciative.

If Heaven, Rosa thought, had but sent such courage and skill to her
poor mother’s aid! And he to have been so slight and young then!

“I don’t wish to be complimented upon it, I thank you; but I think I
have an idea,” Mr. Grewgious announced, after taking a jog-trot or two
across the room, so unexpected and unaccountable that they all stared
at him, doubtful whether he was choking or had the cramp—“I _think_ I
have an idea. I believe I have had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Tartar’s
name as tenant of the top set in the house next the top set in the
corner?”

“Yes, sir,” returned Mr. Tartar. “You are right so far.”

“I am right so far,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Tick that off;” which he did,
with his right thumb on his left. “Might you happen to know the name of
your neighbour in the top set on the other side of the party-wall?”
coming very close to Mr. Tartar, to lose nothing of his face, in his
shortness of sight.

“Landless.”

“Tick that off,” said Mr. Grewgious, taking another trot, and then
coming back. “No personal knowledge, I suppose, sir?”

“Slight, but some.”

“Tick that off,” said Mr. Grewgious, taking another trot, and again
coming back. “Nature of knowledge, Mr. Tartar?”

“I thought he seemed to be a young fellow in a poor way, and I asked
his leave—only within a day or so—to share my flowers up there with
him; that is to say, to extend my flower-garden to his windows.”

“Would you have the kindness to take seats?” said Mr. Grewgious. “I
_have_ an idea!”

They complied; Mr. Tartar none the less readily, for being all abroad;
and Mr. Grewgious, seated in the centre, with his hands upon his knees,
thus stated his idea, with his usual manner of having got the statement
by heart.

“I cannot as yet make up my mind whether it is prudent to hold open
communication under present circumstances, and on the part of the fair
member of the present company, with Mr. Neville or Miss Helena. I have
reason to know that a local friend of ours (on whom I beg to bestow a
passing but a hearty malediction, with the kind permission of my
reverend friend) sneaks to and fro, and dodges up and down. When not
doing so himself, he may have some informant skulking about, in the
person of a watchman, porter, or such-like hanger-on of Staple. On the
other hand, Miss Rosa very naturally wishes to see her friend Miss
Helena, and it would seem important that at least Miss Helena (if not
her brother too, through her) should privately know from Miss Rosa’s
lips what has occurred, and what has been threatened. Am I agreed with
generally in the views I take?”

“I entirely coincide with them,” said Mr. Crisparkle, who had been very
attentive.

“As I have no doubt I should,” added Mr. Tartar, smiling, “if I
understood them.”

“Fair and softly, sir,” said Mr. Grewgious; “we shall fully confide in
you directly, if you will favour us with your permission. Now, if our
local friend should have any informant on the spot, it is tolerably
clear that such informant can only be set to watch the chambers in the
occupation of Mr. Neville. He reporting, to our local friend, who comes
and goes there, our local friend would supply for himself, from his own
previous knowledge, the identity of the parties. Nobody can be set to
watch all Staple, or to concern himself with comers and goers to other
sets of chambers: unless, indeed, mine.”

“I begin to understand to what you tend,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “and
highly approve of your caution.”

“I needn’t repeat that I know nothing yet of the why and wherefore,”
said Mr. Tartar; “but I also understand to what you tend, so let me say
at once that my chambers are freely at your disposal.”

“There!” cried Mr. Grewgious, smoothing his head triumphantly, “now we
have all got the idea. You have it, my dear?”

“I think I have,” said Rosa, blushing a little as Mr. Tartar looked
quickly towards her.

“You see, you go over to Staple with Mr. Crisparkle and Mr. Tartar,”
said Mr. Grewgious; “I going in and out, and out and in alone, in my
usual way; you go up with those gentlemen to Mr. Tartar’s rooms; you
look into Mr. Tartar’s flower-garden; you wait for Miss Helena’s
appearance there, or you signify to Miss Helena that you are close by;
and you communicate with her freely, and no spy can be the wiser.”

“I am very much afraid I shall be—”

“Be what, my dear?” asked Mr. Grewgious, as she hesitated. “Not
frightened?”

“No, not that,” said Rosa, shyly; “in Mr. Tartar’s way. We seem to be
appropriating Mr. Tartar’s residence so very coolly.”

“I protest to you,” returned that gentleman, “that I shall think the
better of it for evermore, if your voice sounds in it only once.”

Rosa, not quite knowing what to say about that, cast down her eyes, and
turning to Mr. Grewgious, dutifully asked if she should put her hat on?
Mr. Grewgious being of opinion that she could not do better, she
withdrew for the purpose. Mr. Crisparkle took the opportunity of giving
Mr. Tartar a summary of the distresses of Neville and his sister; the
opportunity was quite long enough, as the hat happened to require a
little extra fitting on.

Mr. Tartar gave his arm to Rosa, and Mr. Crisparkle walked, detached,
in front.

“Poor, poor Eddy!” thought Rosa, as they went along.

Mr. Tartar waved his right hand as he bent his head down over Rosa,
talking in an animated way.

“It was not so powerful or so sun-browned when it saved Mr.
Crisparkle,” thought Rosa, glancing at it; “but it must have been very
steady and determined even then.”

Mr. Tartar told her he had been a sailor, roving everywhere for years
and years.

“When are you going to sea again?” asked Rosa.

“Never!”

Rosa wondered what the girls would say if they could see her crossing
the wide street on the sailor’s arm. And she fancied that the
passers-by must think her very little and very helpless, contrasted
with the strong figure that could have caught her up and carried her
out of any danger, miles and miles without resting.

She was thinking further, that his far-seeing blue eyes looked as if
they had been used to watch danger afar off, and to watch it without
flinching, drawing nearer and nearer: when, happening to raise her own
eyes, she found that he seemed to be thinking something about _them_.

This a little confused Rosebud, and may account for her never
afterwards quite knowing how she ascended (with his help) to his garden
in the air, and seemed to get into a marvellous country that came into
sudden bloom like the country on the summit of the magic bean-stalk.
May it flourish for ever!




CHAPTER XXII.
A GRITTY STATE OF THINGS COMES ON


Mr. Tartar’s chambers were the neatest, the cleanest, and the
best-ordered chambers ever seen under the sun, moon, and stars. The
floors were scrubbed to that extent, that you might have supposed the
London blacks emancipated for ever, and gone out of the land for good.
Every inch of brass-work in Mr. Tartar’s possession was polished and
burnished, till it shone like a brazen mirror. No speck, nor spot, nor
spatter soiled the purity of any of Mr. Tartar’s household gods, large,
small, or middle-sized. His sitting-room was like the admiral’s cabin,
his bath-room was like a dairy, his sleeping-chamber, fitted all about
with lockers and drawers, was like a seedsman’s shop; and his
nicely-balanced cot just stirred in the midst, as if it breathed.
Everything belonging to Mr. Tartar had quarters of its own assigned to
it: his maps and charts had their quarters; his books had theirs; his
brushes had theirs; his boots had theirs; his clothes had theirs; his
case-bottles had theirs; his telescopes and other instruments had
theirs. Everything was readily accessible. Shelf, bracket, locker,
hook, and drawer were equally within reach, and were equally contrived
with a view to avoiding waste of room, and providing some snug inches
of stowage for something that would have exactly fitted nowhere else.
His gleaming little service of plate was so arranged upon his sideboard
as that a slack salt-spoon would have instantly betrayed itself; his
toilet implements were so arranged upon his dressing-table as that a
toothpick of slovenly deportment could have been reported at a glance.
So with the curiosities he had brought home from various voyages.
Stuffed, dried, repolished, or otherwise preserved, according to their
kind; birds, fishes, reptiles, arms, articles of dress, shells,
seaweeds, grasses, or memorials of coral reef; each was displayed in
its especial place, and each could have been displayed in no better
place. Paint and varnish seemed to be kept somewhere out of sight, in
constant readiness to obliterate stray finger-marks wherever any might
become perceptible in Mr. Tartar’s chambers. No man-of-war was ever
kept more spick and span from careless touch. On this bright summer
day, a neat awning was rigged over Mr. Tartar’s flower-garden as only a
sailor can rig it, and there was a sea-going air upon the whole effect,
so delightfully complete, that the flower-garden might have appertained
to stern-windows afloat, and the whole concern might have bowled away
gallantly with all on board, if Mr. Tartar had only clapped to his lips
the speaking-trumpet that was slung in a corner, and given hoarse
orders to heave the anchor up, look alive there, men, and get all sail
upon her!

Mr. Tartar doing the honours of this gallant craft was of a piece with
the rest. When a man rides an amiable hobby that shies at nothing and
kicks nobody, it is only agreeable to find him riding it with a
humorous sense of the droll side of the creature. When the man is a
cordial and an earnest man by nature, and withal is perfectly fresh and
genuine, it may be doubted whether he is ever seen to greater advantage
than at such a time. So Rosa would have naturally thought (even if she
hadn’t been conducted over the ship with all the homage due to the
First Lady of the Admiralty, or First Fairy of the Sea), that it was
charming to see and hear Mr. Tartar half laughing at, and half
rejoicing in, his various contrivances. So Rosa would have naturally
thought, anyhow, that the sunburnt sailor showed to great advantage
when, the inspection finished, he delicately withdrew out of his
admiral’s cabin, beseeching her to consider herself its Queen, and
waving her free of his flower-garden with the hand that had had Mr.
Crisparkle’s life in it.

“Helena! Helena Landless! Are you there?”

“Who speaks to me? Not Rosa?” Then a second handsome face appearing.

“Yes, my darling!”

“Why, how did you come here, dearest?”

“I—I don’t quite know,” said Rosa with a blush; “unless I am dreaming!”

Why with a blush? For their two faces were alone with the other
flowers. Are blushes among the fruits of the country of the magic
bean-stalk?

“_I_ am not dreaming,” said Helena, smiling. “I should take more for
granted if I were. How do we come together—or so near together—so very
unexpectedly?”

Unexpectedly indeed, among the dingy gables and chimneypots of P. J.
T.’s connection, and the flowers that had sprung from the salt sea. But
Rosa, waking, told in a hurry how they came to be together, and all the
why and wherefore of that matter.

“And Mr. Crisparkle is here,” said Rosa, in rapid conclusion; “and,
could you believe it? long ago he saved his life!”

“I could believe any such thing of Mr. Crisparkle,” returned Helena,
with a mantling face.

(More blushes in the bean-stalk country!)

“Yes, but it wasn’t Crisparkle,” said Rosa, quickly putting in the
correction.

“I don’t understand, love.”

“It was very nice of Mr. Crisparkle to be saved,” said Rosa, “and he
couldn’t have shown his high opinion of Mr. Tartar more expressively.
But it was Mr. Tartar who saved him.”

Helena’s dark eyes looked very earnestly at the bright face among the
leaves, and she asked, in a slower and more thoughtful tone:

“Is Mr. Tartar with you now, dear?”

“No; because he has given up his rooms to me—to us, I mean. It is such
a beautiful place!”

“Is it?”

“It is like the inside of the most exquisite ship that ever sailed. It
is like—it is like—”

“Like a dream?” suggested Helena.

Rosa answered with a little nod, and smelled the flowers.

Helena resumed, after a short pause of silence, during which she seemed
(or it was Rosa’s fancy) to compassionate somebody: “My poor Neville is
reading in his own room, the sun being so very bright on this side just
now. I think he had better not know that you are so near.”

“O, I think so too!” cried Rosa very readily.

“I suppose,” pursued Helena, doubtfully, “that he must know by-and-by
all you have told me; but I am not sure. Ask Mr. Crisparkle’s advice,
my darling. Ask him whether I may tell Neville as much or as little of
what you have told me as I think best.”

Rosa subsided into her state-cabin, and propounded the question. The
Minor Canon was for the free exercise of Helena’s judgment.

“I thank him very much,” said Helena, when Rosa emerged again with her
report. “Ask him whether it would be best to wait until any more
maligning and pursuing of Neville on the part of this wretch shall
disclose itself, or to try to anticipate it: I mean, so far as to find
out whether any such goes on darkly about us?”

The Minor Canon found this point so difficult to give a confident
opinion on, that, after two or three attempts and failures, he
suggested a reference to Mr. Grewgious. Helena acquiescing, he betook
himself (with a most unsuccessful assumption of lounging indifference)
across the quadrangle to P. J. T.’s, and stated it. Mr. Grewgious held
decidedly to the general principle, that if you could steal a march
upon a brigand or a wild beast, you had better do it; and he also held
decidedly to the special case, that John Jasper was a brigand and a
wild beast in combination.

Thus advised, Mr. Crisparkle came back again and reported to Rosa, who
in her turn reported to Helena. She now steadily pursuing her train of
thought at her window, considered thereupon.

“We may count on Mr. Tartar’s readiness to help us, Rosa?” she
inquired.

O yes! Rosa shyly thought so. O yes, Rosa shyly believed she could
almost answer for it. But should she ask Mr. Crisparkle? “I think your
authority on the point as good as his, my dear,” said Helena, sedately,
“and you needn’t disappear again for that.” Odd of Helena!

“You see, Neville,” Helena pursued after more reflection, “knows no one
else here: he has not so much as exchanged a word with any one else
here. If Mr. Tartar would call to see him openly and often; if he would
spare a minute for the purpose, frequently; if he would even do so,
almost daily; something might come of it.”

“Something might come of it, dear?” repeated Rosa, surveying her
friend’s beauty with a highly perplexed face. “Something might?”

“If Neville’s movements are really watched, and if the purpose really
is to isolate him from all friends and acquaintance and wear his daily
life out grain by grain (which would seem to be the threat to you),
does it not appear likely,” said Helena, “that his enemy would in some
way communicate with Mr. Tartar to warn him off from Neville? In which
case, we might not only know the fact, but might know from Mr. Tartar
what the terms of the communication were.”

“I see!” cried Rosa. And immediately darted into her state-cabin again.

Presently her pretty face reappeared, with a greatly heightened colour,
and she said that she had told Mr. Crisparkle, and that Mr. Crisparkle
had fetched in Mr. Tartar, and that Mr. Tartar—“who is waiting now, in
case you want him,” added Rosa, with a half look back, and in not a
little confusion between the inside of the state-cabin and out—had
declared his readiness to act as she had suggested, and to enter on his
task that very day.

“I thank him from my heart,” said Helena. “Pray tell him so.”

Again not a little confused between the Flower-garden and the Cabin,
Rosa dipped in with her message, and dipped out again with more
assurances from Mr. Tartar, and stood wavering in a divided state
between Helena and him, which proved that confusion is not always
necessarily awkward, but may sometimes present a very pleasant
appearance.

“And now, darling,” said Helena, “we will be mindful of the caution
that has restricted us to this interview for the present, and will
part. I hear Neville moving too. Are you going back?”

“To Miss Twinkleton’s?” asked Rosa.

“Yes.”

“O, I could never go there any more. I couldn’t indeed, after that
dreadful interview!” said Rosa.

“Then where _are_ you going, pretty one?”

“Now I come to think of it, I don’t know,” said Rosa. “I have settled
nothing at all yet, but my guardian will take care of me. Don’t be
uneasy, dear. I shall be sure to be somewhere.”

(It did seem likely.)

“And I shall hear of my Rosebud from Mr. Tartar?” inquired Helena.

“Yes, I suppose so; from—” Rosa looked back again in a flutter, instead
of supplying the name. “But tell me one thing before we part, dearest
Helena. Tell me—that you are sure, sure, sure, I couldn’t help it.”

“Help it, love?”

“Help making him malicious and revengeful. I couldn’t hold any terms
with him, could I?”

“You know how I love you, darling,” answered Helena, with indignation;
“but I would sooner see you dead at his wicked feet.”

“That’s a great comfort to me! And you will tell your poor brother so,
won’t you? And you will give him my remembrance and my sympathy? And
you will ask him not to hate me?”

With a mournful shake of the head, as if that would be quite a
superfluous entreaty, Helena lovingly kissed her two hands to her
friend, and her friend’s two hands were kissed to her; and then she saw
a third hand (a brown one) appear among the flowers and leaves, and
help her friend out of sight.

The refection that Mr. Tartar produced in the Admiral’s Cabin by merely
touching the spring knob of a locker and the handle of a drawer, was a
dazzling enchanted repast. Wonderful macaroons, glittering liqueurs,
magically-preserved tropical spices, and jellies of celestial tropical
fruits, displayed themselves profusely at an instant’s notice. But Mr.
Tartar could not make time stand still; and time, with his hard-hearted
fleetness, strode on so fast, that Rosa was obliged to come down from
the bean-stalk country to earth and her guardian’s chambers.

“And now, my dear,” said Mr. Grewgious, “what is to be done next? To
put the same thought in another form; what is to be done with you?”

Rosa could only look apologetically sensible of being very much in her
own way and in everybody else’s. Some passing idea of living,
fireproof, up a good many stairs in Furnival’s Inn for the rest of her
life, was the only thing in the nature of a plan that occurred to her.

“It has come into my thoughts,” said Mr. Grewgious, “that as the
respected lady, Miss Twinkleton, occasionally repairs to London in the
recess, with the view of extending her connection, and being available
for interviews with metropolitan parents, if any—whether, until we have
time in which to turn ourselves round, we might invite Miss Twinkleton
to come and stay with you for a month?”

“Stay where, sir?”

“Whether,” explained Mr. Grewgious, “we might take a furnished lodging
in town for a month, and invite Miss Twinkleton to assume the charge of
you in it for that period?”

“And afterwards?” hinted Rosa.

“And afterwards,” said Mr. Grewgious, “we should be no worse off than
we are now.”

“I think that might smooth the way,” assented Rosa.

“Then let us,” said Mr. Grewgious, rising, “go and look for a furnished
lodging. Nothing could be more acceptable to me than the sweet presence
of last evening, for all the remaining evenings of my existence; but
these are not fit surroundings for a young lady. Let us set out in
quest of adventures, and look for a furnished lodging. In the meantime,
Mr. Crisparkle here, about to return home immediately, will no doubt
kindly see Miss Twinkleton, and invite that lady to co-operate in our
plan.”

Mr. Crisparkle, willingly accepting the commission, took his departure;
Mr. Grewgious and his ward set forth on their expedition.

As Mr. Grewgious’s idea of looking at a furnished lodging was to get on
the opposite side of the street to a house with a suitable bill in the
window, and stare at it; and then work his way tortuously to the back
of the house, and stare at that; and then not go in, but make similar
trials of another house, with the same result; their progress was but
slow. At length he bethought himself of a widowed cousin, divers times
removed, of Mr. Bazzard’s, who had once solicited his influence in the
lodger world, and who lived in Southampton Street, Bloomsbury Square.
This lady’s name, stated in uncompromising capitals of considerable
size on a brass door-plate, and yet not lucidly as to sex or condition,
was BILLICKIN.

Personal faintness, and an overpowering personal candour, were the
distinguishing features of Mrs. Billickin’s organisation. She came
languishing out of her own exclusive back parlour, with the air of
having been expressly brought-to for the purpose, from an accumulation
of several swoons.

“I hope I see you well, sir,” said Mrs. Billickin, recognising her
visitor with a bend.

“Thank you, quite well. And you, ma’am?” returned Mr. Grewgious.

“I am as well,” said Mrs. Billickin, becoming aspirational with excess
of faintness, “as I hever ham.”

“My ward and an elderly lady,” said Mr. Grewgious, “wish to find a
genteel lodging for a month or so. Have you any apartments available,
ma’am?”

“Mr. Grewgious,” returned Mrs. Billickin, “I will not deceive you; far
from it. I _have_ apartments available.”

This with the air of adding: “Convey me to the stake, if you will; but
while I live, I will be candid.”

“And now, what apartments, ma’am?” asked Mr. Grewgious, cosily. To tame
a certain severity apparent on the part of Mrs. Billickin.

“There is this sitting-room—which, call it what you will, it is the
front parlour, Miss,” said Mrs. Billickin, impressing Rosa into the
conversation: “the back parlour being what I cling to and never part
with; and there is two bedrooms at the top of the ’ouse with gas laid
on. I do not tell you that your bedroom floors is firm, for firm they
are not. The gas-fitter himself allowed, that to make a firm job, he
must go right under your jistes, and it were not worth the outlay as a
yearly tenant so to do. The piping is carried above your jistes, and it
is best that it should be made known to you.”

Mr. Grewgious and Rosa exchanged looks of some dismay, though they had
not the least idea what latent horrors this carriage of the piping
might involve. Mrs. Billickin put her hand to her heart, as having
eased it of a load.

“Well! The roof is all right, no doubt,” said Mr. Grewgious, plucking
up a little.

“Mr. Grewgious,” returned Mrs. Billickin, “if I was to tell you, sir,
that to have nothink above you is to have a floor above you, I should
put a deception upon you which I will not do. No, sir. Your slates WILL
rattle loose at that elewation in windy weather, do your utmost, best
or worst! I defy you, sir, be you what you may, to keep your slates
tight, try how you can.” Here Mrs. Billickin, having been warm with Mr.
Grewgious, cooled a little, not to abuse the moral power she held over
him. “Consequent,” proceeded Mrs. Billickin, more mildly, but still
firmly in her incorruptible candour: “consequent it would be worse than
of no use for me to trapse and travel up to the top of the ’ouse with
you, and for you to say, ‘Mrs. Billickin, what stain do I notice in the
ceiling, for a stain I do consider it?’ and for me to answer, ‘I do not
understand you, sir.’ No, sir, I will not be so underhand. I _do_
understand you before you pint it out. It is the wet, sir. It do come
in, and it do not come in. You may lay dry there half your lifetime;
but the time will come, and it is best that you should know it, when a
dripping sop would be no name for you.”

Mr. Grewgious looked much disgraced by being prefigured in this pickle.

“Have you any other apartments, ma’am?” he asked.

“Mr. Grewgious,” returned Mrs. Billickin, with much solemnity, “I have.
You ask me have I, and my open and my honest answer air, I have. The
first and second floors is wacant, and sweet rooms.”

“Come, come! There’s nothing against _them_,” said Mr. Grewgious,
comforting himself.

“Mr. Grewgious,” replied Mrs. Billickin, “pardon me, there is the
stairs. Unless your mind is prepared for the stairs, it will lead to
inevitable disappointment. You cannot, Miss,” said Mrs. Billickin,
addressing Rosa reproachfully, “place a first floor, and far less a
second, on the level footing of a parlour. No, you cannot do it, Miss,
it is beyond your power, and wherefore try?”

Mrs. Billickin put it very feelingly, as if Rosa had shown a headstrong
determination to hold the untenable position.

“Can we see these rooms, ma’am?” inquired her guardian.

“Mr. Grewgious,” returned Mrs. Billickin, “you can. I will not disguise
it from you, sir; you can.”

Mrs. Billickin then sent into her back parlour for her shawl (it being
a state fiction, dating from immemorial antiquity, that she could never
go anywhere without being wrapped up), and having been enrolled by her
attendant, led the way. She made various genteel pauses on the stairs
for breath, and clutched at her heart in the drawing-room as if it had
very nearly got loose, and she had caught it in the act of taking wing.

“And the second floor?” said Mr. Grewgious, on finding the first
satisfactory.

“Mr. Grewgious,” replied Mrs. Billickin, turning upon him with
ceremony, as if the time had now come when a distinct understanding on
a difficult point must be arrived at, and a solemn confidence
established, “the second floor is over this.”

“Can we see that too, ma’am?”

“Yes, sir,” returned Mrs. Billickin, “it is open as the day.”

That also proving satisfactory, Mr. Grewgious retired into a window
with Rosa for a few words of consultation, and then asking for pen and
ink, sketched out a line or two of agreement. In the meantime Mrs.
Billickin took a seat, and delivered a kind of Index to, or Abstract
of, the general question.

“Five-and-forty shillings per week by the month certain at the time of
year,” said Mrs. Billickin, “is only reasonable to both parties. It is
not Bond Street nor yet St. James’s Palace; but it is not pretended
that it is. Neither is it attempted to be denied—for why should
it?—that the Arching leads to a mews. Mewses must exist. Respecting
attendance; two is kep’, at liberal wages. Words _has_ arisen as to
tradesmen, but dirty shoes on fresh hearth-stoning was attributable,
and no wish for a commission on your orders. Coals is either _by_ the
fire, or _per_ the scuttle.” She emphasised the prepositions as marking
a subtle but immense difference. “Dogs is not viewed with favour.
Besides litter, they gets stole, and sharing suspicions is apt to creep
in, and unpleasantness takes place.”

By this time Mr. Grewgious had his agreement-lines, and his
earnest-money, ready. “I have signed it for the ladies, ma’am,” he
said, “and you’ll have the goodness to sign it for yourself, Christian
and Surname, there, if you please.”

“Mr. Grewgious,” said Mrs. Billickin in a new burst of candour, “no,
sir! You must excuse the Christian name.”

Mr. Grewgious stared at her.

“The door-plate is used as a protection,” said Mrs. Billickin, “and
acts as such, and go from it I will not.”

Mr. Grewgious stared at Rosa.

“No, Mr. Grewgious, you must excuse me. So long as this ’ouse is known
indefinite as Billickin’s, and so long as it is a doubt with the
riff-raff where Billickin may be hidin’, near the street-door or down
the airy, and what his weight and size, so long I feel safe. But commit
myself to a solitary female statement, no, Miss! Nor would you for a
moment wish,” said Mrs. Billickin, with a strong sense of injury, “to
take that advantage of your sex, if you were not brought to it by
inconsiderate example.”

Rosa reddening as if she had made some most disgraceful attempt to
overreach the good lady, besought Mr. Grewgious to rest content with
any signature. And accordingly, in a baronial way, the sign-manual
BILLICKIN got appended to the document.

Details were then settled for taking possession on the next day but
one, when Miss Twinkleton might be reasonably expected; and Rosa went
back to Furnival’s Inn on her guardian’s arm.

Behold Mr. Tartar walking up and down Furnival’s Inn, checking himself
when he saw them coming, and advancing towards them!

“It occurred to me,” hinted Mr. Tartar, “that we might go up the river,
the weather being so delicious and the tide serving. I have a boat of
my own at the Temple Stairs.”

“I have not been up the river for this many a day,” said Mr. Grewgious,
tempted.

“I was never up the river,” added Rosa.

Within half an hour they were setting this matter right by going up the
river. The tide was running with them, the afternoon was charming. Mr.
Tartar’s boat was perfect. Mr. Tartar and Lobley (Mr. Tartar’s man)
pulled a pair of oars. Mr. Tartar had a yacht, it seemed, lying
somewhere down by Greenhithe; and Mr. Tartar’s man had charge of this
yacht, and was detached upon his present service. He was a
jolly-favoured man, with tawny hair and whiskers, and a big red face.
He was the dead image of the sun in old woodcuts, his hair and whiskers
answering for rays all around him. Resplendent in the bow of the boat,
he was a shining sight, with a man-of-war’s man’s shirt on—or off,
according to opinion—and his arms and breast tattooed all sorts of
patterns. Lobley seemed to take it easily, and so did Mr. Tartar; yet
their oars bent as they pulled, and the boat bounded under them. Mr.
Tartar talked as if he were doing nothing, to Rosa who was really doing
nothing, and to Mr. Grewgious who was doing this much that he steered
all wrong; but what did that matter, when a turn of Mr. Tartar’s
skilful wrist, or a mere grin of Mr. Lobley’s over the bow, put all to
rights! The tide bore them on in the gayest and most sparkling manner,
until they stopped to dine in some ever-lastingly-green garden, needing
no matter-of-fact identification here; and then the tide obligingly
turned—being devoted to that party alone for that day; and as they
floated idly among some osier-beds, Rosa tried what she could do in the
rowing way, and came off splendidly, being much assisted; and Mr.
Grewgious tried what he could do, and came off on his back, doubled up
with an oar under his chin, being not assisted at all. Then there was
an interval of rest under boughs (such rest!) what time Mr. Lobley
mopped, and, arranging cushions, stretchers, and the like, danced the
tight-rope the whole length of the boat like a man to whom shoes were a
superstition and stockings slavery; and then came the sweet return
among delicious odours of limes in bloom, and musical ripplings; and,
all too soon, the great black city cast its shadow on the waters, and
its dark bridges spanned them as death spans life, and the
everlastingly-green garden seemed to be left for everlasting,
unregainable and far away.

[Illustration: Up the river]


“Cannot people get through life without gritty stages, I wonder?” Rosa
thought next day, when the town was very gritty again, and everything
had a strange and an uncomfortable appearance of seeming to wait for
something that wouldn’t come. NO. She began to think, that, now the
Cloisterham school-days had glided past and gone, the gritty stages
would begin to set in at intervals and make themselves wearily known!

Yet what did Rosa expect? Did she expect Miss Twinkleton? Miss
Twinkleton duly came. Forth from her back parlour issued the Billickin
to receive Miss Twinkleton, and War was in the Billickin’s eye from
that fell moment.

Miss Twinkleton brought a quantity of luggage with her, having all
Rosa’s as well as her own. The Billickin took it ill that Miss
Twinkleton’s mind, being sorely disturbed by this luggage, failed to
take in her personal identity with that clearness of perception which
was due to its demands. Stateliness mounted her gloomy throne upon the
Billickin’s brow in consequence. And when Miss Twinkleton, in agitation
taking stock of her trunks and packages, of which she had seventeen,
particularly counted in the Billickin herself as number eleven, the B.
found it necessary to repudiate.

“Things cannot too soon be put upon the footing,” said she, with a
candour so demonstrative as to be almost obtrusive, “that the person of
the ’ouse is not a box nor yet a bundle, nor a carpet-bag. No, I am
’ily obleeged to you, Miss Twinkleton, nor yet a beggar.”

This last disclaimer had reference to Miss Twinkleton’s distractedly
pressing two-and-sixpence on her, instead of the cabman.

Thus cast off, Miss Twinkleton wildly inquired, “which gentleman” was
to be paid? There being two gentlemen in that position (Miss Twinkleton
having arrived with two cabs), each gentleman on being paid held forth
his two-and-sixpence on the flat of his open hand, and, with a
speechless stare and a dropped jaw, displayed his wrong to heaven and
earth. Terrified by this alarming spectacle, Miss Twinkleton placed
another shilling in each hand; at the same time appealing to the law in
flurried accents, and recounting her luggage this time with the two
gentlemen in, who caused the total to come out complicated. Meanwhile
the two gentlemen, each looking very hard at the last shilling
grumblingly, as if it might become eighteen-pence if he kept his eyes
on it, descended the doorsteps, ascended their carriages, and drove
away, leaving Miss Twinkleton on a bonnet-box in tears.

The Billickin beheld this manifestation of weakness without sympathy,
and gave directions for “a young man to be got in” to wrestle with the
luggage. When that gladiator had disappeared from the arena, peace
ensued, and the new lodgers dined.

But the Billickin had somehow come to the knowledge that Miss
Twinkleton kept a school. The leap from that knowledge to the inference
that Miss Twinkleton set herself to teach _her_ something, was easy.
“But you don’t do it,” soliloquised the Billickin; “I am not your
pupil, whatever she,” meaning Rosa, “may be, poor thing!”

Miss Twinkleton, on the other hand, having changed her dress and
recovered her spirits, was animated by a bland desire to improve the
occasion in all ways, and to be as serene a model as possible. In a
happy compromise between her two states of existence, she had already
become, with her workbasket before her, the equably vivacious companion
with a slight judicious flavouring of information, when the Billickin
announced herself.

“I will not hide from you, ladies,” said the B., enveloped in the shawl
of state, “for it is not my character to hide neither my motives nor my
actions, that I take the liberty to look in upon you to express a ’ope
that your dinner was to your liking. Though not Professed but Plain,
still her wages should be a sufficient object to her to stimilate to
soar above mere roast and biled.”

“We dined very well indeed,” said Rosa, “thank you.”

“Accustomed,” said Miss Twinkleton with a gracious air, which to the
jealous ears of the Billickin seemed to add “my good woman”—“accustomed
to a liberal and nutritious, yet plain and salutary diet, we have found
no reason to bemoan our absence from the ancient city, and the
methodical household, in which the quiet routine of our lot has been
hitherto cast.”

“I did think it well to mention to my cook,” observed the Billickin
with a gush of candour, “which I ’ope you will agree with, Miss
Twinkleton, was a right precaution, that the young lady being used to
what we should consider here but poor diet, had better be brought
forward by degrees. For, a rush from scanty feeding to generous
feeding, and from what you may call messing to what you may call
method, do require a power of constitution which is not often found in
youth, particular when undermined by boarding-school!”

It will be seen that the Billickin now openly pitted herself against
Miss Twinkleton, as one whom she had fully ascertained to be her
natural enemy.

“Your remarks,” returned Miss Twinkleton, from a remote moral eminence,
“are well meant, I have no doubt; but you will permit me to observe
that they develop a mistaken view of the subject, which can only be
imputed to your extreme want of accurate information.”

“My informiation,” retorted the Billickin, throwing in an extra
syllable for the sake of emphasis at once polite and powerful—“my
informiation, Miss Twinkleton, were my own experience, which I believe
is usually considered to be good guidance. But whether so or not, I was
put in youth to a very genteel boarding-school, the mistress being no
less a lady than yourself, of about your own age or it may be some
years younger, and a poorness of blood flowed from the table which has
run through my life.”

“Very likely,” said Miss Twinkleton, still from her distant eminence;
“and very much to be deplored.—Rosa, my dear, how are you getting on
with your work?”

“Miss Twinkleton,” resumed the Billickin, in a courtly manner, “before
retiring on the ’int, as a lady should, I wish to ask of yourself, as a
lady, whether I am to consider that my words is doubted?”

“I am not aware on what ground you cherish such a supposition,” began
Miss Twinkleton, when the Billickin neatly stopped her.

“Do not, if you please, put suppositions betwixt my lips where none
such have been imparted by myself. Your flow of words is great, Miss
Twinkleton, and no doubt is expected from you by your pupils, and no
doubt is considered worth the money. _No_ doubt, I am sure. But not
paying for flows of words, and not asking to be favoured with them
here, I wish to repeat my question.”

“If you refer to the poverty of your circulation,” began Miss
Twinkleton, when again the Billickin neatly stopped her.

“I have used no such expressions.”

“If you refer, then, to the poorness of your blood—”

“Brought upon me,” stipulated the Billickin, expressly, “at a
boarding-school—”

“Then,” resumed Miss Twinkleton, “all I can say is, that I am bound to
believe, on your asseveration, that it is very poor indeed. I cannot
forbear adding, that if that unfortunate circumstance influences your
conversation, it is much to be lamented, and it is eminently desirable
that your blood were richer.—Rosa, my dear, how are you getting on with
your work?”

“Hem! Before retiring, Miss,” proclaimed the Billickin to Rosa, loftily
cancelling Miss Twinkleton, “I should wish it to be understood between
yourself and me that my transactions in future is with you alone. I
know no elderly lady here, Miss, none older than yourself.”

“A highly desirable arrangement, Rosa my dear,” observed Miss
Twinkleton.

“It is not, Miss,” said the Billickin, with a sarcastic smile, “that I
possess the Mill I have heard of, in which old single ladies could be
ground up young (what a gift it would be to some of us), but that I
limit myself to you totally.”

“When I have any desire to communicate a request to the person of the
house, Rosa my dear,” observed Miss Twinkleton with majestic
cheerfulness, “I will make it known to you, and you will kindly
undertake, I am sure, that it is conveyed to the proper quarter.”

“Good-evening, Miss,” said the Billickin, at once affectionately and
distantly. “Being alone in my eyes, I wish you good-evening with best
wishes, and do not find myself drove, I am truly ’appy to say, into
expressing my contempt for an indiwidual, unfortunately for yourself,
belonging to you.”

The Billickin gracefully withdrew with this parting speech, and from
that time Rosa occupied the restless position of shuttlecock between
these two battledores. Nothing could be done without a smart match
being played out. Thus, on the daily-arising question of dinner, Miss
Twinkleton would say, the three being present together:

“Perhaps, my love, you will consult with the person of the house,
whether she can procure us a lamb’s fry; or, failing that, a roast
fowl.”

On which the Billickin would retort (Rosa not having spoken a word),
“If you was better accustomed to butcher’s meat, Miss, you would not
entertain the idea of a lamb’s fry. Firstly, because lambs has long
been sheep, and secondly, because there is such things as killing-days,
and there is not. As to roast fowls, Miss, why you must be quite
surfeited with roast fowls, letting alone your buying, when you market
for yourself, the agedest of poultry with the scaliest of legs, quite
as if you was accustomed to picking ’em out for cheapness. Try a little
inwention, Miss. Use yourself to ’ousekeeping a bit. Come now, think of
somethink else.”

To this encouragement, offered with the indulgent toleration of a wise
and liberal expert, Miss Twinkleton would rejoin, reddening:

“Or, my dear, you might propose to the person of the house a duck.”

“Well, Miss!” the Billickin would exclaim (still no word being spoken
by Rosa), “you do surprise me when you speak of ducks! Not to mention
that they’re getting out of season and very dear, it really strikes to
my heart to see you have a duck; for the breast, which is the only
delicate cuts in a duck, always goes in a direction which I cannot
imagine where, and your own plate comes down so miserably
skin-and-bony! Try again, Miss. Think more of yourself, and less of
others. A dish of sweetbreads now, or a bit of mutton. Something at
which you can get your equal chance.”

Occasionally the game would wax very brisk indeed, and would be kept up
with a smartness rendering such an encounter as this quite tame. But
the Billickin almost invariably made by far the higher score; and would
come in with side hits of the most unexpected and extraordinary
description, when she seemed without a chance.

All this did not improve the gritty state of things in London, or the
air that London had acquired in Rosa’s eyes of waiting for something
that never came. Tired of working, and conversing with Miss Twinkleton,
she suggested working and reading: to which Miss Twinkleton readily
assented, as an admirable reader, of tried powers. But Rosa soon made
the discovery that Miss Twinkleton didn’t read fairly. She cut the
love-scenes, interpolated passages in praise of female celibacy, and
was guilty of other glaring pious frauds. As an instance in point, take
the glowing passage: “Ever dearest and best adored,—said Edward,
clasping the dear head to his breast, and drawing the silken hair
through his caressing fingers, from which he suffered it to fall like
golden rain,—ever dearest and best adored, let us fly from the
unsympathetic world and the sterile coldness of the stony-hearted, to
the rich warm Paradise of Trust and Love.” Miss Twinkleton’s fraudulent
version tamely ran thus: “Ever engaged to me with the consent of our
parents on both sides, and the approbation of the silver-haired rector
of the district,—said Edward, respectfully raising to his lips the
taper fingers so skilful in embroidery, tambour, crochet, and other
truly feminine arts,—let me call on thy papa ere to-morrow’s dawn has
sunk into the west, and propose a suburban establishment, lowly it may
be, but within our means, where he will be always welcome as an evening
guest, and where every arrangement shall invest economy, and constant
interchange of scholastic acquirements with the attributes of the
ministering angel to domestic bliss.”

As the days crept on and nothing happened, the neighbours began to say
that the pretty girl at Billickin’s, who looked so wistfully and so
much out of the gritty windows of the drawing-room, seemed to be losing
her spirits. The pretty girl might have lost them but for the accident
of lighting on some books of voyages and sea-adventure. As a
compensation against their romance, Miss Twinkleton, reading aloud,
made the most of all the latitudes and longitudes, bearings, winds,
currents, offsets, and other statistics (which she felt to be none the
less improving because they expressed nothing whatever to her); while
Rosa, listening intently, made the most of what was nearest to her
heart. So they both did better than before.




CHAPTER XXIII.
THE DAWN AGAIN


Although Mr. Crisparkle and John Jasper met daily under the Cathedral
roof, nothing at any time passed between them having reference to Edwin
Drood, after the time, more than half a year gone by, when Jasper
mutely showed the Minor Canon the conclusion and the resolution entered
in his Diary. It is not likely that they ever met, though so often,
without the thoughts of each reverting to the subject. It is not likely
that they ever met, though so often, without a sensation on the part of
each that the other was a perplexing secret to him. Jasper as the
denouncer and pursuer of Neville Landless, and Mr. Crisparkle as his
consistent advocate and protector, must at least have stood
sufficiently in opposition to have speculated with keen interest on the
steadiness and next direction of the other’s designs. But neither ever
broached the theme.

False pretence not being in the Minor Canon’s nature, he doubtless
displayed openly that he would at any time have revived the subject,
and even desired to discuss it. The determined reticence of Jasper,
however, was not to be so approached. Impassive, moody, solitary,
resolute, so concentrated on one idea, and on its attendant fixed
purpose, that he would share it with no fellow-creature, he lived apart
from human life. Constantly exercising an Art which brought him into
mechanical harmony with others, and which could not have been pursued
unless he and they had been in the nicest mechanical relations and
unison, it is curious to consider that the spirit of the man was in
moral accordance or interchange with nothing around him. This indeed he
had confided to his lost nephew, before the occasion for his present
inflexibility arose.

That he must know of Rosa’s abrupt departure, and that he must divine
its cause, was not to be doubted. Did he suppose that he had terrified
her into silence? or did he suppose that she had imparted to any one—to
Mr. Crisparkle himself, for instance—the particulars of his last
interview with her? Mr. Crisparkle could not determine this in his
mind. He could not but admit, however, as a just man, that it was not,
of itself, a crime to fall in love with Rosa, any more than it was a
crime to offer to set love above revenge.

The dreadful suspicion of Jasper, which Rosa was so shocked to have
received into her imagination, appeared to have no harbour in Mr.
Crisparkle’s. If it ever haunted Helena’s thoughts or Neville’s,
neither gave it one spoken word of utterance. Mr. Grewgious took no
pains to conceal his implacable dislike of Jasper, yet he never
referred it, however distantly, to such a source. But he was a reticent
as well as an eccentric man; and he made no mention of a certain
evening when he warmed his hands at the gatehouse fire, and looked
steadily down upon a certain heap of torn and miry clothes upon the
floor.

Drowsy Cloisterham, whenever it awoke to a passing reconsideration of a
story above six months old and dismissed by the bench of magistrates,
was pretty equally divided in opinion whether John Jasper’s beloved
nephew had been killed by his treacherously passionate rival, or in an
open struggle; or had, for his own purposes, spirited himself away. It
then lifted up its head, to notice that the bereaved Jasper was still
ever devoted to discovery and revenge; and then dozed off again. This
was the condition of matters, all round, at the period to which the
present history has now attained.

The Cathedral doors have closed for the night; and the Choir-master, on
a short leave of absence for two or three services, sets his face
towards London. He travels thither by the means by which Rosa
travelled, and arrives, as Rosa arrived, on a hot, dusty evening.

His travelling baggage is easily carried in his hand, and he repairs
with it on foot, to a hybrid hotel in a little square behind Aldersgate
Street, near the General Post Office. It is hotel, boarding-house, or
lodging-house, at its visitor’s option. It announces itself, in the new
Railway Advertisers, as a novel enterprise, timidly beginning to spring
up. It bashfully, almost apologetically, gives the traveller to
understand that it does not expect him, on the good old constitutional
hotel plan, to order a pint of sweet blacking for his drinking, and
throw it away; but insinuates that he may have his boots blacked
instead of his stomach, and maybe also have bed, breakfast, attendance,
and a porter up all night, for a certain fixed charge. From these and
similar premises, many true Britons in the lowest spirits deduce that
the times are levelling times, except in the article of high roads, of
which there will shortly be not one in England.

He eats without appetite, and soon goes forth again. Eastward and still
eastward through the stale streets he takes his way, until he reaches
his destination: a miserable court, specially miserable among many
such.

He ascends a broken staircase, opens a door, looks into a dark stifling
room, and says: “Are you alone here?”

“Alone, deary; worse luck for me, and better for you,” replies a
croaking voice. “Come in, come in, whoever you be: I can’t see you till
I light a match, yet I seem to know the sound of your speaking. I’m
acquainted with you, ain’t I?”

“Light your match, and try.”

“So I will, deary, so I will; but my hand that shakes, as I can’t lay
it on a match all in a moment. And I cough so, that, put my matches
where I may, I never find ’em there. They jump and start, as I cough
and cough, like live things. Are you off a voyage, deary?”

“No.”

“Not seafaring?”

“No.”

“Well, there’s land customers, and there’s water customers. I’m a
mother to both. Different from Jack Chinaman t’other side the court. He
ain’t a father to neither. It ain’t in him. And he ain’t got the true
secret of mixing, though he charges as much as me that has, and more if
he can get it. Here’s a match, and now where’s the candle? If my cough
takes me, I shall cough out twenty matches afore I gets a light.”

But she finds the candle, and lights it, before the cough comes on. It
seizes her in the moment of success, and she sits down rocking herself
to and fro, and gasping at intervals: “O, my lungs is awful bad! my
lungs is wore away to cabbage-nets!” until the fit is over. During its
continuance she has had no power of sight, or any other power not
absorbed in the struggle; but as it leaves her, she begins to strain
her eyes, and as soon as she is able to articulate, she cries, staring:

“Why, it’s you!”

“Are you so surprised to see me?”

“I thought I never should have seen you again, deary. I thought you was
dead, and gone to Heaven.”

“Why?”

“I didn’t suppose you could have kept away, alive, so long, from the
poor old soul with the real receipt for mixing it. And you are in
mourning too! Why didn’t you come and have a pipe or two of comfort?
Did they leave you money, perhaps, and so you didn’t want comfort?”

“No.”

“Who was they as died, deary?”

“A relative.”

“Died of what, lovey?”

“Probably, Death.”

“We are short to-night!” cries the woman, with a propitiatory laugh.
“Short and snappish we are! But we’re out of sorts for want of a smoke.
We’ve got the all-overs, haven’t us, deary? But this is the place to
cure ’em in; this is the place where the all-overs is smoked off.”

“You may make ready, then,” replies the visitor, “as soon as you like.”

He divests himself of his shoes, loosens his cravat, and lies across
the foot of the squalid bed, with his head resting on his left hand.

“Now you begin to look like yourself,” says the woman approvingly. “Now
I begin to know my old customer indeed! Been trying to mix for yourself
this long time, poppet?”

“I have been taking it now and then in my own way.”

“Never take it your own way. It ain’t good for trade, and it ain’t good
for you. Where’s my ink-bottle, and where’s my thimble, and where’s my
little spoon? He’s going to take it in a artful form now, my deary
dear!”

Entering on her process, and beginning to bubble and blow at the faint
spark enclosed in the hollow of her hands, she speaks from time to
time, in a tone of snuffling satisfaction, without leaving off. When he
speaks, he does so without looking at her, and as if his thoughts were
already roaming away by anticipation.

“I’ve got a pretty many smokes ready for you, first and last, haven’t
I, chuckey?”

“A good many.”

“When you first come, you was quite new to it; warn’t ye?”

“Yes, I was easily disposed of, then.”

“But you got on in the world, and was able by-and-by to take your pipe
with the best of ’em, warn’t ye?”

“Ah; and the worst.”

“It’s just ready for you. What a sweet singer you was when you first
come! Used to drop your head, and sing yourself off like a bird! It’s
ready for you now, deary.”

He takes it from her with great care, and puts the mouthpiece to his
lips. She seats herself beside him, ready to refill the pipe.

After inhaling a few whiffs in silence, he doubtingly accosts her with:

“Is it as potent as it used to be?”

“What do you speak of, deary?”

“What should I speak of, but what I have in my mouth?”

“It’s just the same. Always the identical same.”

“It doesn’t taste so. And it’s slower.”

“You’ve got more used to it, you see.”

“That may be the cause, certainly. Look here.” He stops, becomes
dreamy, and seems to forget that he has invited her attention. She
bends over him, and speaks in his ear.

“I’m attending to you. Says you just now, Look here. Says I now, I’m
attending to ye. We was talking just before of your being used to it.”

“I know all that. I was only thinking. Look here. Suppose you had
something in your mind; something you were going to do.”

“Yes, deary; something I was going to do?”

“But had not quite determined to do.”

“Yes, deary.”

“Might or might not do, you understand.”

“Yes.” With the point of a needle she stirs the contents of the bowl.

“Should you do it in your fancy, when you were lying here doing this?”

She nods her head. “Over and over again.”

“Just like me! I did it over and over again. I have done it hundreds of
thousands of times in this room.”

“It’s to be hoped it was pleasant to do, deary.”

“It _was_ pleasant to do!”

He says this with a savage air, and a spring or start at her. Quite
unmoved she retouches and replenishes the contents of the bowl with her
little spatula. Seeing her intent upon the occupation, he sinks into
his former attitude.

“It was a journey, a difficult and dangerous journey. That was the
subject in my mind. A hazardous and perilous journey, over abysses
where a slip would be destruction. Look down, look down! You see what
lies at the bottom there?”

He has darted forward to say it, and to point at the ground, as though
at some imaginary object far beneath. The woman looks at him, as his
spasmodic face approaches close to hers, and not at his pointing. She
seems to know what the influence of her perfect quietude would be; if
so, she has not miscalculated it, for he subsides again.

“Well; I have told you I did it here hundreds of thousands of times.
What do I say? I did it millions and billions of times. I did it so
often, and through such vast expanses of time, that when it was really
done, it seemed not worth the doing, it was done so soon.”

“That’s the journey you have been away upon,” she quietly remarks.

He glares at her as he smokes; and then, his eyes becoming filmy,
answers: “That’s the journey.”

Silence ensues. His eyes are sometimes closed and sometimes open. The
woman sits beside him, very attentive to the pipe, which is all the
while at his lips.

“I’ll warrant,” she observes, when he has been looking fixedly at her
for some consecutive moments, with a singular appearance in his eyes of
seeming to see her a long way off, instead of so near him: “I’ll
warrant you made the journey in a many ways, when you made it so
often?”

“No, always in one way.”

“Always in the same way?”

“Ay.”

“In the way in which it was really made at last?”

“Ay.”

“And always took the same pleasure in harping on it?”

“Ay.”

For the time he appears unequal to any other reply than this lazy
monosyllabic assent. Probably to assure herself that it is not the
assent of a mere automaton, she reverses the form of her next sentence.

“Did you never get tired of it, deary, and try to call up something
else for a change?”

He struggles into a sitting posture, and retorts upon her: “What do you
mean? What did I want? What did I come for?”

She gently lays him back again, and before returning him the instrument
he has dropped, revives the fire in it with her own breath; then says
to him, coaxingly:

“Sure, sure, sure! Yes, yes, yes! Now I go along with you. You was too
quick for me. I see now. You come o’ purpose to take the journey. Why,
I might have known it, through its standing by you so.”

He answers first with a laugh, and then with a passionate setting of
his teeth: “Yes, I came on purpose. When I could not bear my life, I
came to get the relief, and I got it. It WAS one! It WAS one!” This
repetition with extraordinary vehemence, and the snarl of a wolf.

She observes him very cautiously, as though mentally feeling her way to
her next remark. It is: “There was a fellow-traveller, deary.”

“Ha, ha, ha!” He breaks into a ringing laugh, or rather yell.

“To think,” he cries, “how often fellow-traveller, and yet not know it!
To think how many times he went the journey, and never saw the road!”

The woman kneels upon the floor, with her arms crossed on the coverlet
of the bed, close by him, and her chin upon them. In this crouching
attitude she watches him. The pipe is falling from his mouth. She puts
it back, and laying her hand upon his chest, moves him slightly from
side to side. Upon that he speaks, as if she had spoken.

“Yes! I always made the journey first, before the changes of colours
and the great landscapes and glittering processions began. They
couldn’t begin till it was off my mind. I had no room till then for
anything else.”

Once more he lapses into silence. Once more she lays her hand upon his
chest, and moves him slightly to and fro, as a cat might stimulate a
half-slain mouse. Once more he speaks, as if she had spoken.

[Illustration: Sleeping it off]


“What? I told you so. When it comes to be real at last, it is so short
that it seems unreal for the first time. Hark!”

“Yes, deary. I’m listening.”

“Time and place are both at hand.”

He is on his feet, speaking in a whisper, and as if in the dark.

“Time, place, and fellow-traveller,” she suggests, adopting his tone,
and holding him softly by the arm.

“How could the time be at hand unless the fellow-traveller was? Hush!
The journey’s made. It’s over.”

“So soon?”

“That’s what I said to you. So soon. Wait a little. This is a vision. I
shall sleep it off. It has been too short and easy. I must have a
better vision than this; this is the poorest of all. No struggle, no
consciousness of peril, no entreaty—and yet I never saw _that_ before.”
With a start.

“Saw what, deary?”

“Look at it! Look what a poor, mean, miserable thing it is! _That_ must
be real. It’s over.”

He has accompanied this incoherence with some wild unmeaning gestures;
but they trail off into the progressive inaction of stupor, and he lies
a log upon the bed.

The woman, however, is still inquisitive. With a repetition of her
cat-like action she slightly stirs his body again, and listens; stirs
again, and listens; whispers to it, and listens. Finding it past all
rousing for the time, she slowly gets upon her feet, with an air of
disappointment, and flicks the face with the back of her hand in
turning from it.

But she goes no further away from it than the chair upon the hearth.
She sits in it, with an elbow on one of its arms, and her chin upon her
hand, intent upon him. “I heard ye say once,” she croaks under her
breath, “I heard ye say once, when I was lying where you’re lying, and
you were making your speculations upon me, ‘Unintelligible!’ I heard
you say so, of two more than me. But don’t ye be too sure always; don’t
be ye too sure, beauty!”

Unwinking, cat-like, and intent, she presently adds: “Not so potent as
it once was? Ah! Perhaps not at first. You may be more right there.
Practice makes perfect. I may have learned the secret how to make ye
talk, deary.”

He talks no more, whether or no. Twitching in an ugly way from time to
time, both as to his face and limbs, he lies heavy and silent. The
wretched candle burns down; the woman takes its expiring end between
her fingers, lights another at it, crams the guttering frying morsel
deep into the candlestick, and rams it home with the new candle, as if
she were loading some ill-savoured and unseemly weapon of witchcraft;
the new candle in its turn burns down; and still he lies insensible. At
length what remains of the last candle is blown out, and daylight looks
into the room.

It has not looked very long, when he sits up, chilled and shaking,
slowly recovers consciousness of where he is, and makes himself ready
to depart. The woman receives what he pays her with a grateful, “Bless
ye, bless ye, deary!” and seems, tired out, to begin making herself
ready for sleep as he leaves the room.

But seeming may be false or true. It is false in this case; for, the
moment the stairs have ceased to creak under his tread, she glides
after him, muttering emphatically: “I’ll not miss ye twice!”

There is no egress from the court but by its entrance. With a weird
peep from the doorway, she watches for his looking back. He does not
look back before disappearing, with a wavering step. She follows him,
peeps from the court, sees him still faltering on without looking back,
and holds him in view.

He repairs to the back of Aldersgate Street, where a door immediately
opens to his knocking. She crouches in another doorway, watching that
one, and easily comprehending that he puts up temporarily at that
house. Her patience is unexhausted by hours. For sustenance she can,
and does, buy bread within a hundred yards, and milk as it is carried
past her.

He comes forth again at noon, having changed his dress, but carrying
nothing in his hand, and having nothing carried for him. He is not
going back into the country, therefore, just yet. She follows him a
little way, hesitates, instantaneously turns confidently, and goes
straight into the house he has quitted.

“Is the gentleman from Cloisterham indoors?

“Just gone out.”

“Unlucky. When does the gentleman return to Cloisterham?”

“At six this evening.”

“Bless ye and thank ye. May the Lord prosper a business where a civil
question, even from a poor soul, is so civilly answered!”

“I’ll not miss ye twice!” repeats the poor soul in the street, and not
so civilly. “I lost ye last, where that omnibus you got into nigh your
journey’s end plied betwixt the station and the place. I wasn’t so much
as certain that you even went right on to the place. Now I know ye did.
My gentleman from Cloisterham, I’ll be there before ye, and bide your
coming. I’ve swore my oath that I’ll not miss ye twice!”

Accordingly, that same evening the poor soul stands in Cloisterham High
Street, looking at the many quaint gables of the Nuns’ House, and
getting through the time as she best can until nine o’clock; at which
hour she has reason to suppose that the arriving omnibus passengers may
have some interest for her. The friendly darkness, at that hour,
renders it easy for her to ascertain whether this be so or not; and it
is so, for the passenger not to be missed twice arrives among the rest.

“Now let me see what becomes of you. Go on!”

An observation addressed to the air, and yet it might be addressed to
the passenger, so compliantly does he go on along the High Street until
he comes to an arched gateway, at which he unexpectedly vanishes. The
poor soul quickens her pace; is swift, and close upon him entering
under the gateway; but only sees a postern staircase on one side of it,
and on the other side an ancient vaulted room, in which a large-headed,
gray-haired gentleman is writing, under the odd circumstances of
sitting open to the thoroughfare and eyeing all who pass, as if he were
toll-taker of the gateway: though the way is free.

“Halloa!” he cries in a low voice, seeing her brought to a stand-still:
“who are you looking for?”

“There was a gentleman passed in here this minute, sir.”

“Of course there was. What do you want with him?”

“Where do he live, deary?”

“Live? Up that staircase.”

“Bless ye! Whisper. What’s his name, deary?”

“Surname Jasper, Christian name John. Mr. John Jasper.”

“Has he a calling, good gentleman?”

“Calling? Yes. Sings in the choir.”

“In the spire?”

“Choir.”

“What’s that?”

Mr. Datchery rises from his papers, and comes to his doorstep. “Do you
know what a cathedral is?” he asks, jocosely.

The woman nods.

“What is it?”

She looks puzzled, casting about in her mind to find a definition, when
it occurs to her that it is easier to point out the substantial object
itself, massive against the dark-blue sky and the early stars.

“That’s the answer. Go in there at seven to-morrow morning, and you may
see Mr. John Jasper, and hear him too.”

“Thank ye! Thank ye!”

The burst of triumph in which she thanks him does not escape the notice
of the single buffer of an easy temper living idly on his means. He
glances at her; clasps his hands behind him, as the wont of such
buffers is; and lounges along the echoing Precincts at her side.

“Or,” he suggests, with a backward hitch of his head, “you can go up at
once to Mr. Jasper’s rooms there.”

The woman eyes him with a cunning smile, and shakes her head.

“O! you don’t want to speak to him?”

She repeats her dumb reply, and forms with her lips a soundless “No.”

“You can admire him at a distance three times a day, whenever you like.
It’s a long way to come for that, though.”

The woman looks up quickly. If Mr. Datchery thinks she is to be so
induced to declare where she comes from, he is of a much easier temper
than she is. But she acquits him of such an artful thought, as he
lounges along, like the chartered bore of the city, with his uncovered
gray hair blowing about, and his purposeless hands rattling the loose
money in the pockets of his trousers.

The chink of the money has an attraction for her greedy ears. “Wouldn’t
you help me to pay for my traveller’s lodging, dear gentleman, and to
pay my way along? I am a poor soul, I am indeed, and troubled with a
grievous cough.”

“You know the travellers’ lodging, I perceive, and are making directly
for it,” is Mr. Datchery’s bland comment, still rattling his loose
money. “Been here often, my good woman?”

“Once in all my life.”

“Ay, ay?”

They have arrived at the entrance to the Monks’ Vineyard. An
appropriate remembrance, presenting an exemplary model for imitation,
is revived in the woman’s mind by the sight of the place. She stops at
the gate, and says energetically:

“By this token, though you mayn’t believe it, That a young gentleman
gave me three-and-sixpence as I was coughing my breath away on this
very grass. I asked him for three-and-sixpence, and he gave it me.”

“Wasn’t it a little cool to name your sum?” hints Mr. Datchery, still
rattling. “Isn’t it customary to leave the amount open? Mightn’t it
have had the appearance, to the young gentleman—only the
appearance—that he was rather dictated to?”

“Look’ee here, deary,” she replies, in a confidential and persuasive
tone, “I wanted the money to lay it out on a medicine as does me good,
and as I deal in. I told the young gentleman so, and he gave it me, and
I laid it out honest to the last brass farden. I want to lay out the
same sum in the same way now; and if you’ll give it me, I’ll lay it out
honest to the last brass farden again, upon my soul!”

“What’s the medicine?”

“I’ll be honest with you beforehand, as well as after. It’s opium.”

Mr. Datchery, with a sudden change of countenance, gives her a sudden
look.

“It’s opium, deary. Neither more nor less. And it’s like a human
creetur so far, that you always hear what can be said against it, but
seldom what can be said in its praise.”

Mr. Datchery begins very slowly to count out the sum demanded of him.
Greedily watching his hands, she continues to hold forth on the great
example set him.

“It was last Christmas Eve, just arter dark, the once that I was here
afore, when the young gentleman gave me the three-and-six.” Mr.
Datchery stops in his counting, finds he has counted wrong, shakes his
money together, and begins again.

“And the young gentleman’s name,” she adds, “was Edwin.”

Mr. Datchery drops some money, stoops to pick it up, and reddens with
the exertion as he asks:

“How do you know the young gentleman’s name?”

“I asked him for it, and he told it me. I only asked him the two
questions, what was his Chris’en name, and whether he’d a sweetheart?
And he answered, Edwin, and he hadn’t.”

Mr. Datchery pauses with the selected coins in his hand, rather as if
he were falling into a brown study of their value, and couldn’t bear to
part with them. The woman looks at him distrustfully, and with her
anger brewing for the event of his thinking better of the gift; but he
bestows it on her as if he were abstracting his mind from the
sacrifice, and with many servile thanks she goes her way.

John Jasper’s lamp is kindled, and his lighthouse is shining when Mr.
Datchery returns alone towards it. As mariners on a dangerous voyage,
approaching an iron-bound coast, may look along the beams of the
warning light to the haven lying beyond it that may never be reached,
so Mr. Datchery’s wistful gaze is directed to this beacon, and beyond.

His object in now revisiting his lodging is merely to put on the hat
which seems so superfluous an article in his wardrobe. It is half-past
ten by the Cathedral clock when he walks out into the Precincts again;
he lingers and looks about him, as though, the enchanted hour when Mr.
Durdles may be stoned home having struck, he had some expectation of
seeing the Imp who is appointed to the mission of stoning him.

In effect, that Power of Evil is abroad. Having nothing living to stone
at the moment, he is discovered by Mr. Datchery in the unholy office of
stoning the dead, through the railings of the churchyard. The Imp finds
this a relishing and piquing pursuit; firstly, because their
resting-place is announced to be sacred; and secondly, because the tall
headstones are sufficiently like themselves, on their beat in the dark,
to justify the delicious fancy that they are hurt when hit.

Mr. Datchery hails with him: “Halloa, Winks!”

He acknowledges the hail with: “Halloa, Dick!” Their acquaintance
seemingly having been established on a familiar footing.

“But, I say,” he remonstrates, “don’t yer go a-making my name public. I
never means to plead to no name, mind yer. When they says to me in the
Lock-up, a-going to put me down in the book, ‘What’s your name?’ I says
to them, ‘Find out.’ Likewise when they says, ‘What’s your religion?’ I
says, ‘Find out.’”

Which, it may be observed in passing, it would be immensely difficult
for the State, however statistical, to do.

“Asides which,” adds the boy, “there ain’t no family of Winkses.”

“I think there must be.”

“Yer lie, there ain’t. The travellers give me the name on account of my
getting no settled sleep and being knocked up all night; whereby I gets
one eye roused open afore I’ve shut the other. That’s what Winks means.
Deputy’s the nighest name to indict me by: but yer wouldn’t catch me
pleading to that, neither.”

“Deputy be it always, then. We two are good friends; eh, Deputy?”

“Jolly good.”

“I forgave you the debt you owed me when we first became acquainted,
and many of my sixpences have come your way since; eh, Deputy?”

“Ah! And what’s more, yer ain’t no friend o’ Jarsper’s. What did he go
a-histing me off my legs for?”

“What indeed! But never mind him now. A shilling of mine is going your
way to-night, Deputy. You have just taken in a lodger I have been
speaking to; an infirm woman with a cough.”

“Puffer,” assents Deputy, with a shrewd leer of recognition, and
smoking an imaginary pipe, with his head very much on one side and his
eyes very much out of their places: “Hopeum Puffer.”

“What is her name?”

“’Er Royal Highness the Princess Puffer.”

“She has some other name than that; where does she live?”

“Up in London. Among the Jacks.”

“The sailors?”

“I said so; Jacks; and Chayner men: and hother Knifers.”

“I should like to know, through you, exactly where she lives.”

“All right. Give us ’old.”

A shilling passes; and, in that spirit of confidence which should
pervade all business transactions between principals of honour, this
piece of business is considered done.

“But here’s a lark!” cries Deputy. “Where did yer think ’Er Royal
Highness is a-goin’ to to-morrow morning? Blest if she ain’t a-goin’ to
the KIN-FREE-DER-EL!” He greatly prolongs the word in his ecstasy, and
smites his leg, and doubles himself up in a fit of shrill laughter.

“How do you know that, Deputy?”

“Cos she told me so just now. She said she must be hup and hout o’
purpose. She ses, ‘Deputy, I must ’ave a early wash, and make myself as
swell as I can, for I’m a-goin’ to take a turn at the
KIN-FREE-DER-EL!’” He separates the syllables with his former zest,
and, not finding his sense of the ludicrous sufficiently relieved by
stamping about on the pavement, breaks into a slow and stately dance,
perhaps supposed to be performed by the Dean.

Mr. Datchery receives the communication with a well-satisfied though
pondering face, and breaks up the conference. Returning to his quaint
lodging, and sitting long over the supper of bread-and-cheese and salad
and ale which Mrs. Tope has left prepared for him, he still sits when
his supper is finished. At length he rises, throws open the door of a
corner cupboard, and refers to a few uncouth chalked strokes on its
inner side.

“I like,” says Mr. Datchery, “the old tavern way of keeping scores.
Illegible except to the scorer. The scorer not committed, the scored
debited with what is against him. Hum; ha! A very small score this; a
very poor score!”

He sighs over the contemplation of its poverty, takes a bit of chalk
from one of the cupboard shelves, and pauses with it in his hand,
uncertain what addition to make to the account.

“I think a moderate stroke,” he concludes, “is all I am justified in
scoring up;” so, suits the action to the word, closes the cupboard, and
goes to bed.

A brilliant morning shines on the old city. Its antiquities and ruins
are surpassingly beautiful, with a lusty ivy gleaming in the sun, and
the rich trees waving in the balmy air. Changes of glorious light from
moving boughs, songs of birds, scents from gardens, woods, and
fields—or, rather, from the one great garden of the whole cultivated
island in its yielding time—penetrate into the Cathedral, subdue its
earthy odour, and preach the Resurrection and the Life. The cold stone
tombs of centuries ago grow warm; and flecks of brightness dart into
the sternest marble corners of the building, fluttering there like
wings.

Comes Mr. Tope with his large keys, and yawningly unlocks and sets
open. Come Mrs. Tope and attendant sweeping sprites. Come, in due time,
organist and bellows-boy, peeping down from the red curtains in the
loft, fearlessly flapping dust from books up at that remote elevation,
and whisking it from stops and pedals. Come sundry rooks, from various
quarters of the sky, back to the great tower; who may be presumed to
enjoy vibration, and to know that bell and organ are going to give it
them. Come a very small and straggling congregation indeed: chiefly
from Minor Canon Corner and the Precincts. Come Mr. Crisparkle, fresh
and bright; and his ministering brethren, not quite so fresh and
bright. Come the Choir in a hurry (always in a hurry, and struggling
into their nightgowns at the last moment, like children shirking bed),
and comes John Jasper leading their line. Last of all comes Mr.
Datchery into a stall, one of a choice empty collection very much at
his service, and glancing about him for Her Royal Highness the Princess
Puffer.

The service is pretty well advanced before Mr. Datchery can discern Her
Royal Highness. But by that time he has made her out, in the shade. She
is behind a pillar, carefully withdrawn from the Choir-master’s view,
but regards him with the closest attention. All unconscious of her
presence, he chants and sings. She grins when he is most musically
fervid, and—yes, Mr. Datchery sees her do it!—shakes her fist at him
behind the pillar’s friendly shelter.

Mr. Datchery looks again, to convince himself. Yes, again! As ugly and
withered as one of the fantastic carvings on the under brackets of the
stall seats, as malignant as the Evil One, as hard as the big brass
eagle holding the sacred books upon his wings (and, according to the
sculptor’s representation of his ferocious attributes, not at all
converted by them), she hugs herself in her lean arms, and then shakes
both fists at the leader of the Choir.

And at that moment, outside the grated door of the Choir, having eluded
the vigilance of Mr. Tope by shifty resources in which he is an adept,
Deputy peeps, sharp-eyed, through the bars, and stares astounded from
the threatener to the threatened.

The service comes to an end, and the servitors disperse to breakfast.
Mr. Datchery accosts his last new acquaintance outside, when the Choir
(as much in a hurry to get their bedgowns off, as they were but now to
get them on) have scuffled away.

“Well, mistress. Good morning. You have seen him?”

“_I’ve_ seen him, deary; _I’ve_ seen him!”

“And you know him?”

“Know him! Better far than all the Reverend Parsons put together know
him.”

Mrs. Tope’s care has spread a very neat, clean breakfast ready for her
lodger. Before sitting down to it, he opens his corner-cupboard door;
takes his bit of chalk from its shelf; adds one thick line to the
score, extending from the top of the cupboard door to the bottom; and
then falls to with an appetite.



APPENDIX: FRAGMENT OF ‘THE MYSTERY OF EDWIN DROOD’


When Forster was just finishing his biography of Dickens, he found
among the leaves of one of the novelist’s other manuscripts certain
loose slips in his writing, ‘on paper only half the size of that used
for the tale, so cramped, interlined, and blotted as to be nearly
illegible.’ These proved, upon examination, to contain a suggested
chapter for _Edwin Drood_, in which Sapsea, the auctioneer, appears as
the principal figure, surrounded by a group of characters new to the
story. That chapter, being among the last things Dickens wrote, seems
to contain so much of interest that it may be well to reprint it
here.—ED.

HOW MR. SAPSEA CEASED TO BE A MEMBER OF THE EIGHT CLUB
TOLD BY HIMSELF

Wishing to take the air, I proceeded by a circuitous route to the Club,
it being our weekly night of meeting. I found that we mustered our full
strength. We were enrolled under the denomination of the Eight Club. We
were eight in number; we met at eight o’clock during eight months of
the year; we played eight games of four-handed cribbage, at eightpence
the game; our frugal supper was composed of eight rolls, eight mutton
chops, eight pork sausages, eight baked potatoes, eight marrow-bones,
with eight toasts, and eight bottles of ale. There may, or may not, be
a certain harmony of colour in the ruling idea of this (to adopt a
phrase of our lively neighbours) reunion. It was a little idea of mine.

[Illustration: Facsimile of a page of the manuscript of “The Mystery of
Edwin Drood”]


A somewhat popular member of the Eight Club, was a member by the name
of Kimber. By profession, a dancing-master. A commonplace, hopeful sort
of man, wholly destitute of dignity or knowledge of the world.

As I entered the Club-room, Kimber was making the remark: ‘And he still
half-believes him to be very high in the Church.’

In the act of hanging up my hat on the eighth peg by the door, I caught
Kimber’s visual ray. He lowered it, and passed a remark on the next
change of the moon. I did not take particular notice of this at the
moment, because the world was often pleased to be a little shy of
ecclesiastical topics in my presence. For I felt that I was picked out
(though perhaps only through a coincidence) to a certain extent to
represent what I call our glorious constitution in Church and State.
The phrase may be objected to by cautious minds; but I own to it as
mine. I threw it off in argument some little time back. I said: ‘OUR
GLORIOUS CONSTITUTION in CHURCH and STATE.’

Another member of the Eight Club was Peartree; also member of the Royal
College of Surgeons. Mr. Peartree is not accountable to me for his
opinions, and I say no more of them here than that he attends the poor
gratis whenever they want him, and is not the parish doctor. Mr.
Peartree may justify it to the grasp of _his_ mind thus to do his
republican utmost to bring an appointed officer into contempt. Suffice
it that Mr. Peartree can never justify it to the grasp of _mine_.

Between Peartree and Kimber there was a sickly sort of feeble-minded
alliance. It came under my particular notice when I sold off Kimber by
auction. (Goods taken in execution.) He was a widower in a white
under-waistcoat, and slight shoes with bows, and had two daughters not
ill-looking. Indeed the reverse. Both daughters taught dancing in
scholastic establishments for Young Ladies—had done so at Mrs.
Sapsea’s; nay, Twinkleton’s—and both, in giving lessons, presented the
unwomanly spectacle of having little fiddles tucked under their chins.
In spite of which, the younger one might, if I am correctly informed—I
will raise the veil so far as to say I KNOW she might—have soared for
life from this degrading taint, but for having the class of mind
allotted to what I call the common herd, and being so incredibly devoid
of veneration as to become painfully ludicrous.

When I sold off Kimber without reserve, Peartree (as poor as he can
hold together) had several prime household lots knocked down to him. I
am not to be blinded; and of course it was as plain to me what he was
going to do with them, as it was that he was a brown hulking sort of
revolutionary subject who had been in India with the soldiers, and
ought (for the sake of society) to have his neck broke. I saw the lots
shortly afterwards in Kimber’s lodgings—through the window—and I easily
made out that there had been a sneaking pretence of lending them till
better times. A man with a smaller knowledge of the world than myself
might have been led to suspect that Kimber had held back money from his
creditors, and fraudulently bought the goods. But, besides that I knew
for certain he had no money, I knew that this would involve a species
of forethought not to be made compatible with the frivolity of a
caperer, inoculating other people with capering, for his bread.

As it was the first time I had seen either of those two since the sale,
I kept myself in what I call Abeyance. When selling him up, I had
delivered a few remarks—shall I say a little homily?—concerning Kimber,
which the world did regard as more than usually worth notice. I had
come up into my pulpit, it was said, uncommonly like—and a murmur of
recognition had repeated his (I will not name whose) title, before I
spoke. I had then gone on to say that all present would find, in the
first page of the catalogue that was lying before them, in the last
paragraph before the first lot, the following words: ‘Sold in pursuance
of a writ of execution issued by a creditor.’ I had then proceeded to
remind my friends, that however frivolous, not to say contemptible, the
business by which a man got his goods together, still his goods were as
dear to him, and as cheap to society (if sold without reserve), as
though his pursuits had been of a character that would bear serious
contemplation. I had then divided my text (if I may be allowed so to
call it) into three heads: firstly, Sold; secondly, In pursuance of a
writ of execution; thirdly, Issued by a creditor; with a few moral
reflections on each, and winding up with, ‘Now to the first lot’ in a
manner that was complimented when I afterwards mingled with my hearers.

So, not being certain on what terms I and Kimber stood, I was grave, I
was chilling. Kimber, however, moving to me, I moved to Kimber. (I was
the creditor who had issued the writ. Not that it matters.)

‘I was alluding, Mr. Sapsea,’ said Kimber, ‘to a stranger who entered
into conversation with me in the street as I came to the Club. He had
been speaking to you just before, it seemed, by the churchyard; and
though you had told him who you were, I could hardly persuade him that
you were not high in the Church.’

‘Idiot?’ said Peartree.

‘Ass!’ said Kimber.

‘Idiot and Ass!’ said the other five members.

‘Idiot and Ass, gentlemen,’ I remonstrated, looking around me, ‘are
strong expressions to apply to a young man of good appearance and
address.’ My generosity was roused; I own it.

‘You’ll admit that he must be a Fool,’ said Peartree.

‘You can’t deny that he must be a Blockhead,’ said Kimber.

Their tone of disgust amounted to being offensive. Why should the young
man be so calumniated? What had he done? He had only made an innocent
and natural mistake. I controlled my generous indignation, and said so.

‘Natural?’ repeated Kimber. ‘_He’s_ a Natural!’

The remaining six members of the Eight Club laughed unanimously. It
stung me. It was a scornful laugh. My anger was roused in behalf of an
absent, friendless stranger. I rose (for I had been sitting down).

‘Gentlemen,’ I said with dignity, ‘I will not remain one of this Club
allowing opprobrium to be cast on an unoffending person in his absence.
I will not so violate what I call the sacred rites of hospitality.
Gentlemen, until you know how to behave yourselves better, I leave you.
Gentlemen, until then I withdraw, from this place of meeting, whatever
personal qualifications I may have brought into it. Gentlemen, until
then you cease to be the Eight Club, and must make the best you can of
becoming the Seven.’

I put on my hat and retired. As I went down stairs I distinctly heard
them give a suppressed cheer. Such is the power of demeanour and
knowledge of mankind. I had forced it out of them.

II

Whom should I meet in the street, within a few yards of the door of the
inn where the Club was held, but the self-same young man whose cause I
had felt it my duty so warmly—and I will add so disinterestedly—to take
up.

‘Is it Mr. Sapsea,’ he said doubtfully, ‘or is it—’

‘It is Mr. Sapsea,’ I replied.

‘Pardon me, Mr. Sapsea; you appear warm, sir.’

‘I have been warm,’ I said, ‘and on your account.’ Having stated the
circumstances at some length (my generosity almost overpowered him), I
asked him his name.

‘Mr. Sapsea,’ he answered, looking down, ‘your penetration is so acute,
your glance into the souls of your fellow men is so penetrating, that
if I was hardly enough to deny that my name is Poker, what would it
avail me?’

I don’t know that I had quite exactly made out to a fraction that his
name _was_ Poker, but I daresay I had been pretty near doing it.

‘Well, well,’ said I, trying to put him at his ease by nodding my head
in a soothing way. ‘Your name is Poker, and there is no harm in being
named Poker.’

‘Oh, Mr. Sapsea!’ cried the young man, in a very well-behaved manner.
‘Bless you for those words!’ He then, as if ashamed of having given way
to his feelings, looked down again.

‘Come Poker,’ said I, ‘let me hear more about you. Tell me. Where are
you going to, Poker? and where do you come from?’

‘Ah Mr. Sapsea!’ exclaimed the young man. ‘Disguise from you is
impossible. You know already that I come from somewhere, and am going
somewhere else. If I was to deny it, what would it avail me?’

‘Then don’t deny it,’ was my remark.

‘Or,’ pursued Poker, in a kind of despondent rapture, ‘or if I was to
deny that I came to this town to see and hear you, sir, what would it
avail me? Or if I was to deny—’




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF EDWIN DROOD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus

Author: Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley


        
Release date: October 1, 1993 [eBook #84]
                Most recently updated: February 10, 2026

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/84

Credits: Judith Boss, Christy Phillips, Lynn Hanninen and David Meltzer. HTML version by Al Haines.
        Further corrections by Menno de Leeuw.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANKENSTEIN; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS ***

Frankenstein;

or, the Modern Prometheus

by Mary Wollstonecraft (Godwin) Shelley


 CONTENTS

 Letter 1
 Letter 2
 Letter 3
 Letter 4
 Chapter 1
 Chapter 2
 Chapter 3
 Chapter 4
 Chapter 5
 Chapter 6
 Chapter 7
 Chapter 8
 Chapter 9
 Chapter 10
 Chapter 11
 Chapter 12
 Chapter 13
 Chapter 14
 Chapter 15
 Chapter 16
 Chapter 17
 Chapter 18
 Chapter 19
 Chapter 20
 Chapter 21
 Chapter 22
 Chapter 23
 Chapter 24




Letter 1

_To Mrs. Saville, England._


St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—.


You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
forebodings. I arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
of my undertaking.

I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the streets of
Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
braces my nerves and fills me with delight. Do you understand this
feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes.
Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
region of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for ever
visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put
some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished;
and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in
wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the
phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
solitudes. What may not be expected in a country of eternal light? I
may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this
voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. I
shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world
never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by
the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this
laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little
boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all
mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole
to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.

These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my
letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as
a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
eye. This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. I
have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean
through the seas which surround the pole. You may remember that a
history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected,
yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study
day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction
had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.

These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets
whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. I also
became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation;
I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the
names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well
acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment.
But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I
can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this
great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I
accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea;
I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often
worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive
the greatest practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an
under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. I
must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second
dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest
earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services.

And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
My life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to
every enticement that wealth placed in my path. Oh, that some encouraging
voice would answer in the affirmative! My courage and my resolution is
firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. I am
about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which
will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the spirits
of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.

This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly
quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach. The
cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which I have
already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the
deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise
prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no
ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and
Archangel.

I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my
intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the
insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary
among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not intend to
sail until the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how
can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years,
will pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon,
or never.

Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you,
and save me, that I may again and again testify my gratitude for all your
love and kindness.

Your affectionate brother,

R. Walton




Letter 2

_To Mrs. Saville, England._

Archangel, 28th March, 17—.


How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow!
Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a
vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have
already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend and are certainly
possessed of dauntless courage.

But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no
friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
will be none to participate my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment, no
one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts
to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of
feeling. I desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose
eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I
bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle yet
courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose
tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a
friend repair the faults of your poor brother! I am too ardent in execution
and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me
that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild
on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages.
At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the
necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
country. Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more and that my
daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
call it) _keeping;_ and I greatly need a friend who would have sense
enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to
endeavour to regulate my mind.

Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the
wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet
some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage
and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an
Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel;
finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist
in my enterprise.

The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This
circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years
spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an intense distaste to
the usual brutality exercised on board ship: I have never believed it to be
necessary, and when I heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness
of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt
myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. I heard
of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the
happiness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved
a young Russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw
his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor,
and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend
reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had already bought a farm with his
money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old
man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her
inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is
so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind
of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
otherwise he would command.

Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can
conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, that I am
wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage
is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The
winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail
sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing rashly: you know me
sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
safety of others is committed to my care.

I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of
the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
I am preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to “the
land of mist and snow,” but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do not
be alarmed for my safety or if I should come back to you as worn and
woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I
will disclose a secret. I have often attributed my attachment to, my
passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that
production of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something
at work in my soul which I do not understand. I am practically
industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and
labour—but besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief
in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out
of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited
regions I am about to explore.

But to return to dearer considerations. Shall I meet you again, after
having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of
Africa or America? I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to
look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present to write to
me by every opportunity: I may receive your letters on some occasions when
I need them most to support my spirits. I love you very tenderly. 
Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.

Your affectionate brother,
 Robert Walton




Letter 3

_To Mrs. Saville, England._

July 7th, 17—.


My dear Sister,

I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe—and well advanced
on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on
its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not
see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good
spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We
have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of
summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales,
which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire
to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not
expected.

No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a
letter. One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are
accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and
I shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.

Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that for my own sake, as well as
yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool,
persevering, and prudent.

But success _shall_ crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I
have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars
themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not
still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the
determined heart and resolved will of man?

My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must
finish. Heaven bless my beloved sister!

R.W.




Letter 4


_To Mrs. Saville, England._

August 5th, 17—.

So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before
these papers can come into your possession.

Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which
she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we
were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to,
hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.

About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to
have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to
grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly
attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own
situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by
dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a
being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature,
sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid progress
of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the
distant inequalities of the ice.

This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed,
many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that
it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, by
ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the
greatest attention.

About two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before
night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the
morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to
rest for a few hours.

In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and
found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently
talking to someone in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we
had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large
fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a human
being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of
some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the
master said, “Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish
on the open sea.”

On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a
foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he,
“will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?”

You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed
to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I should have
supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not
have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I
replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the
northern pole.

Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
Good God! Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for
his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were
nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and
suffering. I never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted
to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh
air he fainted. We accordingly brought him back to the deck and
restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to
swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life we
wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the
kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup,
which restored him wonderfully.

Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and I often
feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he
had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin and
attended on him as much as my duty would permit. I never saw a more
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of
wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone
performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most
trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with
a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he
is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his
teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.

When my guest was a little recovered I had great trouble to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not
allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body
and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
Once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice
in so strange a vehicle.

His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and
he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.”

“And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”

“Yes.”

“Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we
saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.”

This aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a multitude of
questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had
pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “I have,
doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”

“Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to
trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”

“And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have
benevolently restored me to life.”

Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking up of the
ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that I could not answer
with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near
midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety
before that time; but of this I could not judge.

From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the
stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for
the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded him to remain in
the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
I have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant
notice if any new object should appear in sight.

Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health but is very
silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
interested in him, although they have had very little communication
with him. For my own part, I begin to love him as a brother, and his
constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. He must
have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck
so attractive and amiable.

I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend
on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been
broken by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the brother
of my heart.

I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals,
should I have any fresh incidents to record.




August 13th, 17—.


My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at once my
admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see so
noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant
grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and
when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art,
yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.

He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck,
apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although
unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he
interests himself deeply in the projects of others. He has frequently
conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated to him without
disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my
eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken
to secure it. I was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the
language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul
and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would
sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my
enterprise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for
the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should
acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a
dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. At first I
perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before
his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I beheld tears trickle
fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast. I
paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “Unhappy man! Do you
share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me;
let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”

Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the
paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened
powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were
necessary to restore his composure.

Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise
himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked
me the history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it
awakened various trains of reflection. I spoke of my desire of finding a
friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than
had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could
boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.

“I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most
noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
friendship. You have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for
despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life
anew.”

As he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled
grief that touched me to the heart. But he was silent and presently
retired to his cabin.

Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he
does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight
afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of
elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he
may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he
has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a
halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.

Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine
wanderer? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and
refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore
somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to
appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. Sometimes I
have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that
elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I
believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never-failing
power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled
for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a
voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.




August 19th, 17—.


Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain
Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had
determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
me, but you have won me to alter my determination. You seek for
knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the
gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine
has been. I do not know that the relation of my disasters will be
useful to you; yet, when I reflect that you are pursuing the same
course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me
what I am, I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you
in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually
deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might
fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things
will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would
provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers
of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”

You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by the offered
communication, yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief by
a recital of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness to hear
the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong
desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. I expressed
these feelings in my answer.

“I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is
useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I
shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he,
perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my
friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my
destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is
determined.”

He then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when I
should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have
resolved every night, when I am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to
record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during
the day. If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This
manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who
know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and
sympathy shall I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my
task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me
with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in
animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul
within. Strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which
embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!




Chapter 1


I am by birth a Genevese, and my family is one of the most
distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for many years
counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public
situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who
knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public
business. He passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the
affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his
marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a
husband and the father of a family.

As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot
refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a
merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous
mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a
proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been
distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts,
therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his
daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in
wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and
was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct
so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in
endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin
the world again through his credit and assistance.

Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery,
he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the
Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort
had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but
it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in
the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a
merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction;
his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for
reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.

His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw and
by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to
support life.

Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her time
was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her, and she knelt
by Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he
conducted her to Geneva and placed her under the protection of a
relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife.

There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but
this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted
affection. There was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind
which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love
strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the
late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set
a greater value on tried worth. There was a show of gratitude and
worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the
doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her
virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing
her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace
to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes
and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is
sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her
with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and
benevolent mind. Her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto
constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. During
the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had
gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after
their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change
of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders,
as a restorative for her weakened frame.

From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born
at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. I remained
for several years their only child. Much as they were attached to each
other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very
mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother’s tender caresses and
my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my
first recollections. I was their plaything and their idol, and something
better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on
them by Heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in
their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled
their duties towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed
towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during
every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity,
and of self-control, I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but
one train of enjoyment to me.

For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a
daughter, but I continued their single offspring. When I was about five
years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they
passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent
disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my
mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a
passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been
relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the
afflicted. During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale
attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst
shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother,
accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife,
hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to
five hungry babes. Among these there was one which attracted my mother far
above all the rest. She appeared of a different stock. The four others were
dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her
hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her
clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was
clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of
her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold
her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent,
and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.

The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and
admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was
not her child, but the daughter of a Milanese nobleman. Her mother was a
German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with
these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been
long married, and their eldest child was but just born. The father of their
charge was one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory
of Italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted
himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the victim of its
weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria
was not known. His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and
a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude
abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.

When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the hall of
our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed
to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter
than the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his
permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their
charge to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed
a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty
and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They
consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza
became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than
sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and
my pleasures.

Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential
attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my
pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to
my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty present for my
Victor—tomorrow he shall have it.” And when, on the morrow, she
presented Elizabeth to me as her promised gift, I, with childish
seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon Elizabeth
as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises bestowed on
her I received as made to a possession of my own. We called each other
familiarly by the name of cousin. No word, no expression could body
forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than
sister, since till death she was to be mine only.




Chapter 2


We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in
our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of
disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
nearer together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated
disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense
application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss
home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
our Alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the
magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their
causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine.
Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
earliest sensations I can remember.

On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
country. We possessed a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive,
the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the
lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was my
temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was
indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but I united
myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. Henry
Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular
talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He
composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and
knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into
masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous
train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
of the infidels.

No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My
parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families I distinctly
discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
the development of filial love.

My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structure of languages,
nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth
that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.

Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul
of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was
the living spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have become
sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And
Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet
he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
ambition.

I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides,
in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which
led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would
account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost
forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.

Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire,
therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age we all went
on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the
weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I
chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it
with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new
light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my
discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my
book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste
your time upon this; it is sad trash.”

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern
system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I
should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my
imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance
my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was
acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest
avidity.

When I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and
studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
treasures known to few besides myself. I have described myself as always
having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking
up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his
successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted
appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
pursuit.

The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little
more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal
lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect,
anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes
in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I
had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
ignorantly I had repined.

But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their
disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
century; but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of
Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
studies. My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a
child’s blindness, added to a student’s thirst for knowledge.
Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest
diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir
of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an
inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could
banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
a violent death!

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a
promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I
attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a time I was
occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand
contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of
multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.

When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It
advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once
with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained,
while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an
old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found
the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the
shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld
anything so utterly destroyed.

Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
electricity. On this occasion a man of great research in natural
philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on
the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of
electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa,
Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my
accustomed studies. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever
be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former
occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed
and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
real knowledge. In this mood of mind I betook myself to the
mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.

Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me
as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was
announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with
their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.

It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
terrible destruction.




Chapter 3


When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that I
should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had
hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it
necessary for the completion of my education that I should be made
acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My
departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.

Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was
in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to
persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. She had at first
yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her
favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. She
attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity
of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this
imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother
sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her
deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
her. She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My
children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were
placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the
consolation of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to
my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, happy
and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are
not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to
death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.”

She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the
soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so
long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day
and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed
for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been
extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear
can be hushed, never more to be heard. These are the reflections of
the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the
evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has
not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I
describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time at
length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and
the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a
sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still
duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the
rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the
spoiler has not seized.

My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events,
was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of
some weeks. It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose,
akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of
life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. I was
unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above
all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled.

She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and
zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call
her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time,
when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.

The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last
evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit
him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. His
father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the
aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune
of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when
he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a
restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details
of commerce.

We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
persuade ourselves to say the word “Farewell!” It was said, and we
retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn I descended to the
carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there—my father
again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to
renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last
feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.

I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in
the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by
amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual
pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going I
must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto
been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible
repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and
Clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believed myself
totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as
I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I
ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home,
thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had
longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to
repent.

I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the
high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was
conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased.

The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to
some of the principal professors. Chance—or rather the evil
influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me
from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He
was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. He
asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and
partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal
authors I had studied. The professor stared. “Have you,” he
said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”

I replied in the affirmative. “Every minute,” continued M. Krempe with
warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems
and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived,
where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they
are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear
sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”

So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books
treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and
dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural
philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow
professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
omitted.

I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long
considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I
returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
shape. M. Krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a
strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I had come
to concerning them in my early years. As a child I had not been
content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the
steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the
discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
It was very different when the masters of the science sought
immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now
the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit
itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of
boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the information
which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And although I
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M.
Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing
room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very
unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his
temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person
was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard.
He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and
the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took
a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of
its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he
concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I
shall never forget:

“The ancient teachers of this science,” said he,
“promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters
promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that
the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or
crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses
of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the
heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of
the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers;
they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even
mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”

Such were the professor’s words—rather let me say such the words of
the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went on I felt as if my soul
were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were
touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was
sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of
Frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps
already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and
unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.

I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of
insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence arise, but I
had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning’s dawn,
sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as a dream.
There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
devote myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a
natural talent. On the same day I paid M. Waldman a visit. His
manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I
gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had
given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little
narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius
Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had
exhibited. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal
modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. The
labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” I
listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured
terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his
instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to
procure.

“I am happy,” said M. Waldman, “to have gained a
disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of
your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that
I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not
neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry
chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your
wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty
experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural
philosophy, including mathematics.”

He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his
various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure and
promising me the use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in
the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of
books which I had requested, and I took my leave.

Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.




Chapter 4


From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
I read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
university, and I found even in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In
M. Waldman I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by
dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways
he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at
first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded and
soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me,
with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman
expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years
passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was
engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which I
hoped to make. None but those who have experienced them can conceive
of the enticements of science. In other studies you go as far as
others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
A mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must
infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and I, who
continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was
solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two
years I made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical
instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the
university. When I had arrived at this point and had become as well
acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as
depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my
residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought
of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident
happened that protracted my stay.

One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was
the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with
life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a
mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our
inquiries. I revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined
thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of
natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been
animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this
study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the
causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became
acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; I
must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my
mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not ever
remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared
the apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and
a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of
life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become
food for the worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of
this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
charnel-houses. My attention was fixed upon every object the most
insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. I saw how the
fine form of man was degraded and wasted; I beheld the corruption of
death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw how the worm
inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and
analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity
of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so
many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same
science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a
secret.

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens than that which I now affirm is
true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.

The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery
soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time spent in
painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the
most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so
great and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been
progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result.
What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation
of the world was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it
all opened upon me at once: the information I had obtained was of a
nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them
towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead
and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly
ineffectual light.

I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
which I am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end
of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that
subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was,
to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by my
precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature
will allow.

When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I hesitated
a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it.
Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable
difficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the
creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my
imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to
doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful
as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared
adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should
ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my
operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be
imperfect, yet when I considered the improvement which every day takes
place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present
attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor
could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I
began the creation of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts
formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first
intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say,
about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having
formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully
collecting and arranging my materials, I began.

No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death
appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and
pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless
me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his
child so completely as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these
reflections, I thought that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless
matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible)
renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.

These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking
with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my
person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very
brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the
next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I alone
possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon
gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless
eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive
the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps
of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but
then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward; I seemed
to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was
indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed
acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had
returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses and
disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human
frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase,
I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from
their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The
dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials;
and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation,
whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I
brought my work near to a conclusion.

The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields
bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant
vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the
same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also
to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had
not seen for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I
well remembered the words of my father: “I know that while you are
pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall
hear regularly from you. You must pardon me if I regard any
interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other duties
are equally neglected.”

I knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but I could
not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. I wished, as it
were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection
until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature,
should be completed.

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
to vice or faultiness on my part, but I am now convinced that he was
justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free from
blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and
peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to
disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge
is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself
has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for
those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that
study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human
mind. If this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit
whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared his
country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the
empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.

But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
tale, and your looks remind me to proceed.

My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my
silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not
watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my
occupation. The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near
to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had
succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared
rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most
painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow
creatures as if I had been guilty of a crime. Sometimes I grew alarmed at
the wreck I perceived that I had become; the energy of my purpose alone
sustained me: my labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and
amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and I promised myself
both of these when my creation should be complete.




Chapter 5


It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment
of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I
collected the instruments of life around me, that I might infuse a
spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was
already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the
panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the
half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature
open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.

How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate
the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to
form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as
beautiful. Beautiful! Great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered
the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous
black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these
luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes,
that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which
they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.

The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For this I had
deprived myself of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour
that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty
of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my
heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I
rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my
bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. At length lassitude
succeeded to the tumult I had before endured, and I threw myself on the
bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
But it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest
dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in
the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced her,
but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with
the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I
held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her
form, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my
teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
shutters, I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had
created. He held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
may be called, were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some
inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have
spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
detain me, but I escaped and rushed downstairs. I took refuge in the
courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited, where I remained
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if
it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I
had so miserably given life.

Oh! No mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy
again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. I
had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those
muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing
such as even Dante could not have conceived.

I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, I nearly
sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with
this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!

Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple
and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into
the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the
wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my
view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but
felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured
from a black and comfortless sky.

I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by
bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I
traversed the streets without any clear conception of where I was or
what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
 
 Like one who, on a lonely road,
 Doth walk in fear and dread,
 And, having once turned round, walks on,
 And turns no more his head;
 Because he knows a frightful fiend
 Doth close behind him tread.
 
 [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”]



Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the various
diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I paused, I knew not why;
but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming
towards me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer I observed
that it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was standing, and
on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me,
instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
“how glad I am to see you! How fortunate that you should be here at
the very moment of my alighting!”

Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought back
to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear
to my recollection. I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror
and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months,
calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial
manner, and we walked towards my college. Clerval continued talking for
some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
permitted to come to Ingolstadt. “You may easily believe,” said
he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all
necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping;
and, indeed, I believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant
answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch
schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins
a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his
affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has
permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of
knowledge.”

“It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left
my father, brothers, and Elizabeth.”

“Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from
you so seldom. By the by, I mean to lecture you a little upon their
account myself. But, my dear Frankenstein,” continued he, stopping
short and gazing full in my face, “I did not before remark how very ill
you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
several nights.”

“You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one
occupation that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see;
but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
end and that I am at length free.”

I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked with a
quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and
the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my
apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. I dreaded to
behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him.
Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the
stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the
lock of the door before I recollected myself. I then paused, and a
cold shivering came over me. I threw the door forcibly open, as
children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in
waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped
fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed
from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that so great a good
fortune could have befallen me, but when I became assured that my enemy
had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Clerval.

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed
me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same
place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival,
but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes
for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter frightened and astonished him.

“My dear Victor,” cried he, “what, for God’s sake,
is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the
cause of all this?”

“Do not ask me,” cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I
thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me;
I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.

Poor Clerval! What must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I
was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not
recover my senses for a long, long time.

This was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for
several months. During all that time Henry was my only nurse. I
afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness
for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive
nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he
did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest
action that he could towards them.

But I was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever
before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my
words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings
of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which I
continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became
capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I
perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young
buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was
a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as
cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion.

“Dearest Clerval,” exclaimed I, “how kind, how very good
you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever
repay you? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I
have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.”

“You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I
may speak to you on one subject, may I not?”

I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on
whom I dared not even think?

“Compose yourself,” said Clerval, who observed my change of
colour, “I will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father
and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your
own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at
your long silence.”

“Is that all, my dear Henry? How could you suppose that my first
thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love and
who are so deserving of my love?”

“If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad
to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from
your cousin, I believe.”




Chapter 6


Clerval then put the following letter into my hands. It was from my
own Elizabeth:

“My dearest Cousin,

“You have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear
kind Henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account. You are
forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear Victor,
is necessary to calm our apprehensions. For a long time I have thought
that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have
restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have
prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so
long a journey, yet how often have I regretted not being able to
perform it myself! I figure to myself that the task of attending on
your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never
guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of
your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed
you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will confirm this
intelligence soon in your own handwriting.

“Get well—and return to us. You will find a happy, cheerful home and
friends who love you dearly. Your father’s health is vigorous, and he
asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a
care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. How pleased you would
be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now sixteen and full
of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a true Swiss and to enter
into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his
elder brother returns to us. My uncle is not pleased with the idea of
a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your
powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his
time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the
lake. I fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point
and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected.

“Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
place since you left us. The blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they
never change; and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are
regulated by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up
my time and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left us, but one
change has taken place in our little household. Do you remember on
what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family? Probably you do not;
I will relate her history, therefore in a few words. Madame Moritz,
her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the
third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed
this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
to allow her to live at our house. The republican institutions of our
country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which
prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less
distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the
lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are
more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same
thing as a servant in France and England. Justine, thus received in
our family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our
fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a
sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.

“Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and I
recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one
glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Angelica—she looked so
frank-hearted and happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for her,
by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that
which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid;
Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not
mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but
you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She
thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.

“When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness
with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other
trials were reserved for her.

“One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The
conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
deaths of her favourites was a judgement from heaven to chastise her
partiality. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor
confirmed the idea which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few months
after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her
repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she
was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness
and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable
for vivacity. Nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature
to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her
repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness,
but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her
brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz
into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is
now at peace for ever. She died on the first approach of cold weather,
at the beginning of this last winter. Justine has just returned to us;
and I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle,
and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her
expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.

“I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
William. I wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with
sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he
smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
health. He has already had one or two little _wives,_ but Louisa Biron
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.

“Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little
gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield
has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly
sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your
favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes
since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has already
recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a
lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much
older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with
everybody.

“I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one
word will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his
kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, I entreat
you, write!

“Elizabeth Lavenza.


“Geneva, March 18th, 17—.”



“Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had read her
letter: “I will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety
they must feel.” I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but
my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another
fortnight I was able to leave my chamber.

One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the
several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a
kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the
beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent antipathy even
to the name of natural philosophy. When I was otherwise quite restored
to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony
of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my
apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment; for he
perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room which had
previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of
no avail when I visited the professors. M. Waldman inflicted torture
when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I
had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the
subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to
modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What
could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as if he
had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which
were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death. I
writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt.
Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. I
thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly
that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from
me; and although I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence
that knew no bounds, yet I could never persuade myself to confide in
him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
I feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even
more pain than the benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. “D—n
the fellow!” cried he; “why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has
outstript us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A
youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly
as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if
he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—Ay,
ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering,
“M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man.
Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was
myself when young; but that wears out in a very short time.”

M. Krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his
literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. He
came to the university with the design of making himself complete
master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for
the plan of life he had marked out for himself. Resolved to pursue no
inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the East, as affording
scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit
languages engaged his attention, and I was easily induced to enter on
the same studies. Idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that I
wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, I felt
great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not
only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. I
did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for
I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary
amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well
repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy
elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of
any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to
consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How
different from the manly and heroical poetry of Greece and Rome!

Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva was
fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. I felt this
delay very bitterly; for I longed to see my native town and my beloved
friends. My return had only been delayed so long, from an
unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange place, before he had become
acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent
cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came
its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.

The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the letter daily
which was to fix the date of my departure, when Henry proposed a
pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt, that I might bid a
personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded
with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Clerval
had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature
that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.

We passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits
had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
the conversation of my friend. Study had before secluded me from the
intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but
Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught
me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
Excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to
elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own. A selfish
pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and
affection warmed and opened my senses; I became the same happy creature
who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care.
When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most
delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with
ecstasy. The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring
bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. I
was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed
upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an
invincible burden.

Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he
exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled
his soul. The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in
imitation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful
fancy and passion. At other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew
me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity.

We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon: the peasants were
dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were
high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.




Chapter 7


On my return, I found the following letter from my father:—

“My dear Victor,

“You have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of
your return to us; and I was at first tempted to write only a few
lines, merely mentioning the day on which I should expect you. But
that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be
your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to
behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? And how, Victor, can
I relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered you callous to
our joys and griefs; and how shall I inflict pain on my long absent
son? I wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is
impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.

“William is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! Victor, he is murdered!

“I will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
circumstances of the transaction.

“Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought of
returning; and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone
on before, were not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until
they should return. Presently Ernest came, and enquired if we had seen
his brother; he said, that he had been playing with him, that William
had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and
afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not return.

“This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have
returned to the house. He was not there. We returned again, with
torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had
lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I
discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming and
active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.

“He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very earnest to
see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her but she persisted,
and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my
darling child!’

“She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me, that that same
evening William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable
miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and
was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. We
have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him
are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved William!

“Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps
continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live
to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

“Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
festering, the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my
friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
with hatred for your enemies.

“Your affectionate and afflicted father,

“Alphonse Frankenstein.



“Geneva, May 12th, 17—.”



Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, was
surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy I at first
expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the
table, and covered my face with my hands.

“My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me
weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend,
what has happened?”

I motioned him to take up the letter, while I walked up and down the
room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from the eyes of
Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.

“I can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he;
“your disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do?”

“To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.”

During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation;
he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he,
“dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had
seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How
much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little
fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
he is at rest. The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
A sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain. He can no longer
be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
survivors.”

Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind and I remembered them afterwards in
solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a
cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.

My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry on, for I longed
to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when I
drew near my native town, I slackened my progress. I could hardly sustain
the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. I passed through
scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years.
How altered every thing might be during that time! One sudden and
desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances
might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were
done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. Fear overcame me; I
dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble,
although I was unable to define them.

I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I
contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the
snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By
degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my journey
towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I
approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black
sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc. I wept like a
child. “Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
wanderer? Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country, my beloved
country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in again
beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
lake!

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also
closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still
more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I
foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human
beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not
conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined to endure.

It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva; the gates
of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass the night at
Secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city. The sky
was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot
where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not pass through the
town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plainpalais.
During this short voyage I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont
Blanc in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach
rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might observe its
progress. It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain
coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.

I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash
over my head. It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of
Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in
Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The
most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
lake which lies between the promontory of Belrive and the village of
Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another
darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the
east of the lake.

While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with
a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I clasped my
hands, and exclaimed aloud, “William, dear angel! this is thy
funeral, this thy dirge!” As I said these words, I perceived in the
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood
fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning
illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs
to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy
dæmon, to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I
shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that
idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth
chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure
passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could
have destroyed the fair child. _He_ was the murderer! I could not
doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the
fact. I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly
perpendicular ascent of Mont Salêve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the
south. He soon reached the summit, and disappeared.

I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain still
continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I
revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget:
the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had
now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and
was this his first crime? Alas! I had turned loose into the world a
depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not
murdered my brother?

No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not
feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light
of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
to destroy all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates were
open, and I hastened to my father’s house. My first thought was to
discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
made. But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A
being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I
remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at
the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of
delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that
if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have
looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature
of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited
as to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then of what use would
be pursuit? Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the
overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and
I resolved to remain silent.

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father’s house. I
told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I
stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my
departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and venerable parent! He still remained
to me. I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the
mantel-piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale;
but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the
sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my
tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, Ernest
entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me:
“Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you
had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and
delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can
alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems
sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor
Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor
William! he was our darling and our pride!”

Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of mortal
agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only imagined the
wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and
a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more
minutely concerning my father, and here I named my cousin.

“She most of all,” said Ernest, “requires consolation; she accused
herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
very wretched. But since the murderer has been discovered—”

“The murderer discovered! Good God! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him? It is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw. I saw him too; he
was free last night!”

“I do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of
wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No
one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit
that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?”

“Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?”

“No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear,
leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried today, and you will
then hear all.”

He then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor William
had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
bed for several days. During this interval, one of the servants,
happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. The servant
instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to
any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
Justine was apprehended. On being charged with the fact, the poor girl
confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of
manner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied
earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor,
good Justine, is innocent.”

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed
on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and,
after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
some other topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed,
“Good God, papa! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of
poor William.”

“We do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed I had
rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.”

“My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent.”

“If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She is to be
tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”

This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that
Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. I
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to
announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I, the
creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
which I had let loose upon the world?

We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last
beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
her childish years. There was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
She welcomed me with the greatest affection. “Your arrival, my dear
cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some
means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she
be convicted of crime? I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do
upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely
love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I
never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure she will not;
and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
William.”

“She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall
be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
of her acquittal.”

“How kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible: and to
see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me
hopeless and despairing.” She wept.

“Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she
is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of
partiality.”




Chapter 8


We passed a few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
commence. My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole of
this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to
be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of
innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
ignominious grave, and I the cause! A thousand times rather would I
have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine, but I
was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have
been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have
exculpated her who suffered through me.

The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning, and
her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
feelings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she appeared confident in
innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. She
was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she
worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. When she entered the
court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
her utter guiltlessness.

The trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts combined
against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
of her innocence as I had. She had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she
did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused
and unintelligible answer. She returned to the house about eight
o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
if anything had been heard concerning him. When shown the body, she
fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The
picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same
which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her
countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
although variable voice.

“God knows,” she said, “how entirely I am innocent. But I
do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence
on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
against me, and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my
judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
doubtful or suspicious.”

She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
house of an aunt at Chêne, a village situated at about a league from
Geneva. On her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who asked
her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. She was
alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being
unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Most
of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
it was without her knowledge. That she had been bewildered when
questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
a sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture she could give no account.

“I know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and
fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of
explaining it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left
to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that I have no
enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me
wantonly. Did the murderer place it there? I know of no opportunity
afforded him for so doing; or, if I had, why should he have stolen the
jewel, to part with it again so soon?

“I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for
hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my
innocence.”

Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
the court.

“I am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who
was murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by and have lived
with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may
therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but
when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I
know of her character. I am well acquainted with the accused. I have lived
in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly
two years. During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and
benevolent of human creatures. She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in
her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards
attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited
the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. She was
warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a
most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to say that,
notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely
on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an action; as to
the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it,
I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value
her.”

A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful
appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
favour of poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She
herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. I believed
in her innocence; I knew it. Could the dæmon who had (I did not for a
minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I could not sustain the
horror of my situation, and when I perceived that the popular voice and
the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
I rushed out of the court in agony. The tortures of the accused did
not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I went to
the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not ask the fatal
question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine
was condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before
experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured to bestow upon
them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I
addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
“That evidence,” he observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a
case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
decisive.”

This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had
my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would
believe me to be if I disclosed the object of my suspicions? I
hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.

“My cousin,” replied I, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
should escape. But she has confessed.”

This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon
Justine’s innocence. “Alas!” said she. “How shall I
ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as
my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
committed a murder.”

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my
cousin. My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own
judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth,
“I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany
me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet
I could not refuse.

We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some
straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on
her knees. She rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with
her, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My
cousin wept also.

“Oh, Justine!” said she. “Why did you rob me of my last consolation?
I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I
was not so miserable as I am now.”

“And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do you also
join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?” Her
voice was suffocated with sobs.

“Rise, my poor girl,” said Elizabeth; “why do you kneel,
if you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies, I believed you
guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had
yourself declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false; and be
assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a
moment, but your own confession.”

“I did confess, but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I
was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do?
In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly
miserable.”

She paused, weeping, and then continued, “I thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I
am to suffer ignominy and death.”

“Oh, Justine! Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess? But do not mourn, dear girl. Do not fear. I
will proclaim, I will prove your innocence. I will melt the stony
hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. You shall not die!
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
No! No! I never could survive so horrible a misfortune.”

Justine shook her head mournfully. “I do not fear to die,” she said;
“that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to
endure the worst. I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember
me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the
fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
the will of heaven!”

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison room,
where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. Despair!
Who dared talk of that? The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such
deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. Justine started. When
she saw who it was, she approached me and said, “Dear sir, you are very
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?”

I could not answer. “No, Justine,” said Elizabeth; “he is more
convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you
had confessed, he did not credit it.”

“I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is
the affection of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than
half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my
innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. She indeed
gained the resignation she desired. But I, the true murderer, felt the
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or
consolation. Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and
despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within
me which nothing could extinguish. We stayed several hours with
Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear
herself away. “I wish,” cried she, “that I were to die with you; I
cannot live in this world of misery.”

Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice
of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth,
my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
suffer! Live, and be happy, and make others so.”

And on the morrow Justine died. Elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence
failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
criminality of the saintly sufferer. My passionate and indignant
appeals were lost upon them. And when I received their cold answers
and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
avowal died away on my lips. Thus I might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. She
perished on the scaffold as a murderess!

From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and
voiceless grief of my Elizabeth. This also was my doing! And my
father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
are not your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!

Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and
Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.




Chapter 9


Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
and fear. Justine died, she rested, and I was alive. The blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
heart which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet
behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and
the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures
such as no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned
the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.

My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and
awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
“Do you think, Victor,” said he, “that I do not suffer
also? No one could love a child more than I loved your
brother”—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—“but
is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty
owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for
society.”

This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
other sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look of
despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was
particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at
ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
hour had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome
to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of the family had
retired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the
water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and
sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to
pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. I
was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only
unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and
heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore—often,
I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
might close over me and my calamities for ever. But I was restrained,
when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly
loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought also of my
father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them
exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose
among them?

At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that
could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author of
unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had
created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling
that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime,
which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained
behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of
him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently wished to
extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When I
reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished
to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine.

Our house was the house of mourning. My father’s health was deeply
shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and
desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
future prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
smiles.

“When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of
Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. Yet I am
certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake
of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend,
a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
it had been her own! I could not consent to the death of any human
being, but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to
remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel
she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walking on
the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. William and Justine were
assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free,
and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the
scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a
wretch.”

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in deed,
but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my
countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you
must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how
deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of
despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the
friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. Have we lost
the power of rendering you happy? Ah! While we love, while we are
true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
peace?”

And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before every
other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
heart? Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.

Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
ineffectual. I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial
influence could penetrate. The wounded deer dragging its fainting
limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.

Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left
my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought
in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed
towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my
boyhood. Six years had passed since then: _I_ was a wreck, but nought
had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.

I performed the first part of my journey on horseback. I afterwards
hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
injury on these rugged roads. The weather was fine; it was about the
middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of
Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The
weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in
the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung
me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as
Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher,
the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was
augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and
shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
earth, the habitations of another race of beings.

I passed the bridge of Pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that
overhangs it. Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix. This
valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed. The
high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no
more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached
the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and
magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.

A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this
journey. Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the
lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more. Then again the
kindly influence ceased to act—I found myself fettered again to grief
and indulging in all the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my
animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on
the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.

At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix. Exhaustion succeeded
to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured.
For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid
lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of
the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling sounds
acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed
the giver of oblivion.




Chapter 10


I spent the following day roaming through the valley. I stood beside
the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that
with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
barricade the valley. The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
presence-chamber of imperial Nature was broken only by the brawling
waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the
greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving. They elevated me
from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. In some degree, also, they
diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
last month. I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I
had contemplated during the day. They congregated round me; the
unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
gathered round me and bade me be at peace.

Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke? All of
soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
thought. The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends. Still I would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
in their cloudy retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule was
brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of
Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
effect of solemnising my mind and causing me to forget the passing
cares of life. I determined to go without a guide, for I was well
acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
solitary grandeur of the scene.

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots
the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
other trees. The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw
destruction upon the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or
luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I
received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may
convey to us.

  We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
     We rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
  We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
     Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
  It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
     The path of its departure still is free.
  Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
     Nought may endure but mutability!


It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent. For some
time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered
both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated
the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very
uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a
league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I
now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league;
and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in a recess
of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. Their icy and glittering
peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was
before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed,
“Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
away from the joys of life.”

As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the
crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his
stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I was
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me,
but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created. I trembled with rage and
horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
mortal combat. He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance,
and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
detestation and contempt.

“Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do
not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust! And,
oh! That I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”

“I expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind. If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and
you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it
be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”

“Abhorred monster! Fiend that thou art! The tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! You reproach me with
your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I
so negligently bestowed.”

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

He easily eluded me and said,

“Be calm! I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to
increase my misery? Life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in
opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and
docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
clemency and affection, is most due. Remember that I am thy creature;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I
alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made
me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous.”

“Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community between you
and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight,
in which one must fall.”

“How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed
with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my
creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures,
who owe me nothing? They spurn and hate me. The desert mountains and
dreary glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered here many days; the
caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the
only one which man does not grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they
are kinder to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of mankind
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep
no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my
wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be
moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to my tale; when you have heard
that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve.
But hear me. The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen
to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with
a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the
eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”

“Why do you call to my remembrance,” I rejoined, “circumstances of
which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and
author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me no power
to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from
the sight of your detested form.”

“Thus I relieve thee, my creator,” he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; “thus I take from
thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me and grant
me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this
from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
world, you will have heard my story and can decide. On you it rests,
whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless
life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
your own speedy ruin.”

As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed. My heart
was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weighed the
various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to
his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I
complained of his wickedness. These motives urged me to comply with
his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
rock. The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy
heart and depressed spirits. But I consented to listen, and seating
myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began
his tale.




Chapter 11


“It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original era of
my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard,
and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By
degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I
was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and troubled
me, but hardly had I felt this when, by opening my eyes, as I now
suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked and, I believe,
descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with
no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light
became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as I
walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the
forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting
from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst. This
roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I
found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. I slaked my thirst
at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.

“It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted
your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some
clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of
night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could
distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat
down and wept.

“Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of
pleasure. I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the
trees. [The moon] I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly,
but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with
which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct
ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger,
and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that I could
distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pleasure.

“Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations from each
other. I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with
drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted
when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
often intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also to observe,
with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the
boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. Sometimes I
tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into
silence again.

“The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened
form, showed itself, while I still remained in the forest. My
sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to
perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from
the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the
sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
thrush were sweet and enticing.

“One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been
left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live
embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange,
I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I
examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn. I was pained at this and sat still watching the
operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had placed near the heat
dried and itself became inflamed. I reflected on this, and by touching
the various branches, I discovered the cause and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it and have a
plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with
it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I
covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank
into sleep.

“It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame. I
observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again I
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for I found
some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees. I
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
the live embers. I found that the berries were spoiled by this
operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.

“Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day
searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. When
I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be
more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the
loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident and knew not how
to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious consideration of
this difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood
towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles and at
length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken
place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold
damp substance that covered the ground.

“It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and
shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which
had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This
was a new sight to me, and I examined the structure with great
curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it,
near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on
hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form
hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had ever
before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. But I was enchanted
by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite
and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the
remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like. Then, overcome by
fatigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep.

“It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my
travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
at sunset I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! The
huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
turns. The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw
placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. One
of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within
the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I
escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel,
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had
beheld in the village. This hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat
and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, I
dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however,
was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an
agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.

“Here, then, I retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
from the barbarity of man. As soon as morning dawned I crept from my
kennel, that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could
remain in the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back
of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig
sty and a clear pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had
crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be perceived
with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on
occasion to pass out; all the light I enjoyed came through the sty, and
that was sufficient for me.

“Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I
retired, for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered
too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. I
had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf
of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink
more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept
perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
tolerably warm.

“Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until
something should occur which might alter my determination. It was
indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with
pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little
water when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink, I beheld
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. The
girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found
cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. I lost
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing
the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along,
seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose
countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the
cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw
the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
house and sometimes in the yard.

“On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the
cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and almost
imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an
old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The
young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent
countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air
which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then
pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before experienced,
either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the
window, unable to bear these emotions.

“Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage,
and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed
pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed
thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
cottage together.

“The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to
eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again
occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming
with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The
old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
fields.

“Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that the
cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours. In the evening
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the
instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in
the morning. So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play,
but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since
found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the
science of words or letters.

“The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.”




Chapter 12


“I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the
occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners
of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I
remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from
the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I
might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would
remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
motives which influenced their actions.

“The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman
arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
after the first meal.

“This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon
perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. They
performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.

“They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion often
went apart and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness,
but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were
miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being,
should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They
possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
looks of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they
really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions,
but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which
were at first enigmatic.

“A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of
the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they
suffered that evil in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment
consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
could scarcely procure food to support it. They often, I believe,
suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
man when they reserved none for themselves.

“This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed,
during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own
consumption, but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on
the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and
roots which I gathered from a neighbouring wood.

“I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to assist
their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day
in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night I often
took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home
firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.

“I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she
opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great
pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the
youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed, with pleasure,
that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the
cottage and cultivating the garden.

“By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that
these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and
feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words
they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike science,
and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But I was baffled in
every attempt I made for this purpose. Their pronunciation was quick, and
the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the
mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having
remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I
discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of
discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
_wood._ I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth
and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only
one, which was _father._ The girl was called _sister_ or
_Agatha,_ and the youth _Felix, brother,_ or _son_. I cannot
describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of
these sounds and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished several other
words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good,
dearest, unhappy._

“I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of
the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, I
felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw
few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the
cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the
superior accomplishments of my friends. The old man, I could perceive,
often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes I found that
he called them, to cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a
cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I
generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus
with Felix. He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my
unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old
man.

“I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked
the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of poverty
and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little
white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in
the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that
obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible
hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring
farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner,
yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden,
but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old
man and Agatha.

“This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees I
discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when
he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs
for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend
these also; but how was that possible when I did not even understand
the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, however,
sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I
easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover myself to
the cottagers, I ought not to make the attempt until I had first become
master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.

“I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty,
and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself
in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that
it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; and when I became
fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am, I was
filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity.

“As the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this
time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
advanced.

“The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the
earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.

“My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the morning I
attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in
various occupations, I slept; the remainder of the day was spent in
observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, if there was any
moon or the night was star-light, I went into the woods and collected
my own food and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often as it
was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and performed those
offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these
labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and
once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good
spirit, wonderful_; but I did not then understand the signification
of these terms.

“My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover the
motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to
know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought
(foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the
venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix
flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior beings who would be
the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a
thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of
me. I imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle
demeanour and conciliating words, I should first win their favour and
afterwards their love.

“These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to
the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but
supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood with tolerable ease.
It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
better treatment than blows and execration.

“The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
aspect of the earth. Men who before this change seemed to have been
hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of
cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth! Fit habitation
for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and
unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of
nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”




Chapter 13


“I now hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall relate
events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had been,
have made me what I am.

“Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies
cloudless. It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy
should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My
senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and
a thousand sights of beauty.

“It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested
from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children
listened to him—that I observed the countenance of Felix was
melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently, and once his father
paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired
the cause of his son’s sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and
the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.

“It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a country-man as a guide.
The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black
veil. Agatha asked a question, to which the stranger only replied by
pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was
musical but unlike that of either of my friends. On hearing this word,
Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her
hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular
proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with
a lovely pink.

“Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of
sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of
ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it capable; his
eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I
thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by
different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as
well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She did not appear to
understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and
dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some
conversation took place between him and his father, and the young
stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.

“I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds
and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood
by nor herself understood the cottagers. They made many signs which I
did not comprehend, but I saw that her presence diffused gladness
through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of
delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed
the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made
signs which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she
came. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
expressed joy, the cause of which I did not comprehend. Presently I
found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger
repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language;
and the idea instantly occurred to me that I should make use of the
same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about twenty
words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had
before understood, but I profited by the others.

“As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. When they
separated Felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night
sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and
by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely
guest was the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to
understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
it utterly impossible.

“The next morning Felix went out to his work, and after the usual
occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of the
old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or
dying away like a nightingale of the woods.

“When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first
declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. The old
man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to
explain to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she
bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.

“The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration
that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the
knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most
of the words uttered by my protectors.

“In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for I never
ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
treatment I had formerly endured in the first village which I entered.

“My days were spent in close attention, that I might more speedily
master the language; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than
the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken
accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
was spoken.

“While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of letters as
it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field
for wonder and delight.

“The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins
of Empires_. I should not have understood the purport of this book had not
Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. He had chosen this
work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the
Eastern authors. Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge of history
and a view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave
me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different
nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics, of the stupendous
genius and mental activity of the Grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue
of the early Romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the
decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard
of the discovery of the American hemisphere and wept with Safie over the
hapless fate of its original inhabitants.

“These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. Was
man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so
vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil
principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour
that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more
abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I
could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or
even why there were laws and governments; but when I heard details of
vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and
loathing.

“Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
While I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the
Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I
heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.

“The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the
possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and
unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with
only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered,
except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to
waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! And what was I? Of
my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant, but I knew that I
possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides,
endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; I was not even
of the same nature as man. I was more agile than they and could
subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with
less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked
around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot
upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?

“I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
knowledge. Oh, that I had for ever remained in my native wood, nor
known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

“Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it
has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to
shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that there was but one
means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
which I feared yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good
feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
cottagers, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except
through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was unseen and
unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of
becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the
animated smiles of the charming Arabian were not for me. The mild
exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved
Felix were not for me. Miserable, unhappy wretch!

“Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the
difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the
father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the
older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained
knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.

“But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my
infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if
they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I
distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I
then was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being
resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I? The
question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.

“I will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to
return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various
feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in
an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).”




Chapter 14


“Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends. It was
one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to
one so utterly inexperienced as I was.

“The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good
family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. His son was bred
in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the
highest distinction. A few months before my arrival they had lived in
a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends and
possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.

“The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a
Turkish merchant and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some
reason which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from
Constantinople to join him. He was tried and condemned to death. The
injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all Paris was indignant;
and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime
alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.

“Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and
indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the
court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then
looked around for the means. After many fruitless attempts to gain
admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an
unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the
unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the
execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at night
and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. The Turk,
amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer
by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with
contempt, yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit
her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the
youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed
a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.

“The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made
on the heart of Felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in
his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he
should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to
accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of the
event as to the consummation of his happiness.

“During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several
letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to
express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
man, a servant of her father who understood French. She thanked him in
the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and
at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.

“I have copies of these letters, for I found means, during my residence
in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters
were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will
give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
as the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat
the substance of them to you.

“Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a
slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
the father of Safie, who married her. The young girl spoke in high and
enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the
bondage to which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in
the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female
followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly
impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem,
allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble
emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian and
remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in
society was enchanting to her.

“The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night
previous to it he quitted his prison and before morning was distant
many leagues from Paris. Felix had procured passports in the name of
his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his
plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in
an obscure part of Paris.

“Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont
Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable
opportunity of passing into some part of the Turkish dominions.

“Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she
should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in
expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society
of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
affection. They conversed with one another through the means of an
interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie
sang to him the divine airs of her native country.

“The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes
of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other
plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear
lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer
if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they
inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled
to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and
secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed. His plans
were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris.

“The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their
victim and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. The
plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were
thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his
dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of
her whom he loved. This idea was torture to him. He quickly arranged
with the Turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity
for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a
boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian,
he hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.

“He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the
trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.

“They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I
discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for
whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted Italy with
his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him,
as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.

“Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered
him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family. He could
have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss
of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The
arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.

“When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth
and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her
lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. The generous
nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his
tyrannical mandate.

“A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told
her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn
had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the
French government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to
Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. He
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential
servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.

“When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey
was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
to it. By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn,
but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for
Germany.

“She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage
of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her
with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. She fell, however,
into good hands. The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at
the cottage of her lover.”




Chapter 15


“Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply.
I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.

“As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of the
progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which occurred
in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.

“One night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where I
collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on
the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and
some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. 
Fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which I
had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _Paradise Lost_, a volume
of _Plutarch’s Lives_, and the _Sorrows of Werter_. The
possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually
studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were
employed in their ordinary occupations.

“I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They produced
in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In
the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that I found in it a
never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and
domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a
more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character
contained no pretension, but it sank deep. The disquisitions upon
death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not
pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards
the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely
understanding it.

“As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and
condition. I found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I
was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I
was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none.
‘The path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
annihilation. My person was hideous and my stature gigantic. What did
this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did I come? What was my
destination? These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to
solve them.

“The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the
histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book
had a far different effect upon me from the _Sorrows of Werter_. I
learned from Werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but Plutarch
taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my
own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many
things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a very
confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
and boundless seas. But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
large assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the
only school in which I had studied human nature, but this book
developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned
in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. I felt the
greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these
feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa,
Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Theseus. The
patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should
have been imbued with different sensations.

“But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read
it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of
exciting. I often referred the several situations, as their similarity
struck me, to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to
any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
gall of envy rose within me.

“Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon
after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had
neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was
your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You
minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
occurrences. You doubtless recollect these papers. Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
horrors and rendered mine indelible. I sickened as I read. ‘Hateful
day when I received life!’ I exclaimed in agony. ‘Accursed creator!
Why did you form a monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from me in
disgust? God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
and encourage him, but I am solitary and abhorred.’

“These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should
become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn
from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. I
postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every
day’s experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking
until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.

“Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. The
presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also
found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. Felix and Agatha
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I
cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person
reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
image and that inconstant shade.

“I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my
thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and
dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s
supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me,
and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.

“Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did
not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention
towards the cottagers. Their happiness was not decreased by the
absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and
their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost
limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would turn them from
me with disdain and horror. The poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not
believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

“The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain
the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means
be tolerated by my younger protectors.

“One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his children had departed,
he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before. At first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

“My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me and I sank to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting
all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived
me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their
cottage.

“I knocked. ‘Who is there?’ said the old man. ‘Come in.’

“I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am
a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you
would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’

“‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what
manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to
procure food for you.’

“‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is
warmth and rest only that I need.’

“I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview, when the old man addressed me.

‘By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman; are you
French?’

“‘No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that
language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’

“‘Are they Germans?’

“‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation
or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go have never
seen me and know little of me. I am full of fears, for if I fail
there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.’

“‘Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’

“‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.’

“‘That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?’

“‘I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I
feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends; I
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.’

“‘Where do these friends reside?’

“‘Near this spot.’

“The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere. I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’

“‘Excellent man! I thank you and accept your generous offer. You
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid,
I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
creatures.’

“‘Heaven forbid! Even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am
unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.’

“‘How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall
be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.’

“‘May I know the names and residence of those friends?’

“I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that
moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a moment
to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the
time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I
seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’

“‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Who are you?’

“At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the antelope. But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and
I refrained. I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general
tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”




Chapter 16


“Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did I
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
their shrieks and misery.

“When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable
night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest
or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the ruin.

“But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness
towards my enemies? No; from that moment I declared everlasting war
against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

“The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

“The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the
cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my
conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that
my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a
fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I
ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to me, and by degrees to
have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe my errors to be
irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the
cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
party.

“These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix
tearing me from his father’s feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that
it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
search of food.

“When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the
well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
accustomed hour when the family arose. That hour passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I
trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside
of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the
agony of this suspense.

“Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix
approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had not
quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.

“‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
the produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
I beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
determination.’

“‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can
never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest
danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and
my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat you not to reason
with me any more. Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this
place.’

“Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then
departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more.

“I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed and had broken
the only link that held me to the world. For the first time the
feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to
control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I
bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends,
of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the
exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of
tears somewhat soothed me. But again when I reflected that they had
spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to
injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As
night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage,
and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
operations.

“As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my
spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the
dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the
cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.

“As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.

“And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I
resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the
thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you
were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness
than to him who had given me life? Among the lessons that Felix had
bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been omitted; I had learned from
these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
You had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
this place I resolved to proceed.

“But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a
southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I
did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although
towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling,
heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I
determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from
any other being that wore the human form.

“My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense. It was
late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided.
I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh,
earth! How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being! The
mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more
deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow
fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents
now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I
often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me
no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived
on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.

“I generally rested during the day and travelled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of
these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears
again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with
thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.

“I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard
the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade
of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running
towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides
of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. She
was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic,
who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. On
seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, I
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun,
which he carried, at my body and fired. I sank to the ground, and my
injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

“This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being
from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable
pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. The feelings of
kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments
before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by
pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the
agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted.

“For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder,
and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had
endured.

“After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The
labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my
desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for
the enjoyment of pleasure.

“But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time I
reached the environs of Geneva.

“It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among
the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

“At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection,
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came
running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

“Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, ‘Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.’

“He struggled violently. ‘Let me go,’ he cried;
‘monster! Ugly wretch! You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. You
are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell my papa.’

“‘Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’

“‘Hideous monster! Let me go. My papa is a syndic—he is M.
Frankenstein—he will punish you. You dare not keep me.’

“‘Frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom I have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’

“The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried
despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
moment he lay dead at my feet.

“I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation;
my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’

“As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his
breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite
of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few moments I
gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was
for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in
regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and affright.

“Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only
wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

“While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had
committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I
entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was
sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent over
her and whispered, ‘Awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
beloved, awake!’

“The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. Should she
indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? Thus
would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not I, but
she, shall suffer; the murder I have committed because I am for ever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had
its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of
Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work
mischief. I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
the folds of her dress. She moved again, and I fled.

“For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
its miseries for ever. At length I wandered towards these mountains,
and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning
passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have
promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable; man
will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
would not deny herself to me. My companion must be of the same species
and have the same defects. This being you must create.”




Chapter 17


The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the
expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
proposition. He continued,

“You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone
can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
concede.”

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
me.

“I do refuse it,” I replied; “and no torture shall ever extort a
consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but you
shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another like
yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I
have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent.”

“You are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
of threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I
am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator,
would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I
should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you
could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him
live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would
bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
union. Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. I will
revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and
chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear
inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor
finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
your birth.”

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
he calmed himself and proceeded—

“I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for you do
not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. If any being felt
emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a
hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the
whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a creature of
another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be
harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me
happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I
excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my
request!”

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences
of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature
of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion
of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of
feeling and continued,

“If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not
that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will
be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me,
I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment
and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire.”

“You propose,” replied I, “to fly from the habitations of
man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and
you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent.”

“How inconstant are your feelings! But a moment ago you were moved by
my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that
with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of man and
dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions
will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly
away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker.”

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him and
sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when
I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle
these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathise with him, I
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
was yet in my power to bestow.

“You swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not
already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust
you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by
affording a wider scope for your revenge?”

“How is this? I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If
I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall
become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. My vices
are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will
necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel
the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
existence and events from which I am now excluded.”

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various
arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of virtues which
he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
manifested towards him. His power and threats were not omitted in my
calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a
long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and
my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
Turning to him, therefore, I said,

“I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever,
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall
deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.”

“I swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to your
home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with
unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall
appear.”

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
sea of ice.

His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent
towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced
perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences
of the day had produced. Night was far advanced when I came to the
halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars
shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I
exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.”

These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you
how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I
listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
way to consume me.

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no
rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own heart I could
give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a
mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I
answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were placed
under a ban—as if I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if
never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I
loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate
myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
and that thought only had to me the reality of life.




Chapter 18


Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and
I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I feared the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my
repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not
compose a female without again devoting several months to profound
study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries
having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was
material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my
father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to
every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
me. A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts
towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring
blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took
refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake
alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and
bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and
on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile
and a more cheerful heart.

It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
calling me aside, thus addressed me,

“I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still
unhappy and still avoid our society. For some time I was lost in
conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”

I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—

“I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your
marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other from your
earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so blind is the experience of
man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
wish that she might become your wife. Nay, you may have met with another
whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
to feel.”

“My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my
warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”

“The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear Victor,
gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you
feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
a gloom over us. But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate. Tell me,
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You
are younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose,
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words
with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and
sincerity.”

I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of
thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me
the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled
and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold miseries might not
impend over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the
ground? I must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from
which I expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I
had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
intercourse with those I loved. I knew that a thousand fearful
accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to
thrill all connected with me with horror. I was aware also that I
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus
employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be
restored to my family in peace and happiness. My promise fulfilled,
the monster would depart for ever. Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to
visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I
clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply. After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that
resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find
that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
return, have restored me entirely to myself.

The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or
at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal kind
precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without
previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth,
arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered
with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be
an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many
hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between
me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were alone, would he not at times
force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to
contemplate its progress?

To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that my union
with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. My father’s
age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one
reward I promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim Elizabeth and
forget the past in my union with her.

I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and
would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
this might happen. But through the whole period during which I was the
slave of my creature I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his
machinations.

It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native
country. My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth
therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. It had
been her care which provided me a companion in Clerval—and yet a man
is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s
sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand
conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent
farewell.

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly
knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around.
I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on
it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed
many leagues, I arrived at Strasburgh, where I waited two days for
Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between us! He
was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the
setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new
day. He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and
the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is to live,” he cried;
“now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are
you desponding and sorrowful!” In truth, I was occupied by gloomy
thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an
eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a
miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to
enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to
Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this
voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz
becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw
many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed,
presents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view
rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory,
flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river
and populous towns occupy the scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits
continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the
bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to
drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger. And if these
were my sensations, who can describe those of Henry? He felt as if he had
been transported to Fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by
man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes
of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the
snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance
were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore
up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud;
but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The
mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
charm in the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
half hid in the recess of the mountain. Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who
pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
our own country.”

Clerval! Beloved friend! Even now it delights me to record your words and
to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He was a
being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” His wild and
enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. His
soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
in the imagination. But even human sympathies were not sufficient to
satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external nature, which others regard
only with admiration, he loved with ardour:—

    ——The sounding cataract
    Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,
    The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
    Their colours and their forms, were then to him
    An appetite; a feeling, and a love,
    That had no need of a remoter charm,
    By thought supplied, or any interest
    Unborrow’d from the eye.

          [Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey”.]

And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost
for ever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the
life of its creator;—has this mind perished? Does it now only exist
in my memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight
tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart,
overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will
proceed with my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to
post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England.
It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw
the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames presented a new scene;
they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish
Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had heard
of even in my country.

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering
above all, and the Tower famed in English history.




Chapter 19


London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
time, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally
occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most
distinguished natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had
come over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of
the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest
was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when alone, I
could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory
peace. But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
my heart. I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my
fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and
Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
my soul with anguish.

But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive
and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of
manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long
had in view. His design was to visit India, in the belief that he had
in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had
taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the
execution of his plan. He was for ever busy, and the only check to his
enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to conceal this
as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures
natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone. I now also
began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
on the head. Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person in
Scotland who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned the
beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth,
where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and I,
although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now
February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not
intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford,
Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
this tour about the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and
the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to us
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
stately deer were all novelties to us.

From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our minds
were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
there more than a century and a half before. It was here that Charles
I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him,
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his
companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and
son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a
dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these
feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters,
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
domes, embosomed among aged trees.

I enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed
for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never
visited my mind, and if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has
entered my soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit what
I shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.

We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs
and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery
were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the
field on which that patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
and the remembrancers. For an instant I dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
into my flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
miserable self.

We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock, which was our next
place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; but
everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
distant white Alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The latter name
made me tremble when pronounced by Henry, and I hastened to quit
Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.

From Derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
Cumberland and Westmorland. I could now almost fancy myself among the
Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also we
made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into
happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than
mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found
in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have
imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his
inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among
these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.”

But he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again
engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.

We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland
and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them
to travel on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had now neglected my
promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s
disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance
on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment
from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited
for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed I was
miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and I
saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to
read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend
followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment,
but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the
consciousness of which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed
drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so well
as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic
castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, Arthur’s
Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for
the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was
impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.

We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and
along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and
accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland
alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with
my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short
time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
congenial to your own temper.”

Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. “I had rather be with
you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch
people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in
your absence.”

Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of
Scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the
monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have
finished, that he might receive his companion.

With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours. It was a place
fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were
continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely
affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they
indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
the mainland, which was about five miles distant.

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two
rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought some
furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at
and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
of men.

In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea to
listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. It was a
monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was
far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills
are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when
troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively
infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived, but
as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my
laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night
in order to complete my work. It was, indeed, a filthy process in
which I was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of
enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my
mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now I went to it in
cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.

Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I
grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my
persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much
dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.

In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably
advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager
hope, which I dared not trust myself to question but which was
intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.




Chapter 20


I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I
remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should leave my
labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to
consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three years before, I was
engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled
barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
remorse. I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had
sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and
reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her
creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn
with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
deserted by one of his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon
the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
condition precarious and full of terror. Had I right, for my own benefit,
to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before been moved
by the sophisms of the being I had created; I had been struck senseless by
his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
promise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.

I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by
the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task
which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the
fulfilment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I
sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to dissipate
the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most
terrible reveries.

Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea;
it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone
specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence,
although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
person landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot; I felt a
presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the sensation
of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.

Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he
approached me and said in a smothered voice,

“You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endured toil and misery;
I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among
its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt many
months in the heaths of England and among the deserts of Scotland. I have
endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
hopes?”

“Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”

“Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; you believe
yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of
day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master;
obey!”

“The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in
vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon whose
delight is in death and wretchedness? Begone! I am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage.”

The monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
impotence of anger. “Shall each man,” cried he, “find a
wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
Man! You may hate, but beware! Your hours will pass in dread and misery,
and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
ever. Are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my
wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge
remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
misery. Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I will watch with
the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall
repent of the injuries you inflict.”

“Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend
beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.”

“It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night.”

I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”

I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with
precipitation. In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot
across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
waves.

All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. I burned with rage to
pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. I
walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why had I not
followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him
to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland. I shuddered
to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
And then I thought again of his words—“_I will be with you on
your wedding-night._” That, then, was the period fixed for the
fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die and at once satisfy and
extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I
thought of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I
had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall
before my enemy without a bitter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
the depths of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last
night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I
almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. I
desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to
be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a
dæmon whom I had myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it
loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the
sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep
sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep
into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as
if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to
reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared
like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to
join him. He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in London desired
his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
Indian enterprise. He could not any longer delay his departure; but as
his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now
conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of
my society on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to
leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed
southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and
I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.

Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered
to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must
handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. The next
morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had
destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had
mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself and
then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments
out of the room, but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my
work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly
put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them
up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the
meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film
had been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time saw
clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in
my own mind that to create another like the fiend I had first made
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I
banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.

Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my
basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land,
but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission of a
dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
fellow creatures. At one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of
darkness and cast my basket into the sea; I listened to the gurgling sound
as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded, but
the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations
that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the
moon, everything was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I
slept soundly.

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I
found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high, and
the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found
that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from
which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I
confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass with me
and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
world that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be driven into the
wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already
been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to
my other sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; I looked upon the
sea; it was to be my grave. “Fiend,” I exclaimed, “your
task is already fulfilled!” I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and
of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so
despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
closing before me for ever, I shudder to reflect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became
free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high
land towards the south.

Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured
for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of
warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
of life even in the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a
part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. It had a
wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived
the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself
suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I
carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which I at
length saw issuing from behind a small promontory. As I was in a state of
extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place
where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with
me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good
harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
escape.

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
people crowded towards the spot. They seemed much surprised at my
appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered
together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they
spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My
good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of
this town and inform me where I am?”

“You will know that soon enough,” replied a man with a hoarse voice.
“Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste,
but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.”

I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
stranger, and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
angry countenances of his companions. “Why do you answer me so
roughly?” I replied. “Surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to
receive strangers so inhospitably.”

“I do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
English may be, but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains.”

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly
increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which
annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn, but
no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the
crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, “Come, sir, you must
follow me to Mr. Kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”

“Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is not
this a free country?”

“Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate,
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was
found murdered here last night.”

This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself. I was innocent;
that could easily be proved; accordingly I followed my conductor in silence
and was led to one of the best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from
fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic
to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into
apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that
was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair
all fear of ignominy or death.

I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
recollection.




Chapter 21


I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however,
with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.

About half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with
his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about
two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle,
and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding
along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his
length on the ground. His companions came up to assist him, and by the
light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man,
who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was the
corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage
of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty
years of age. He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of
any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
when the mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the murder of
my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for
support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew
an unfavourable augury from my manner.

The son confirmed his father’s account, but when Daniel Nugent was
called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore;
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same
boat in which I had just landed.

A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with
only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found.

Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed and
rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
quite gone.

Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been
obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed.
Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body
from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know
the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
of the town of —— from the place where I had deposited the corpse.

Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into
the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
effect the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably
suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of the
murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help being struck by the
strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had
inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly
tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. How
can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with
horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
agony. The examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the lifeless form of Henry
Clerval stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
the body, I exclaimed, “Have my murderous machinations deprived you
also, my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed; other
victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my
benefactor—”

The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and
I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my
ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the
murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my
attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was
tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke
my native language, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.

Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not
sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many blooming
children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I
made that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
the wheel, continually renewed the torture?

But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had
forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around
and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which I
was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly.

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside
me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her
tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English,
and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my sufferings.

“Are you better now, sir?” said she.

I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, “I believe I am;
but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am
still alive to feel this misery and horror.”

“For that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you
were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that’s none
of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty
with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt
languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The whole series
of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it
were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
of reality.

As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew
feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the
hangman who would gain his fee?

These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had
shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison
to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who
had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to
see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and
miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see
that I was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
intervals.

One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes
half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. I was overcome by gloom
and misery and often reflected I had better seek death than desire to
remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I
considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
penalty of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my
thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered.
His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to
mine and addressed me in French,

“I fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to
make you more comfortable?”

“I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving.”

“I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”

“That is my least concern; I am, by a course of strange events, become
the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and
have been, can death be any evil to me?”

“Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some
surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was
presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path.”

As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured on
this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at
the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for Mr. Kirwin hastened
to say,

“Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
your person were brought me, and I examined them that I might discover some
trace by which I could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I
discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote
to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
kind.”

“This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am
now to lament?”

“Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with
gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.”

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
misery and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for
me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes,
and cried out in agony,

“Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, do not
let him enter!”

Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help
regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in
rather a severe tone,

“I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”

“My father!” cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
from anguish to pleasure. “Is my father indeed come? How kind, how
very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?”

My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose and
quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the
arrival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and cried,

“Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?”

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of
cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
of the room. “You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems
to pursue you. And poor Clerval—”

The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears.

“Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the
most horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I
should have died on the coffin of Henry.”

We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I
gradually recovered my health.

As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was
for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
life? It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now
drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also
sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant, although the
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours
motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three months
in prison, and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a
relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country
town where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every
care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared
the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not
brought before the court that decides on life and death. The grand
jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney
Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight
after my removal I was liberated from prison.

My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a
criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh
atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. I did not
participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes
they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark
orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as I
first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked
of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest; but
these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a
wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a
prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the
existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.

Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should
return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
I so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to
blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstrous image which I had endued with the
mockery of a soul still more monstrous. My father still desired to
delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the fatigues of a
journey, for I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a human being. My
strength was gone. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day
preyed upon my wasted frame.

Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on board a vessel
bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores.
It was midnight. I lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my
sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that I should
soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream;
yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested
shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly
that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on
to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night in
which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.

Ever since my recovery from the fever, I had been in the custom of taking
every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, I now
swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. But sleep did
not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
thousand objects that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind
of nightmare; I felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was
watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of
security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour
and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm
forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
susceptible.




Chapter 22


The voyage came to an end. We landed, and proceeded to Paris. I soon
found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I
could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were
indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and
sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to
seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not
abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt
attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right
to share their intercourse. I had unchained an enemy among them whose
joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How they
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know
my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!

My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I
felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of
murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

“Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know me. 
Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent
as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause
of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all
died by my hands.”

My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an
explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of
delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved in my
convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence
concerning the wretch I had created. I had a persuasion that I should be
supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. But,
besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my
hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
silent when I would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably
from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part
relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
“My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat
you never to make such an assertion again.”

“I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the
assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not
sacrifice the whole human race.”

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as
possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my
misfortunes.

As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost
self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
to the sea of ice.

A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland, I received the
following letter from Elizabeth:

“My dear Friend,

“It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle
dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you
must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than
when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably,
tortured as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in
your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
comfort and tranquillity.

“Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at
this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
some explanation necessary before we meet.

Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain? If
you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the
case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I
have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.

“You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young, and
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I
believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But
as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each
other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our
case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you by our mutual
happiness, with simple truth—Do you not love another?

“You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last
autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our
connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love
you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my
own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now
I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who
have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured
that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be
made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you
obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

“Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle
will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I
shall need no other happiness.

“Elizabeth Lavenza.



“Geneva, May 18th, 17—”



This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of
the fiend—“_I will be with you on your
wedding-night!_” Such was my sentence, and on that night would the
dæmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of
happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. On that night he
had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were
victorious I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he
were vanquished, I should be a free man. Alas! What freedom? Such as the
peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless,
penniless, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty except that in my
Elizabeth I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
angel’s arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make
her happy. If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My
destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer
should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would
surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed
_to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that
threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that
he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately
after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my
immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
should not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and
affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness
remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centred in
you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life
and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a
dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide this tale of
misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But
until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. This I most
earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply.”

In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned
to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were
in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a
change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I
was.

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness
with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed
me; sometimes I was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.

Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice
would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human
feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason
returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with
resignation. Ah! It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.

Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
Elizabeth. I remained silent.

“Have you, then, some other attachment?”

“None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to our union with
delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate
myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”

“My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen
us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. Our circle will be
small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
And when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
deprived.”

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the
threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as
invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words “_I shall be with
you on your wedding-night_,” I should regard the threatened fate as
unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were
balanced with it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful
countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined,
the seal to my fate.

Great God! If for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish
intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself
for ever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over
the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real
intentions; and when I thought that I had prepared only my own death, I
hastened that of a far dearer victim.

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed my
feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own
heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of
the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian
government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It
was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa
Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
near which it stood.

In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the
fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger
constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for
in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
for its solemnisation drew nearer and I heard it continually spoken of
as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her;
and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which I had
promised to reveal to her on the following day. My father was in the
meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.

After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my
father’s, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our
journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our
voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable;
all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the
feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalègre, and at a distance,
surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the
ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

I took the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If
you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would
endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
one day at least permits me to enjoy.”

“Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope,
nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not
painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me
not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I
will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move
along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature
appears!”

Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating;
joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
to distraction and reverie.

The sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and
observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The
spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.

The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched
the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
me and cling to me for ever.




Chapter 23


It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.

I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious
and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in
my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my
life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
of my adversary was extinguished.

Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
trembling, she asked, “What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor?
What is it you fear?”

“Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and
all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how
fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.

She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages
of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to
my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to
conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
execution of his menaces when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful
scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I
heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood
trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This
state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed
into the room.

Great God! Why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the
destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I
turn I see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this and live? Alas!
Life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. For a moment
only did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground.

When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others
appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I
escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my
wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the
posture in which I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have
supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held
in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished.
The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up.
The windows of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of
panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be
described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his
fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards
the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me,
leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
plunged into the lake.

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to
the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with
boats; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several hours, we
returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to
search the country, parties going in different directions among the
woods and vines.

I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the
house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken
man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my
eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I
was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had
happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
I had lost.

After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were women weeping around; I
hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
cause. I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death
of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly
of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining
friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his
feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. I started
up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the
wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was
hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men
to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from
mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt,
and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any
exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were
familiar to me in my happier time and which I had contemplated but the day
before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection.
Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw
the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had
then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as
a great and sudden change. The sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had
snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been
so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their
_acme_, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you. Know
that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate. My
own strength is exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of
my hideous narration.

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old
man! His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with
all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having
few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed
be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
in wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to
rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and
darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes,
indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a
dungeon. Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear
conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the
memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their
cause—the monster whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had
sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a
maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal
revenge on his cursed head.

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to
reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town
and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the
destroyer of my family, and that I required him to exert his whole
authority for the apprehension of the murderer.

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be
assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
be spared to discover the villain.”

“I thank you,” replied I; “listen, therefore, to the
deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that I
should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
which, however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to
be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood.” My
manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in my
own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life. I now related
my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I continued
he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes shudder with
horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
on his countenance.

When I had concluded my narration, I said, “This is the being whom I
accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your
whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that
your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those
functions on this occasion.”

This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon
to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you
every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an
animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
no man would venture to intrude? Besides, some months have elapsed since
the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he
has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.”

“I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if
he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois
and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts; you do not
credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
punishment which is his desert.”

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
“You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if
it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer
punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have
yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
make up your mind to disappointment.”

“That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I
confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage
is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned
loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have
but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to
his destruction.”

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a frenzy
in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to a Genevan
magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and
reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

“Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is you say.”

I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
some other mode of action.




Chapter 24


My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
delirium or death would have been my portion.

My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, which, when I
was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels
which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

And now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. I have
traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I
have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon
the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared
not die and leave my adversary in being.

When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I
might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled,
and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the
entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father
reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
observer. The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived,
and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass
and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the
sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the
spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will
preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun
and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
eyes for ever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed
and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
torments me.”

I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.

I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh. It rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy and have
destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that I
was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known
and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an
audible whisper, “I am satisfied, miserable wretch! You have
determined to live, and I am satisfied.”

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than
mortal speed.

I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. Guided by a
slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The
blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the fiend
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I
have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by
this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself,
who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die,
left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw
the print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first entering
on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the
least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil
and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly
extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes,
when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast
was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had
invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
few drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom
seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
path. I had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers
by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed,
which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had
provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most
miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture. The
spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
happiness that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of
this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was
sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my
friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent
countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth’s
voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by
a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should
come and that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
friends. What agonising fondness did I feel for them! How did I cling to
their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments vengeance, that
burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the
destruction of the dæmon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the
mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the
ardent desire of my soul.

What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know. Sometimes, indeed, he
left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet
over”—these words were legible in one of these
inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I
seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if
you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my
enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”

Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee,
miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give up my search
until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join my
Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the
reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants were
shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to
seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be
procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.

The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. One
inscription that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils
only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
hatred.”

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I
resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support
me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary
of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
south! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when
they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with
rapture the boundary of their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down
and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in
safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
to meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus
traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the
fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I had
daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that
when I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and
I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new
courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said,
had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of
his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter
food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a
numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they
conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless
journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey.

I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I
departed from land.

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have endured
misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution
burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and
rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard
the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But
again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that
I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured
her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after
the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the
summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to
discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I
distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known
form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might
not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
oppressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their
dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an
hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible, nor
did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short
time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed
perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I
beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within
me.

But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had
ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared;
and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in a few
minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left
drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
thus preparing for me a hideous death.

In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I
myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw your
vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life.
I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
the direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southwards,
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could pursue
my enemy. But your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my
vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied
hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.

Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dæmon, allow
me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do,
swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to
undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear, if
the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated
woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent
and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
and fiend-like malice. Hear him not; call on the names of William,
Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and
thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the
steel aright.

Walton, _in continuation._


August 26th, 17—.


You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not
feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his
tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes
were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me,
and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a
greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence!
I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I
endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his
creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.

“Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your
senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the
world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not seek
to increase your own.”

Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked
to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held
with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said
he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to
posterity.”

Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest
tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts and every feeling of my
soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe
him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can
now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and
death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his
friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
remote world. This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render
them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays
unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. His
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates
a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in the days
of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems
to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.

“When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for
some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a coolness
of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This sentiment of
the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed,
for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
might be useful to my fellow creatures. When I reflected on the work I had
completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational
animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But
this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now
serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes
are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am
chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I
conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot
recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod
heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty
ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once
was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation. Despondency
rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell,
never, never again to rise.”

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have
sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert
seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his
value and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.

“I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so
miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any
man be to me as Clerval was, or any woman another Elizabeth? Even
where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our
minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our
infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a
brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of
Clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead, and but one
feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
utility to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But
such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I
gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.”

My beloved Sister,

September 2d.


I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever
doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit
it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and
threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows whom I
have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have
none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our
situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is
terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
through me. If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.

And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not hear of my
destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and
you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My
beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a husband
and lovely children; you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He
endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession
which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have
happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel
the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he
rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of
expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny
caused by this despair.

September 5th.


A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot
forbear recording it.

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of
my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of
desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire
still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly
roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—I was roused by half
a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. They
entered, and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his
companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, I could not refuse.
We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free
passage be opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
this. They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn
promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my
course southwards.

This speech troubled me. I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived
the idea of returning if set free. Yet could I, in justice, or even in
possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated before I answered, when
Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men,
he said,

“What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then,
so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious
expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
these you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this
was it an honourable undertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as the
benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now,
behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
firesides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove
yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your
purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your
hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
you wonder that these men were moved? They looked at one another and were
unable to reply. I spoke; I told them to retire and consider of what had
been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
desired the contrary, but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage
would return.

They retired and I turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and
almost deprived of life.

How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than
return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my
fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
willingly continue to endure their present hardships.

September 7th.


The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back
ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess
to bear this injustice with patience.

September 12th.


It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility
and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to detail these
bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted
towards England and towards you, I will not despond.

September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. We were
in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed. The ice cracked
behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from
the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they
will soon return to England.”

“Do you, then, really return?”

“Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them
unwillingly to danger, and I must return.”

“Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose, but
mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am weak, but
surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with
sufficient strength.” Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the
bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.

It was long before he was restored, and I often thought that life was
entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with
difficulty and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a composing
draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he
told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.

His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve and be patient. I sat
by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept; but
presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near,
said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall
soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think
not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that burning
hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself
justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During these last days I
have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was
bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
well-being. This was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
that. My duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or
misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to
create a companion for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity
and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction
beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I
know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he may
render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was
mine, but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious motives, I
asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and I renew this request now,
when I am only induced by reason and virtue.

“Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
this task; and now that you are returning to England, you will have
little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration of these
points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I
leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I
may still be misled by passion.

“That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the
only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of
the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms. Farewell,
Walton! Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have myself been
blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”

His voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
effort, he sank into silence. About half an hour afterwards he
attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and
his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed
away from his lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this
glorious spirit? What can I say that will enable you to understand the
depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would be inadequate and
feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of
disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find
consolation.

I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine.
Good night, my sister.

Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the
remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the power to detail
it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be incomplete without this
final and wonderful catastrophe.

I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to
describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
apparent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my
approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of
such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and
endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
I called on him to stay.

He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the
lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and
every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
uncontrollable passion.

“That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my
crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it
avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee
by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer
me.”

His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I
approached this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my eyes to his
face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I
attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster
continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I
gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.

“Your repentance,” I said, “is now superfluous. If you
had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
Frankenstein would yet have lived.”

“And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that I was then
dead to agony and remorse? He,” he continued, pointing to the corpse,
“he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. Oh! Not the
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me
on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think you that the
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was fashioned to be
susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
torture such as you cannot even imagine.

“After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken
and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; I
abhorred myself. But when I discovered that he, the author at once of
my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
indulgence of which I was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. I
recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. I
knew that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was the
slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not
disobey. Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not miserable. I had
cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no
choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had willingly
chosen. The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!”

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I called
to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “Wretch!” I said.
“It is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are
consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend!
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would
he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you
feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
from your power.”

“Oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
“Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
be the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of
virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am
content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when I die, I am
well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. Once
my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once
I falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I was
nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has
degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no
malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the
frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same
creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the
fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man
had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone.

“You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my
crimes and his misfortunes. But in the detail which he gave you of them
he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured
wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did
not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving; still
I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there no
injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all
humankind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his
friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these are virtuous
and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my
blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.

“But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and
the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have
devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that
irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but
your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look on the
hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the
imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.

“Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work
is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to perform this
sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall
collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
create such another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the
agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no
more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no
longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light,
feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my
happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by
crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in
death?

“Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive
and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better
satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so; thou
didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness;
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than
that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
wounds until death shall close them for ever.

“But soon,” he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “I
shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning
miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration
will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell.”

He sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft
which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves and
lost in darkness and distance.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANKENSTEIN; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Phantom of the Opera
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
anything. You can copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Phantom of the Opera

Author: Gaston Leroux


        
Release date: May 24, 2020 [eBook #62215]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: French

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/62215

Credits: Produced by Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images
        generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA ***

GASTON LEROUX

THE GHOST
OF THE OPERA

PIERRE LAFITTE & CIE
PUBLISHERS

90, AVENUE DES CHAMPS-ÉLYSÉES

PARIS




THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA




TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD. Where the author of this singular work tells the reader
how he came to become certain that the ghost of
The Opera really existed.

I. Is it the ghost?

II. The New Daisy

III. Where, for the first time, Messrs. Debienne and Poligny give, in
secret to the new directors of the Opera, Messrs. Armand Moncharmin and
Firmin Richard, the true and mysterious reason for their departure from
the National Academy of Music

IV. Lodge No. 5

V. Continuation of lodge no. 5

VI. The Enchanted Violin

VII. A visit to lodge no. 5

VIII. Where Messrs. Firmin Richard and Armand Moncharmin have the audacity to do
to represent "Faust" in a "cursed" and terrifying hall
resulting event

IX. The mysterious coupe

X. At the masked ball

XI. We must forget the name "the man's voice"

XII. Above the trapdoors

XIII. Apollo's Lyre

XIV. A masterstroke by the trap enthusiast

XV. The peculiar posture of a safety pin

XVI. “Christine! Christina!”

XVII. Astonishing revelations by Mrs. Giry, concerning her relationships
personal encounters with the Phantom of the Opera

XVIII. Continuation of the curious behavior of a safety pin

XIX. The police commissioner, the viscount, and the Persian

XX. The Viscount and the Persian

XXI. Behind the Scenes at the Opera

XXII. Interesting and instructive tribulations of a Persian in the
below the Opera

XXIII. In the torture chamber

XXIV. The tortures begin

XXV. "Barrels, barrels, do you have any barrels for sale?"

XXVI. Should we turn the scorpion? Should we turn the grasshopper?

XXVII. The end of the ghost's love affairs

EPILOGUE




FOREWORD


WHERE THE AUTHOR OF THIS UNUSUAL WORK TELLS THE READER HOW HE WAS
LEADS TO ACQUIRING THE CERTAINTY THAT THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA REALLY
EXISTED


The Phantom of the Opera did exist. It was not, as some believed...
For a long time, an inspiration to artists, a superstition to directors,
the feeble creation of the excited brains of these young ladies of the body
ballet dancers, their mothers, ushers, cloakroom attendants and
from the concierge.

Yes, he existed, in flesh and blood, although he gave himself every...
appearances of a real ghost, that is to say, of a shadow.

I was struck from the outset when I began to peruse the
archives of the National Academy of Music by coincidence
surprising phenomena attributed to the _ghost_, and the most
mysterious, of the most fantastic of dramas, and I was soon to be
leads to the idea that one could perhaps rationally
to explain this by that one. The events hardly date back more than
in his thirties and it would not be difficult to find
Even today, at the very heart of the dance, there are very old men
respectable, whose word cannot be doubted, who
they remember as if it happened yesterday, the conditions
mysterious and tragic events that accompanied the abduction of
Christine Daaé, the disappearance of the Viscount of Chagny and the death of his
elder brother, Count Philippe, whose body was found on the riverbank
of the lake that stretches beneath the Opera House, on the street side
Scribe. But none of these witnesses had believed until this day that they should
to mix into this dreadful adventure the rather legendary character of
Phantom of the Opera.

The truth was slow to penetrate my mind, which was troubled by an investigation.
who constantly encountered events that at first
From the perspective, one could judge them to be extraterrestrials, and, more than once, I was quite
close to abandoning a task I was exhausting myself trying to complete,--without
To ever grasp it—a vain image. Finally, I had proof that my
My premonitions had not deceived me, and I was rewarded in every way.
my efforts the day I became certain that the ghost of
The Opera had been more than a shadow.

That day, I had spent long hours in the company of
"Memoirs of a Director," a light work by this overly skeptical man
Moncharmin, who understood nothing during his time at the Opera, at the
the ghost's dark conduct, and he mocked it as much as he could,
at the very moment he was the first victim of the curious
financial transaction that took place inside the "envelope"
magic".

In despair, I had just left the library when I met
the charming administrator of our National Academy, who was chatting
on a landing with a sprightly and dapper little old man, to whom he
presented cheerfully. The administrator was aware of my
research and knew with what impatience I had tried in vain to
discover the retirement of the investigating judge in the famous case
Chagny, M. Faure. No one knew what had become of him, dead or alive;
And so, upon returning from Canada, where he had just spent fifteen years,
his first step in Paris had been to come and seek a
a favorite chair in the Opera's secretariat. This little old man
It was Mr. Faure himself.

We spent a good part of the evening together and he told me
The whole Chagny affair as he had once understood it. He had to
In the absence of evidence, they concluded that the viscount was insane and that he was dead
accidental death of the older brother, but he remained convinced that a tragedy
A terrible thing had happened between the two brothers regarding Christine.
Daaé. He couldn't tell me what had become of Christine, nor could the viscount.
Of course, when I told him about the ghost, he just laughed. Him
had also been informed of the unusual events which
seemed at the time to attest to the existence of an exceptional being who had chosen
he lived in one of the most mysterious corners of the Opera and he had
He knew the story of "the envelope," but he hadn't seen anything in all of this.
nothing that could have captured the attention of a magistrate tasked with investigating the case
the Chagny affair, and he barely listened to a few
moments the deposition of a witness who had spontaneously
presented to assert that he had had the opportunity to meet the
ghost. This character—the witness—was none other than the one whom the
All of Paris called him "the Persian," and he was well known to everyone.
Opera subscribers. The judge had taken him for a lunatic.

You can imagine how incredibly interested I was in this story of the
Persian. I wanted to find again, if there was still time, this precious
and original witness. My good fortune returning, I managed to
discovering him in his small apartment on the rue de Rivoli, which he
had not left since that time and where he was going to die five months
after my visit.

At first, I was suspicious; but when the Persian had told me, with
a childlike innocence, all he personally knew about the ghost
and that he had given me full ownership of the proofs of his existence
and especially the strange correspondence of Christine Daaé, correspondence
which so dazzlingly illuminated his terrifying destiny, he did not
It was no longer possible to doubt! No! No! The ghost was not a
myth!

I am well aware that I was told that all this correspondence
was perhaps not authentic and it could have been
made entirely by a man whose imagination had
was certainly raised on the most seductive tales, but he...
It was fortunately possible to find some of Christine's writing in
outside of the famous packet of letters and, consequently, to indulge in
a comparative study that dispelled all my doubts.

I also did some research on Persian and that's why I appreciated it.
in him an honest man incapable of inventing a scheme that would have
could have misled justice.

This is the opinion of the other major figures who have been
involved in the Chagny affair, whether directly or indirectly, who were the friends
of the family and to whom I presented all my documents and in front of
which I have drawn up all my deductions. I received from this
on the side of the noblest encouragements, and I will allow myself to reproduce
On this subject, here are a few lines that were sent to me by the general
D...


"Sir,

"I cannot urge you enough to publish the results of your
investigation. I remember perfectly that a few weeks before the
the disappearance of the great opera singer Christine Daaé and the tragedy that ensued
The entire Faubourg Saint-Germain was plunged into mourning; there was much talk, at
home of dance, of the _phantom_, and I believe that we have not ceased
to discuss it only after this affair which occupied everyone
spirits; but if it is possible, as I think it is after having told you
Understood, to explain the tragedy by the ghost, please.
Sir, tell us more about the ghost. However mysterious it may be
Firstly, it will appear, it will always be more explainable than this
A dark story where malicious people wanted to see...
to tear apart, even unto death, two brothers who adored each other all their
life...

"Believe me, etc..."


Finally, with my file in hand, I had once again gone through the vast
domain of the ghost, the formidable monument of which he had made his
empire, and all that my eyes had seen, all that my mind had
The discovery admirably corroborated the Persian's documents, when a
a wonderful discovery definitively crowned my
works.

We recall that recently, during the excavation of the Opera's basement,
to bury the phonographed voices of the artists, the peak of
The workers uncovered a corpse; however, I immediately had proof that
This corpse was that of the Phantom of the Opera! I made him touch this
proof, by hand, to the administrator himself, and now he
I don't care if the newspapers report that a... was found there
victim of the Commune.

The unfortunate people who were massacred during the Commune, in the
The cellars of the Opera House are not buried on this side; I will tell you where
Their skeletons can be found far from this immense crypt
where all sorts of provisions had been accumulated during the siege
by word of mouth. I was put on this trail while searching for the
remains of the Phantom of the Opera, which I would not have found without this
An extraordinary coincidence of the burial of living voices!

But we will talk again about this corpse and what should be done with it;
Now, it is important for me to conclude this very necessary foreword.
by thanking the all-too-modest accomplices who, like the Commissioner of
Mifroid police (formerly called in for the initial findings during the
(disappearance of Christine Daaé), such as Mr. the former secretary
Rémy, Mr. Mercier the former administrator, Mr. the former choirmaster
Gabriel, and more specifically Baroness de Castelot-Barbezac,
who was once "little Meg" (and who isn't ashamed of it), the most
charming star of our admirable ballet company, the eldest daughter
of the Honorable Mrs. Giry—former usherette of the box, deceased
Ghost—they were of the most useful help to me and thanks to whom I will
to be able, along with the reader, to relive, in their smallest details, these
hours of pure love and terror[1].


[Note 1: I would be ungrateful if I didn't also thank you on the
The threshold of this appalling and true story, the current direction
of the Opera, which so kindly lent itself to all my
investigations, and in particular Mr. Messager; also the very
The friendly administrator Mr. Gabion and the very kind architect
committed to the proper preservation of the monument, who did not hesitate to
lend me the works of Charles Garnier, although he was almost
I'm sure I wouldn't give them back to him. Finally, I still have to...
publicly acknowledge the generosity of my friend and former
collaborator MJ-L. Croze, who allowed me to draw from his
admirable theatrical library and to borrow editions from it
unique items to which he was very attached.--GL]




I


IS THIS THE GHOST?


That evening, which was the one where Messrs. Debienne and Poligny, the
The resigning directors of the Opera were giving their last
Gala evening, on the occasion of their departure, the Sorelli box,
One of the first subjects of the dance was suddenly invaded by a
half a dozen of these young ladies from the corps de ballet who were coming up from
scene after having "danced" _Polyeucte._ They rushed there
In a great confusion, some were laughing excessively.
and unnatural, and the others cries of terror.

Sorelli, who wished to be alone for a moment to "iron" the
compliment that she was to pronounce later in the foyer in front of Messrs.
Debienne and Poligny had viewed this entire crowd with ill humor.
Dazed, they rushed after her. She turned back to her companions and
was worried by such a tumultuous commotion. It was little Jammes,--the
a nose dear to Grévin, forget-me-not eyes, rosy cheeks, a throat
of lilies,—who gave the reason in three words, in a trembling voice
that stifled anguish:

--It's the ghost!

And she locked the door. Sorelli's dressing room was one
Official and banal elegance. A cheval glass, a sofa, a dressing table and
Cabinets formed the necessary furniture. Some engravings on
the walls, memories of the mother, who had known the good old days of
the old Opera on rue Le Peletier. Portraits of Vestris,
Gardel, de Dupont, de Bigottini. This box looked like a palace to
girls from the ballet corps, who were housed in rooms
communes, where they spent their time singing, arguing, and
to beat the hairdressers and dressers and to buy themselves a few drinks
blackcurrant or beer or even rum until the bell rings
the warning device.

Sorelli was very superstitious. Upon hearing little Jammes
Speaking of the ghost, she shuddered and said:

--Little creature!

And since she was the first to believe in ghosts in general
and to the Opera in particular, she immediately wanted to be
informed.

"Did you see it?" she asked.

"How I can see you!" replied little Jammes, whining, who,
Unable to stand on his own two feet, he slumped down onto a chair.

And immediately little Giry—with her plum-colored eyes, her inky hair, a
her swarthy complexion, her poor little skin on her poor little
bones, --he added:

--If it's him, he's very ugly!

--Oh! yes, said the chorus of dancers.

And they all spoke together. The ghost had appeared to them under
the kind of man in a black suit who had stood up at
a blow in front of them, in the corridor, without anyone being able to tell from where it came from
was coming. His appearance had been so sudden that one might have thought he
came out of the wall.

"Bah!" said one of them who had more or less kept her
With composure, you see the ghost everywhere.

And it's true that, for the past few months, there had been no talk of
the Opera, that of this phantom in a black suit who wandered about like a
shadow, from the top to the bottom of the building, who did not speak to
no one, whom no one dared speak to and who would faint, from the
remains, as soon as it was seen, without anyone being able to know by what means or
how. He made no noise as he walked, as befits a
real ghost. We started by laughing about it and making fun of this
returning dressed either like a gentleman or like an undertaker, but
the legend of the ghost had soon taken on colossal proportions
in the corps de ballet. All claimed to have met more or
less this extra-natural being and having been victims of its evil spells.
And those who laughed the loudest were not the most
reassured. When he didn't let himself be seen, he signaled his
presence or passage through comical or tragic events
whose almost universal superstition held him responsible. Had they
In regrettable, an accident occurred; had a classmate made a niche in
one of these young ladies from the corps de ballet, a powder puff of
Was the rice lost? It was all the ghost's fault, the ghost's fault
of the Opera!

In the end, who had seen him? You can find so many people wearing black clothes in
The opera, which are not ghosts. But this one had a
a specialty not all black suits possess. He dressed a
skeleton.

At least, that's what these young ladies said.

And he had, naturally, a skull and crossbones.

Was all of this serious? The truth is that the imagination of
The skeleton was born from the description that had been given of the ghost,
Joseph Buquet, the chief stagehand, was the one who had actually seen it.
had collided—one could not say "nose to nose," for the ghost
didn't have any, --with the mysterious figure on the small staircase
which, near the ramp, descends directly to the "underneath". He had
just enough time to glimpse it for a second, --for the ghost had
fled,--and had retained an indelible memory of that vision.

And here is what Joseph Buquet said about the ghost to anyone who wanted
To hear it:

"He is prodigiously thin and his black suit hangs loosely on a
skeletal frame. His eyes are so deep that one cannot distinguish
Their eyes were perfectly still. In short, one could only see two large
black holes like the skulls of the dead. Her skin, which is stretched taut over
the skeleton, like a drum skin, is not white, but
ugly yellow; his nose is so small as to be invisible from
profile, and the absence of that nose is a horrible thing to see. Three
or four long brown locks on the forehead and behind the ears
"act as hair."

Joseph Buquet had pursued this strange apparition in vain.
had disappeared as if by magic and he had been unable to find any trace of it.

This chief machinist was a serious, orderly man with an imagination
slow, and he was sober. His words were listened to with astonishment and
interest, and immediately there were people who said that they too
had encountered a man dressed in black with a skull on him.

Sensible people who heard about this story stated
first, that Joseph Buquet had been the victim of a joke by one of
his subordinates. And then, incidents occurred one after another.
so curious and so inexplicable that even the cleverest began to wonder
torment.

A fire lieutenant is brave! He's fearless, he doesn't
Above all, don't be afraid of fire!

Well! The fire lieutenant in question[2], who had left
to do a surveillance tour in the basement and who had
ventured, it seems, a little further than usual, was suddenly
reappeared on the set, pale, terrified, trembling, his eyes outside the
orbits, and had almost fainted in the arms of the noble mother of
Little Jammes. And why? Because he had seen her approaching him,
_At head height, but without a body, a head of fire!_ And I
Repeat, a fire lieutenant, he's not afraid of fire.

This fire lieutenant's name was Papin.

The corps de ballet was dismayed. First, this fiery head...
it bore no resemblance whatsoever to the description given of the ghost
Joseph Buquet. The firefighter was questioned thoroughly, he was questioned again.
the chief machinist, following which these young ladies were
convinced that the ghost had several heads which it changed
as he wanted? Naturally, they immediately imagined that they
were running the greatest risks. From the moment a lieutenant of
firefighters did not hesitate to faint, coryphaea and rats could
many excuses were offered for the terror that made them flee from
all their little paws when they passed in front of some hole
dark, poorly lit corridor.

Therefore, in order to protect the monument as much as possible
to such horrible evil spells, Sorelli herself, surrounded by
all the dancers, followed even by all the little children
classes in jerseys, had, --in the aftermath of the story of the lieutenant of
firefighters, --on the table located in the concierge's vestibule, of the
On the side of the administration building, a horseshoe was deposited that
anyone entering the Opera House, for any reason other than that of
spectator, had to touch before setting foot on the first
step of the staircase. And this under penalty of becoming prey to the
occult power that had taken hold of the building, from the cellars to
attic!

This horseshoe, like this whole story, moreover—alas!—I don't
I didn't invent it, and you can still see it today on the
vestibule table, in front of the concierge's lodge, when you enter
The Opera by the court of administration.

This gives a fairly quick overview of the state of mind of these
young ladies, the evening we entered with them into the box of the
Sorelli.

"It's the ghost!" cried little Jammes.

And the dancers' anxiety had only grown. Now, a
An agonizing silence reigned in the box. Only the...
the sound of panting breaths. Finally, Jammes, having thrown herself with
signs of genuine terror even in the most remote corner of
the wall, murmured that single word:

--Listen!

It seemed, in fact, to everyone that a brushing was taking place
I could hear what was behind the door. No footsteps. It was like silk.
A light touch that slid across the panel. Then, nothing. Sorelli tried
to appear less cowardly than her companions. She stepped forward
the door, and asked in a flat voice:

--Who is here?

But no one answered him.

Then, feeling all eyes on her, spying on her every move,
She forced herself to be brave and said very loudly:

--Is there someone behind the door?

--Oh! yes! Yes! certainly, there's someone behind the door!
repeated this small, dry prune of Meg Giry, who heroically held the
Sorelli in her gauze skirt... Above all, don't open it! My God, don't open it!
not!

But Sorelli, armed with a stylus that never left her side, dared
turn the key in the lock and open the door, while the
dancers retreated all the way to the bathroom and Meg Giry
sighed:

--Mommy! Mommy!

Sorelli looked bravely down the corridor. It was deserted;
a fire butterfly, in its glass prison, cast a red glow and
shady within the surrounding darkness, without managing to dispel it.
And the dancer quickly closed the door with a heavy sigh.

"No," she said, "there's nobody here!"

"And yet, we saw it clearly!" James asserted again, continuing
He tentatively took small steps to find his place beside Sorelli. He must be
Somewhere, over there, prowling. I'm not going back to get dressed.
We should all go down to the shelter, together, right now, to
the "compliment", and we would go back up together.

Then the child reverently touched the little coral finger which
was intended to ward off bad luck. And Sorelli drew,
furtively, with the tip of the pink nail of her right thumb, a cross
of Saint Andrew on the wooden ring that encircled the ring finger of his hand
LEFT.

“La Sorelli,” wrote a famous columnist, “is a dancer”
tall, beautiful, with a serious and voluptuous face, and a supple waist
than a willow branch; it is commonly said of it that it is "a
"Beautiful creature." Her hair, blond and pure as gold, crowns a
A matte forehead beneath which two emerald eyes are set. Her
head sways gently like an egret on a long, elegant neck
And proud. When she dances, she has a certain hip movement.
indescribable, which gives her whole body a shiver of ineffable
languor. When she raises her arms and bends over to begin a
pirouette, thus highlighting the entire design of the bodice, and that
the tilt of the body makes the hip of this delightful woman protrude
"Woman, it seems that this is a painting that would blow your brains out."

In fact, it seems clear that she had very little brains. We don't
He didn't reproach him for it.

She said again to the little dancers:

My children, you must "get over" it!... The ghost? Nobody
He may never have seen it!...

"Yes! Yes! We saw it!... we saw it just now!" they repeated.
the little ones. He had his skull and crossbones and his suit on, like the night when
He appeared to Joseph Buquet!

"And Gabriel saw it too!" said Jammes... "Just yesterday!"
in the afternoon... in broad daylight...

--Gabriel, the singing master?

--But yes... What! You don't know that?

--And he was wearing his clothes in broad daylight?

--Who? Gabriel?

--No way! The ghost?

"Of course he had his suit on!" Jammes affirmed. "It's Gabriel."
He told me himself... That's even how he recognized him. And
Here's how it happened. Gabriel was in the office of
stage manager. Suddenly, the door opened. It was the Persian who
entered. You know if the Persian has the "evil eye".

"Oh! yes!" replied the little dancers in chorus, who immediately
that they had evoked the image of the Persian, made horns of Destiny
with their index and little fingers extended, while the middle finger
and the ring finger were folded over the palm and held in place by the thumb.

"...And if Gabriel is superstitious!" continued Jammes, "however, he is
always polite and when he sees the Persian, he simply puts
calmly put his hand in his pocket and touched his keys... Well!
As soon as the door opened before the Persian, Gabriel did not
that he leaped from the armchair where he was sitting to the lock of
the cupboard, to touch iron! In this movement, he tore at one
nailed a whole section of his coat. Hurrying to leave, he went
he pressed his forehead against a coat rack and got a huge bump; then, in
He stepped back abruptly and scraped his arm on the screen near the piano;
He wanted to lean on the piano, but unfortunately the lid
it fell back on his hands and crushed his fingers; he leaped like a
crazy out of the office and finally took such a bad time going down
the staircase, he tumbled down, landing on his back on all the steps of the first
upstairs. I was just passing by with Mom at that moment. We were
We rushed to help him up. He was badly bruised and had...
Blood all over our faces, it scared us. But right away
He began to smile at us and exclaim, "Thank you, my God!"
"To get off scot-free for so little!" So we questioned him, and he told us...
He recounted all his fear. It had come from what he had glimpsed,
Behind the Persian, the ghost! _the ghost with the skull_,
as described by Joseph Buquet.

A startled murmur greeted the end of this story, at the end of which
Jammes arrived completely out of breath, she had told it so quickly, so quickly.
as if she were being pursued by the ghost. And then there was
Another silence, broken in a low voice by little Giry, during
Sorelli, deeply moved, was polishing her nails.

"Joseph Buquet would do better to keep quiet," the prune stated.

"Why would he remain silent?" they asked him.

"That's Mum's opinion..." replied Meg, in a very low voice.
this time, and looking around her as if she were afraid
to be heard by ears other than those that were there.

--And why is that your mother's opinion?

Shh! Mom says the ghost doesn't like being bothered!

--And why does your mother say that?

Because... Because... nothing...

This learned reticence only served to exasperate the curiosity of these
young ladies, who crowded around little Giry and the
They begged for an explanation. They were there, shoulder to shoulder,
They bent over in a single movement of prayer and dread.
They communicated their fear, taking an acute pleasure in it that chilled them.

"I swore I wouldn't say anything!" Meg added, in a whisper.

But they gave him no rest and they promised so well
the secret that Meg, who was burning with desire to tell what she knew,
began, his eyes fixed on the door:

--That's it... it's because of the lodge...

--Which lodge?

--The ghost's lodge!

--Does the ghost have a dressing room?

The dancers could not accept the idea that the ghost had his dressing room.
to contain the fatal joy of their astonishment. They pushed from
They sighed softly. They said:

Oh my God! Tell me... tell me...

"Lower!" Meg ordered. "It's the first box, number 5, you know."
Okay, the first box next to the left-hand side of the stage.

--Not possible!

--It's like I told you... Mom's the one who's opening it...
But you swear to me you won't tell anyone?

--Yes, go ahead!...

Well! This is the ghost's lodge... No one has been here since
more than a month, except for the ghost, of course, and we gave
the order to the administration never to rent it out again...

--And is it true that the ghost comes there?

--Yes, indeed...

--So someone is coming?

--No way!... The ghost comes here and nobody's there._

The little dancers looked at each other. If the ghost came into the
box, we had to see him, since he was wearing a black suit and had a head of
dead. That's what they made Meg understand, but she...
replied:

--Exactly! We can't see the ghost! And it has neither clothes nor a head!...
All the stories that have been told about his skull and his head of fire,
That's a joke! He doesn't have anything at all... We only hear him when he
is in the dressing room. Mom has never seen him, but she's heard him. Mom
He knows this very well, since she's the one who gives him the program!

Sorelli felt compelled to intervene:

--Little Giry, you're making fun of us.

Then, little Giry began to cry.

--I would have been better off keeping quiet... if Mom ever found out about this!... but
Joseph Buquet is certainly wrong to concern himself with things that don't concern him
Don't look... it'll bring him bad luck... Mom was saying it again yesterday
evening...

At that moment, loud, hurried footsteps were heard in the corridor.
and a breathless voice shouting:

--Cécile! Cécile! Are you there?

"That's Mom's voice!" said Jammes. "What is it?"

And she opened the door. An honorable lady, built like a grenadier.
The Pomeranian rushed into the lodge and collapsed, whimpering.
in an armchair. Her eyes rolled wildly, illuminating gloomily
its baked brick face.

"What a misfortune!" she exclaimed. "...What a misfortune!"

--What? What?

--Joseph Buquet...

--Well! Joseph Buquet...

--Joseph Buquet is dead!

The lodge filled with exclamations, astonished protests, and
horrified demands for explanations...

--Yes... we just found him hanging in the third basement!...
"But the most terrible thing," continued the poor honorable lady, breathless, "the
Even more terrible is that the stagehands who found his body,
claim that a noise could be heard around the corpse which
resembled the song of the dead!

"It's the ghost!" the little girl blurted out, almost involuntarily.
Giry, but she immediately regained her composure, her fists to her mouth:
No!... No!... I didn't say anything!... I didn't say anything!...

Around her, all her companions, terrified, were repeating aloud
low:

--For sure! It's the ghost!...

Sorelli was pale...

"I will never be able to say my compliment," she said.

Jammes' mother gave her opinion while emptying a small glass of liqueur.
which was lying on a table: there must have been a ghost
down there...

The truth is that we never really knew how Joseph died.
Buquet. The cursory investigation yielded no results, apart from the
_natural suicide._ In the _Memoirs of a Director_, Mr. Moncharmin,
who was one of the two directors, succeeding Messrs. Debienne and
Poligny reports the incident of the hanged man as follows:

"An unfortunate accident disrupted the small celebration that Messrs. Debienne
and Poligny were celebrating their departure. I was
I was in the director's office when I suddenly saw him enter
Mercier—the administrator—He was distraught when he told me that we
had just discovered, hanging in the third below-stage area,
between a farm and a set from _The King of Lahore_, the body of a
machinist. I cried out: Let's get it down! The time it took me to
to tumble down the stairs and climb down the ladder of the clothes rack, the hanged man
"He no longer had his rope!"

So this is an event that Mr. Moncharmin finds natural. A man
He is hanging from the end of a rope, we are going to unhook him, the rope has disappeared.
Oh! Mr. Moncharmin has found a very simple explanation. Listen to him:
It was time for the dance, and the chorus members and the rats had quickly
They took precautions against the evil eye. That's all.
You can just imagine the corps de ballet descending the ladder of the rigging and
sharing the hanging rope in less time than it takes to
To write it. That's not serious. When I think, on the contrary, of
the exact location where the body was found --in the third
behind the scenes—I imagine there could have been _somewhere_ a
interest in this rope disappearing after it had done its
work and we'll see later if I'm wrong to have this
imagination-there.

The grim news had quickly spread from the top to the bottom of the Opera House,
where Joseph Buquet was very popular. The boxes emptied, and the
little dancers, clustered around Sorelli like sheep
Fearful, gathered around the shepherd, they took the path home, through the
dimly lit corridors and staircases, trotting along in all haste
with their little pink paws.


[Note 2: I also obtained this very authentic anecdote from Mr. Pedro]
Gailliard himself, former director of the Opera.]




II


THE NEW DAISY


At the first landing, Sorelli collided with the Count of Chagny who was coming up.
The count, ordinarily so calm, was showing great excitement.

"I was coming to your house," said the count, greeting the young woman in a...
Very charming. Ah! Sorelli, what a lovely evening! And Christine Daaé:
What a triumph!

"No way!" protested Meg Giry. "Six months ago, she was singing like..."
A nail! But let us through, my dear count, said the girl with
With a mischievous bow, we go to inquire about the news of a poor man who
He was found hanged.

At that moment, the administrator, busy at work, stopped.
suddenly upon hearing the remark.

"What! You already know that, ladies?" he said in a rather...
Harsh... Well! Don't even mention it... and especially not Messrs. Debienne and
Poligny shouldn't be informed! It would upset them too much.
their last day.

Everyone headed towards the dance hall, which was already
invaded.

Count de Chagny was right; never was a gala comparable to
that one; the privileged few who were there still talk about it.
their children and grandchildren with a fond memory. Just think that
Gounod, Reyer, Saint-Saëns, Massenet, Guiraud, Delibes, went up to
taking turns at the conductor's podium, they conducted themselves
the performance of their works. They had, among other performers,
Faure and Krauss, and it was that evening that they were revealed to all of Paris
I am stunned and intoxicated by this Christine Daaé, whom I want to, in this
work, to reveal the mysterious destiny.

Gounod had _Funeral March of a Puppet_ performed;
Reyer, his beautiful overture to _Sigurd_; Saint-Saëns, _Danse macabre_
and an _Oriental Reverie_; Massenet, an unpublished _Hungarian March_;
Guiraud, his _Carnival_; Delibes, _Sylvia's Slow Waltz_ and the
_pyzzicati_ of _Coppélia._ Misses Krauss and Denise Bloch had
sung: the first, the bolero from _Sicilian Vespers_; the second,
Lucrezia Borgia's toast.

But all the triumph had gone to Christine Daaé, who had
first appeared in a few passages of _Romeo and Juliet_.
It was the first time the young artist had sung this work by
Gounod, which, moreover, had not yet been transported to the Opera
and that the Opéra-Comique had just revived it long after it had
It was created at the old Théâtre-Lyrique by Mine Carvalho. Ah! it
We must pity those who have not heard Christine Daaé in this role
of Juliette, who did not know her naive grace, who did not
thrilled at the accents of his seraphic voice, which did not feel
their souls fly away with his soul above the tombs of the lovers of
Verona: "Lord! Lord! Lord! Forgive us!"

Well, all of that was nothing compared to the superhuman accents.
which she made heard in the prison scene and the final trio of Faust,
which she sang in place of Carlotta, who was unwell. We hadn't
Never heard of it, never seen anything like it!

That was "the new Marguerite" revealed by the Daaé, a
Marguerite, of a splendor and radiance yet unsuspected.

The entire hall had greeted him with a thousand cheers.
Indescribable emotion, Christine sobbed and fainted between
She was carried in the arms of her comrades. They had to take her to her dressing room. She
seemed to have breathed his last. The great critic P. de St-V. fixed the
An unforgettable memory of that wonderful minute, in a chronicle
which he aptly titled _The New Daisy_. Like a great
As the artist he was, he was simply discovering that this beautiful and sweet
that child had brought a little bit to the stage of the Opera that evening.
more than his art, that is to say, his heart. None of the friends of the Opera
he was not unaware that Christine's heart had remained as pure as at fifteen
years, and P. de St-V. declared "that in order to understand what was coming
to arrive in Daaé, he was forced to imagine that she
had just loved for the first time! I may be being indiscreet,
he added, but only love is capable of accomplishing such a thing
A miracle, such a dazzling transformation. We heard, there
At two years old, Christine Daaé in her Conservatory competition, and she
had given us a charming hope. Where does the sublime come from?
From today? If he does not descend from heaven on the wings of love,
I will have to think that he is coming up from hell and that Christine, like the
Blackmailer Ofterdingen has made a pact with the Devil! Who hasn't
I didn't hear Christine sing the final trio from _Faust_, I don't know it.
_Faust_: the exaltation of the voice and the sacred intoxication of a pure soul
would know how to go even further!

However, some subscribers protested. How could they have...
How could such a treasure have been hidden for so long? Christine Daaé had been
Until then, a suitable Siebel compared to this Marguerite, a little
Carlotta was too splendidly material. And it had been necessary
the incomprehensible and inexcusable absence of Carlotta, at this
a gala evening, so that little Daaé could give her all at the last minute
her measure in a part of the program reserved for the Spanish diva!
Finally, how, deprived of Carlotta, did Messrs. Debienne and Poligny
Had they approached the Daaé? They were therefore aware of his genius.
Hidden? And if they knew, why were they hiding it? And she,
Why was she hiding it? Oddly enough, she wasn't known to have...
current professor. She had stated on several occasions that,
From now on she would work all alone. That was all well and good.
inexplicable.

The Count of Chagny had witnessed this frenzy, standing in his box, and
had joined in with his resounding cheers.

The Count of Chagny (Philippe-Georges-Marie) had then exactly
Forty-one years old. He was a nobleman and a handsome man. Of a
above average height, pleasant face, despite the forehead
Though tough and with somewhat cold eyes, he was refinedly polite.
He was a bit haughty with women and men, who never forgave him.
not always his successes in the world. He had an excellent heart and
an honest conscience. By the death of old Count Philibert, he was
having become the head of one of the most illustrious and ancient families of
France, whose noble lineage dated back to Louis X.
The Chagny fortune was considerable, and when the old count, who
He was a widower, he died; it was no small task for Philippe,
than the fact that he had to accept managing such a large estate. His
two sisters and her brother Raoul refused to hear anything about
division, and they remained in joint ownership, entrusting everything to
Philippe, as if the right of primogeniture had never ceased to exist.
When the two sisters married—on the same day—they resumed
their shares from the hands of their brother, not as a thing their
belonging, but like a dowry to which they expressed their
acknowledgement.

The Countess of Chagny—née de Moerogis de la Martynière—had died
giving birth to Raoul, born twenty years after his older brother.
When the old count died, Raoul was twelve years old. Philippe
actively took charge of the child's education. He was admirably
assisted in this task first by his sisters and then by a
old aunt, widow of the sailor, who lived in Brest, and who gave to the young
Raoul had a taste for things of the sea. The young man entered the Borda, in
came out in the first issues and quietly completed its tour
of the world. Thanks to powerful connections, he had just been appointed
to be part of the official _Shark_ expedition, which had
mission to search the polar ice for survivors
the expedition of the _d'Artois_, from which there had been no news since
three years. In the meantime, he was enjoying a long leave of absence which was not supposed to
to end in six months, and the dowagers of the noble suburb, in
Seeing this pretty child, who seemed so fragile, they already felt sorry for him
tough work awaited him.

The timidity of this sailor, I would almost be tempted to say, his
His innocence was remarkable. He seemed to have left the day before.
women's hand. In fact, cherished by his two sisters and by his old
aunt, he had retained from this purely feminine education
almost innocent manners, imbued with a charm that nothing,
Until then, it had not been able to tarnish. At that time, it had been a little more
He was twenty-one years old but looked eighteen. He had a small
blond moustache, beautiful blue eyes and a girlish complexion.

Philippe spoiled Raoul a lot. First, he was very proud of him and
joyfully predicted a glorious career for his younger brother in this
marine where one of their ancestors, the famous Chagny de La Roche, had
held the rank of admiral. He was taking advantage of the young man's leave to...
to show Paris, which he knew almost nothing about.
to offer luxurious joy and artistic pleasure.

The count believed that at Raoul's age, too much wisdom was no longer enough.
That was very wise. He was a very well-balanced character, that of
Philippe, measured in his work as in his pleasures, always
impeccably dressed, unable to show his brother a villain
for example. He took him everywhere with him. He even introduced him to the
dance hall. I know very well that it was said that the count was
of the "last possession" with Sorelli. But what! Could one make a
crime against this gentleman, who remained a bachelor, and who, consequently,
had plenty of leisure time ahead of him, especially since his sisters
were established, to come and spend an hour or two, after his
dinner, in the company of a dancer who, obviously, was not
not very, very witty, but who had the prettiest eyes of the
world? And then, there are places where a true Parisian, when he holds
The rank of the Count of Chagny must be shown, and, at that time, the
The dance studio at the Opera was one of those places.

Finally, perhaps Philippe would not have led his brother into the
behind the scenes at the National Academy of Music, if it hadn't been
the first, on several occasions, to ask him with a gentle
obstinacy which the count would later rely upon.

Philippe, after applauding the Daaé that evening, had turned
on Raoul's side, and had seen him so pale that he had been
afraid.

"So you don't see," Raoul had said, "that this woman is
wrong?

Indeed, on stage, we had to support Christine Daaé.

"It's you who's going to faint..." said the count, leaning towards
Raoul. What's wrong?

But Raoul was already standing.

"Come on," he said, his voice trembling.

"Where do you want to go, Raoul?" asked the count, astonished by the emotion.
in which he found his younger brother.

--But let's see! This is the first time she's sung like this!

The count stared curiously at his brother and a slight smile came over him.
to be inscribed at the corner of her amused lip.

--Bah!... And he immediately added: Come on! Come on!

He looked delighted.

They soon reached the entrance to the abandoned area, which was very
crowded. While waiting for him to be able to enter the stage, Raoul
Philippe, who was kind, tore his gloves in an unconscious gesture.
He did not mock his impatience. But he was well-informed. He
now knew why Raoul was distracted when he spoke to him and
also why he seemed to take such great pleasure in bringing back all the
topics of conversation about the Opera.

They entered the plateau.

A crowd of people dressed in black pressed towards the dance floor where
were heading towards the artists' dressing rooms. At the shouts of the stagehands...
The vehement speeches of the department heads were interspersed.
extras from the last scene who are leaving, the "walkers" who you
jostle, a passing clothes rack, a backdrop descending from
a hanger, a platform that is secured with heavy hammer blows
the eternal "make way for the theatre" which resounds in your ears like the
threat of some new catastrophe for your eight-reflections or a
solid support for your kidneys, such is the usual occurrence of
intermissions which never fail to unsettle a novice like the young
man with a small blond mustache, blue eyes and a girlish complexion
who was crossing, as fast as the congestion allowed, this
stage on which Christine Daaé had just triumphed and under which
Joseph Buquet had just died.

That evening, the confusion had never been more complete, but
Raoul had never been less shy. He shrugged off with one shoulder
solidly overcoming everything that stood in his way, paying no attention to what
he was saying to those around him, without trying to understand the remarks
The machinists were horrified. He was solely preoccupied with the desire to
to see the one whose magical voice had torn his heart out. Yes, he
He knew perfectly well that his poor, brand-new heart no longer belonged to him.
had tried hard to defend him ever since the day Christine, whom he
She had known him since he was very young, and she had reappeared to him. He had felt...
facing her was a very gentle emotion that he had wanted to banish, at the
reflection, for he had sworn to himself, so great was his self-respect
and of his faith, to love only the one who would be his wife, and he did not
could, for a second, naturally, consider marrying a singer;
But then, the very gentle emotion was replaced by a sensation
Atrocious. Sensation? Feeling? There was something physical and something else in it.
morale. His chest ached, as if it had been cut open.
to take his heart. He felt a terrible hollow there, an emptiness.
a reality that could never again be filled except by the heart of
The other one! These are events of a particular psychology.
which, it seems, can only be understood by those who have been
struck, by love, by that strange blow called, in language
common, "love at first sight".

Count Philippe had difficulty keeping up with him. He continued to smile.

At the back of the stage, past the double doors that open onto the steps
which lead to the foyer and those which lead to the left-hand boxes of the
On the ground floor, Raoul had to stop in front of the small group of rats
who, having just come down from their attic, were blocking the passage
in which he wanted to get involved. More than one pleasant remark was made to him.
fired by small, made-up lips to which he did not respond
Finally, he was able to pass and disappeared into the shadows of a corridor.
all noisy with the exclamations that were being made by enthusiasts
admirers. One name drowned out all the rumors: Daaé! Daaé! The Count,
Behind Raoul, people were saying, "The rascal knows the way," and he...
asked how he had learned it. He had never driven himself.
Raoul at Christine's. It seems he had gone there all
alone while the count stayed as usual to chat at home
with Sorelli, who often begged him to stay with her until the
the moment she entered the stage, and who sometimes had this habit
tyrannical to give him to keep the little gaiters with which
she came down from her box and guaranteed the luster of her
satin shoes and the crispness of her flesh-colored jersey. Sorelli had
An excuse: she had lost her mother.

The Count, postponing for a few minutes the visit he owed to the
Sorelli, therefore, followed the gallery that led to the Daaé, and
noted that this corridor had never been as busy as it was
that evening, when the entire theatre seemed overwhelmed by the artist's success
and also of her fainting spell. For the beautiful child had not yet
regained consciousness, and we went to get the doctor from
theatre, which arrived in the meantime, jostling the groups and
closely followed by Raoul, who was walking right on his heels.

Thus, the doctor and the lover found themselves at the same time at
Christine's side, who received initial care from one and opened
their eyes in each other's arms. The count had stayed, with much
others, on the threshold of the door in front of which we were suffocating.

Don't you think, doctor, that these gentlemen should
"Clear out" the box a little? Raoul asked with incredible audacity.
We can't breathe in here anymore.

"But you are perfectly right," agreed the doctor, and he put
everyone at the door, except for Raoul and the wife of
bedroom.

She looked at Raoul with eyes widened by the most sincere
She was stunned. She had never seen him before.

However, she did not dare to question him.

And the doctor imagined that if the young man acted this way, it was
obviously because he had the right to. So the viscount remained
in this lodge, contemplating the Daaé reborn to life, while
the two directors, Messrs. Debienne and Poligny themselves, who were
had come to express their admiration for their resident, were
Turned back into the corridor, dressed in black. The Count of Chagny,
Rejected like the others into the corridor, he laughed out loud.

--Ah! the rascal! Ah! the rascal!

And he added, _in private_: Trust these young men who
They're taking on the airs of little girls!

He was beaming. He concluded: "It's a Chagny!" and he headed off
towards Sorelli's box; but she was going down to the foyer with her
A small flock trembling with fear, and the count met her on the way
as has been said.

In the dressing room, Christine Daaé had let out a deep sigh to which
had answered with a groan. She turned her head and saw Raoul and
she flinched. She looked at the doctor, smiled at him, then at his wife
of the room, then again Raoul.

"Sir!" she asked him, in a voice that was not yet
just a breath... who are you?

"Mademoiselle," replied the young man, who knelt down and
he placed a passionate kiss on the diva's hand, mademoiselle, _I am
the little child who went to retrieve your scarf from the sea.

Christine looked again at the doctor and the maid, and all three of them
They started laughing. Raoul stood up, very red-faced.

--Mademoiselle, since you prefer not to recognize me, I
I would like to tell you something in particular, something very
important.

"When I'm better, sir, will you?"—and his voice
was trembling. --You are very kind...

"But you must go..." added the doctor in his most amiable tone.
smile. Let me take care of the young lady.

"I'm not sick," Christine suddenly said with energy.
as strange as it was unexpected.

And she stood up, quickly passing a hand over her...
eyelids.

Thank you, doctor! I need to be alone...
Go away, all of you! Please... leave me alone... I am very
Nervous tonight...

The doctor wanted to voice some protests, but faced
Given the young woman's agitation, he believed that the best remedy for a
Such a state consisted of not contradicting her. And he went away with
Raoul, who was in the corridor, was very distraught. The doctor told him
said:

--I don't recognize her anymore tonight... she, usually so sweet...

And he left him.

Raoul remained alone. This entire part of the theater was deserted.
now. The farewell ceremony was to take place at the home of
the dance. Raoul thought that the Daaé might go there and he
He waited in solitude and silence. He even hid himself in
the convenient shade of a doorway. He always had that awful
Pain in place of the heart. And that's what he wanted to talk about.
to the Daaé, without delay. Suddenly the lodge opened and he saw the
A maid who went off on her own, carrying packages.
She stopped him as he passed and asked him about his mistress.
He replied, laughing, that she was perfectly fine, but that he
She shouldn't be disturbed because she wanted to be alone. And
She ran away. An idea flashed through Raoul's fevered mind:
Obviously, Daaé wanted to be alone _for him!_... Hadn't he
He didn't say that he particularly wanted to talk to her, and wasn't it
Was that the reason why she had isolated herself?
Barely breathing, he approached his dressing room and leaned his ear
He leaned against the door to hear what the answer would be, and he
He was about to strike. But his hand fell back. He had just perceived, in
the lodge, _a man's voice_, who was speaking in an intonation
singularly authoritarian:

--Christine, you must love me!

And Christine's voice, sorrowful, which one could tell was accompanied by
Tears, a trembling voice, replied:

How can you say that to me? I only sing for you!

Raoul leaned against the panel, so great was his pain. His heart, which he believed
Gone forever, had returned to his chest and was giving him
resounding blows. The whole corridor echoed with them, and the ears of
Raoul's voices were as if deafened. Surely, if his heart continued
By making so much noise, we were going to hear it, we were going to open the
door and the young man would be shamefully chased away. What a position.
For a Chagny! Listening behind a door! He took his heart in two
hands to silence him. But a heart is not the mouth of a
dog, and even when you hold a dog's muzzle with both hands,--a
dog that barks unbearably, --you can always hear it growling.

The man's voice resumed:

--You must be very tired?

--Oh! Tonight, I gave you my soul and I died.

"Your soul is truly beautiful, my child," the deep, masculine voice continued.
Thank you. No emperor has ever received such a gift.
A gift! _The angels cried tonight._

After these words: _the angels wept tonight_, the viscount heard nothing
Nothing more.

However, he did not leave, but, as he feared being
Surprised, he retreated to his shady corner, determined to wait there.
that the man left the box. At the same time he had just learned
Love and hate. He knew he loved. He wanted to know who.
He hated it. To his great astonishment, the door opened, and Christine
Daaé, wrapped in furs and her face hidden under lace,
She went out alone. She closed the door, but Raoul noticed that she didn't
She locked the door. She passed by. He didn't even follow her.
eyes, for her eyes were fixed on the door that would not open. Then,
The corridor being deserted again, he crossed it. He opened the door
from the lodge and immediately closed it behind him. He was in the
The darkness was more opaque. The gas had been turned off.

"There's someone here!" Raoul exclaimed, his voice trembling. "Why is he here?"
Is he hiding something?

And as he said this, he kept his back to the closed door.

Night and silence. Raoul could only hear the sound of his own
breathing. He certainly didn't realize that
the indiscretion of his conduct exceeded anything one could
imagine.

"You will not leave here until I give you permission!" cried the young man.
Man. If you don't answer me, you're a coward! But I'll know
You're well unmasked!

And he struck his match. The flame lit up the box. There was no
There was nobody in the box! Raoul, after taking care to close the
He locked the door, turned on the globes and lamps. He entered the
bathroom, opened the cupboards, searched, felt with his hands
The walls were damp. Nothing!

"Ah! That," he said aloud, "am I going crazy?"

He remained like that for ten minutes, listening to the hissing of the gas in the
peace of this abandoned lodge; in love, he didn't even think of
stealing a ribbon, which would have brought him the scent of the one he
He loved it. He went out, no longer knowing what he was doing or where he was going.
At one point during his incoherent wandering, an icy air came over him.
to hit in the face. He was at the bottom of a narrow staircase that
descending behind him was a procession of workers bent over a
a kind of stretcher covered with a white cloth.

"The exit, please?" he said to one of the men.

"You can see perfectly well!" came the reply. "Right in front of you. The door is..."
Open. But let us through.

He asked mechanically, pointing to the stretcher:

--What is this?

The worker replied:

--That's Joseph Buquet, who was found hanged in the third
below, between a clothes rack and a decoration of the _King of Lahore_.

He stepped aside in front of the procession, bowed, and left.




III


WHERE, FOR THE FIRST TIME, MESSRS. DEBIENNE AND POLIGNY SECRETLY DONATE
TO THE NEW DIRECTORS OF THE OPERA, MESSRS. ARMAND MONCHARMIN AND FIRMIN
RICHARD, THE TRUE AND MYSTERIOUS REASON FOR THEIR DEPARTURE FROM THE ACADEMY
NATIONAL MUSIC ORGANIZATION


Meanwhile, the farewell ceremony was taking place.

I said that this magnificent party had been given on the occasion
of their departure from the Opera, by Messrs. Debienne and Poligny who had
wanted to die as we say today: beautifully.

They had been helped in the realization of this ideal program and
funereal, by all who mattered then in Parisian society and
in the arts.

Everyone had gathered at the dance hall,
where Sorelli was waiting, a glass of champagne in her hand and
with a short, prepared speech on the tip of their tongues, the directors
resigning. Behind her, her young and old comrades from the
The corps de ballet crowded about, some of them talking in hushed tones.
events of the day, the others discreetly sending signs
intelligence to their friends, whose chattering crowd already surrounded the
buffet, which had been set up on the sloping floor, between the
_warrior dance_ and the _country dance_ of Mr. Boulenger.

Some dancers had already changed into their street clothes; the
most still had their light gauze skirts; but all had
felt obliged to adopt appropriate poses. Only little Jammes
whose fifteen springs seemed already to have forgotten in their
carefree days—happy age—the ghost and death of Joseph Buquet
never stopped cackling, babbling, hopping, playing pranks, so
although, Messrs. Debienne and Poligny appeared on the steps of the foyer
Regarding the dance, she was severely reprimanded by Sorelli.
impatient.

Everyone noticed that the resigning directors had
a cheerful air, which, in the provinces, would not have seemed natural to anyone, but this
which, in Paris, was found to be in very good taste. That one will never
Parisian who has not learned to put a mask of joy on his
pains and the "wolf" of sadness, boredom or of
indifference to his private joy. You know that one of your friends
is in pain, do not try to console him; he will tell you that he
He already is; but if some happy event has happened to him,
Beware of congratulating him; he finds his good fortune so natural
He'll be surprised that anyone even mentions it. In Paris, they're always at the ball.
masked, and it is not at the heart of the dance that such characters
"warned" that Messrs. Debienne and Poligny had committed the error of
to show their grief, which was real. And they were already smiling too much at
Sorelli, who was beginning to deliver her compliment when a
Jammes's little crazy girl's complaint shattered the smile of
The directors, in such a brutal manner that the figure of desolation
and the terror that lay beneath it appeared before everyone's eyes:

--The Phantom of the Opera!

Jammes had uttered this phrase in a tone of unspeakable terror and his
a finger pointed in the crowd of black-clad people to a face so pale, so
gloomy and so ugly, with the black holes of the brow ridges so
profound, that this skull thus designated won
It was an immediate and huge success.

--The Phantom of the Opera! The Phantom of the Opera!

And we laughed, and we jostled each other, and we wanted to offer drinks to the
Phantom of the Opera; but he had disappeared! He had slipped into the
a crowd searched for him in vain, while two old gentlemen
were trying to calm little Jammes, and little Giry was pushing
Peacock cries.

Sorelli was furious; she had not been able to finish her speech;
Messrs. Debienne and Poligny had embraced her, thanked her, and had
saved as quickly as the ghost itself. No one was surprised.
because we knew they had to undergo the same ceremony upstairs
superior, at the heart of the song, and that finally their close friends would be
received one last time by them in the large vestibule of the office
directorial, where a proper supper awaited them.

And that's where we'll find them again with the new directors, Messrs.
Armand Moncharmin and Firmin Richard. The former barely knew each other.
The latter, however, were filled with great protestations of friendship.
And they responded with a thousand compliments; so that
those of the guests who had feared a somewhat gloomy evening
They immediately showed joyful expressions. Supper was almost
cheerful, and the opportunity having presented itself for several toasts, Mr.
The government commissioner was so particularly adept at it, blending
from the glory of the past to the successes of the future, that the greatest
Cordiality soon reigned among the guests. The transmission of
The directorial powers had been established the day before, in the simplest way possible.
possible, and the questions that remained to be settled between the old and
the new direction had been resolved there under the presidency of
government commissioner in such a great desire for agreement on both sides and
on the other hand, which in truth one could not be surprised by, on that evening
It was memorable to find four such smiling faces of directors.

Messrs. Debienne and Poligny had already handed it over to Messrs. Armand Moncharmin
and Firmin Richard, the two tiny keys, the master keys
which opened all the doors of the National Academy of
music,—several thousand.—And quickly these little keys, the object of
general curiosity led them to pass from hand to hand when attention
some were diverted by the discovery that they had just
to make, at the end of the table, of this strange and pale and fantastic
a hollow-eyed figure who had already appeared at the dance hall and
which had been greeted by little Jammes with this apostrophe: "The
Phantom of the Opera!

He was there, like the most natural of guests, except that he didn't
He neither ate nor drank.

Those who had started to look at him smiling, had ended up
to turn his head away, so immediately did this vision capture the mind
to the most somber thinkers. No one repeated the joke of
In the foyer, no one cried out: "There's the Phantom of the Opera!"

He hadn't uttered a word, and not even his neighbors could have
to say at what precise moment he had come to sit there, but each
thought that if the dead sometimes returned to sit at the table of
While alive, they could not have shown a more macabre face. The friends of
Messrs. Firmin Richard and Armand Moncharmin believed that this guest
The gaunt man was a close friend of Messrs. Debienne and Poligny, while the
Friends of Messrs. Debienne and Poligny thought that this corpse belonged to
the clientele of Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin. So that none
No request for explanation, no unpleasant remarks, no jokes.
Nothing in bad taste risked offending this guest from beyond the grave. A few
guests who were aware of the ghost legend and who
knew the description given by the chief machinist, --they
were unaware of Joseph Buquet's death, --thought to themselves that the man
from the end of the table could very well have passed for the realization
living image of the character created, according to them, by the incorrigible
superstition among the Opera staff; and yet, according to legend,
The ghost had no nose and this character did, but Mr.
Moncharmin states in his "memoirs" that the guest's nose was
transparent.--His nose, he said, was long, thin, and transparent,--and
I would add that it could have been a false nose. Mr. Moncharmin was able to
mistaking for transparency what was merely glossy. All the
The world knows that science makes admirable false masks for those who
were deprived by nature or by some operation. In reality,
Did the ghost come and sit that night at the banquet of the
directors without having been invited? And can we be sure that
Was this figure that of the Phantom of the Opera himself? Who would dare?
Should I say it? If I'm talking about this incident here, it's not because I want to...
a second to make the reader believe, or attempt to make them believe, that the
The ghost was capable of such superb audacity, but because in
In short, it's very possible.

And here, it seems, is a sufficient reason. Mr. Armand Moncharmin,
still in his "memoirs", he says verbatim: --Chapter
XI.--“When I think of that first evening, I cannot separate the
confidence that was shared with us in their office by Messrs. Debienne and
Poligny, thank you for the presence at our supper of this ghostly figure.
that none of us knew.

Here is exactly what happened:

Messrs. Debienne and Poligny, seated in the middle of the table, had not
I caught another glimpse of the man with the skull face, when he suddenly...
at once, to speak.

"The rats are right," he said. "The death of poor Buquet is not..."
perhaps not as natural as we think.

Debienne and Poligny jumped.

"Is Buquet dead?" they exclaimed.

"Yes," replied the man, or rather the shadow of a man, calmly... "He was
found hanged this evening in the third basement level, between a farmhouse and
A set design from _The King of Lahore_.

The two directors, or rather former directors, immediately stood up,
staring strangely at their interlocutor. They were more agitated than
of reason, that is to say, more than one has reason to be so by the announcement of
the hanging of a chief machinist. They both looked at each other. They
had become paler than the tablecloth. Finally, Debienne signaled to
Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin: Poligny offered a few words of apology
addressed the guests, and all four went into the office
directorial. I give the floor to Mr. Moncharmin.

"Messrs. Debienne and Poligny seemed increasingly agitated,
he recounts in his memoirs, and it seemed to us that they had some
something to tell us that greatly embarrassed them. First, they told us
they asked if we knew the individual sitting at the end of the table,
who had informed them of the death of Joseph Buquet, and, regarding our response
When they said no, they became even more troubled. They took us
They held the master keys in their hands, considered them for a moment, and nodded.
the head, then gave us the advice to have new ones made
locks, in the utmost secrecy, for apartments, offices and
objects for which we might desire an airtight seal.
They were so funny when they said that, that we started laughing.
asking them if there were any thieves at the Opera? They told us
replied that there was something worse, which was the
_ghost._ We started laughing again, convinced they were giving themselves up
to some joke that was supposed to be like the crowning achievement of this
a small, intimate celebration. And then, at their request, we resumed our
"serious," determined to enter, to please them, into this
a kind of game. They told us they would never have spoken to us about it.
ghost, if they had not received the formal order from the ghost himself to
we commit to being kind to him and to granting him
anything he would ask of us. However, only too happy to leave a
domain where this tyrannical shadow reigned supreme and to be
Having gotten rid of the blow, they had hesitated until the very last moment to
to share with us such a curious adventure to which certainly
Our skeptical minds were not prepared when the announcement of
The death of Joseph Buquet had brutally reminded them that, every
times when they had not obeyed the ghost's wishes,
some whimsical or tragic event could quickly bring them back
to the feeling of their dependence.

During these unexpected speeches delivered in a confidential tone
The most secret and most important thing, I was looking at Richard. Richard,
During his student days, he had a reputation as a prankster.
that is to say, he was aware of all the thousand and one ways that
We have a tendency to make fun of each other, and the concierges on the boulevard
Saint Michael knew something about it. He also seemed to enjoy it very much.
a dish that was then served to him. He didn't waste a single bite.
although the condiment was a bit macabre because of Buquet's death.
He nodded his head sadly, and his expression, as it turned out,
The others were talking, it became pathetic, like that of a man who
he bitterly regretted this Opera affair now that he
I learned that there was a ghost inside. I couldn't have done better.
rather than slavishly copying this desperate attitude. However,
Despite all our efforts, we could not, in the end, prevent ourselves from
"Giggle" in the faces of Messrs. Debienne and Poligny who, seeing us
to shift abruptly from the darkest state of mind to cheerfulness
the most insolent, acted as if they believed we had become
crazy.

The farce dragging on a bit too long, Richard asked, half-heartedly
Half a grape: "But what on earth does that ghost want?"

Mr. Poligny went to his office and returned with a copy of the
specifications.

The specifications begin with these words: "The management of the Opera
will be required to provide representations to the National Academy of
music of the splendor befitting the first lyrical scene
French,” and ends with Article 98, worded as follows:

"This privilege may be withdrawn:"

1° If the director contravenes the provisions stipulated in the
specifications.

These provisions follow.

This copy, said Mr. Moncharmin, was in black ink and entirely
in accordance with the one we possessed.

However, we saw that the specifications submitted to us by Mr.
Poligny contained _in fine_ a paragraph, written in ink
red,—bizarre and tormented handwriting, as if it had been
traced with matchsticks, a child's handwriting that wouldn't have
never stopped making sticks and who wouldn't yet know how to connect his
letters. And that paragraph which lengthened the article so strangely
98, -- he said verbatim:

5° If the director delays the monthly payment by more than fifteen days
that he owes to the Phantom of the Opera, a fixed monthly payment until further notice
Order at 20,000 francs - 240,000 francs per year.

Mr. de Poligny, with a hesitant finger, showed us this clause
supreme, which we certainly did not expect.

"Is that all? He doesn't want anything else?" asked Richard, his voice thick with emotion.
great composure.

"Yes," replied Poligny.

And he leafed through the specifications again and read:

"Art. 63.--The large right-hand proscenium of the first No. 1, will be
reserved for all official functions for the head of state.

Bathtub number 20, on Monday, and first box number 30, the
Wednesdays and Fridays will be made available to the minister.

The second box, number 27, will be reserved each day for the use of
prefects of the Seine and of police."

And again, at the end of this article, Mr. Poligny showed us a line at
the red ink that had been added to it.

The first box, number 5, will be available for all performances at the
The Phantom of the Opera's layout.

With that last blow, we could only stand up and squeeze
warmly shook hands with our two predecessors, congratulating them
for having imagined this charming joke, which proved that the
Old French cheerfulness never lost its rights. Richard believed
I should even add that he now understood why Messrs. Debienne
and Poligny were leaving the directorship of the National Academy of Music.
Business was no longer possible with such a demanding ghost.

"Obviously," replied Mr. Poligny without batting an eye, "240,000 francs..."
are not found under a horse's shoe. And have you counted what
may cost us the non-rental of the first reserved box no. 5
to the ghost at all performances? Not to mention that we have
They were forced to refund the subscription fee, it's frightening! Really,
We don't work to maintain ghosts!... We
We'd rather leave!

"Yes," repeated Mr. Debienne, "we prefer to leave!"
Let's go!

And he stood up.

Richard said:

—But really, it seems to me that you're being quite kind to this ghost. If
If I had a ghost that bothersome, I wouldn't hesitate to...
to stop.

"But where? But how?" they cried in unison; "we don't have it!"
Never seen anything like it!

--But when does he come to his dressing room?

We've never seen him in his dressing room.

--Then rent it.

--Rent the Phantom of the Opera's box! Well, gentlemen, give it a try!

With that, the four of us left the director's office. Richard and
We had never "laughed so much".




IV


LODGE NO. 5


Armand Moncharmin wrote such voluminous memoirs that as far as
particularly concerns the rather long period of his co-direction,
One might legitimately wonder if he ever found the time to occupy himself
of the Opera in a different way than by recounting what happened there. Mr. Moncharmin
he didn't know a note of music, but he addressed the minister informally.
Public Instruction and Fine Arts, had done a little bit of
journalism on the boulevard and enjoyed a fairly large fortune.
Finally, he was a charming boy and lacked no
of intelligence, since, having decided to commission the Opera, he had known
to choose the one who would be the useful director and had gone straight
to Firmin Richard.

Firmin Richard was a distinguished musician and a gentleman.
the portrait drawn of it, at the time of its acquisition, by the _Revue
theatres_: "Mr. Firmin Richard is about fifty years old,
Tall, with a robust neck, and not overweight. He has
poise and distinction, vibrant and colorful, with roots down
Thick, a little low and trimmed into a brush, the beard in unison with the
hair, the look of his face has something a little sad about it
immediately tempers this with a frank and direct look accompanied by a smile
charming.

"Mr. Firmin Richard is a very distinguished musician. A skilled harmonist,
A learned counterpointist, grandeur is the principal characteristic of his
composition. He published chamber music that was highly regarded by
amateurs, of piano music, sonatas or fugitive pieces
Filled with originality, a collection of melodies. Finally, _Death_
Hercules's work, performed at the Conservatory concerts, breathes a breath
epic which brings to mind Gluck, one of M.'s revered masters.
Firmin Richard. However, while he adores Gluck, he is no less fond of
Piccini; Mr. Richard, takes his pleasure where he finds it. Full
While he admires Piccini, he bows before Meyerbeer, he revels in it.
of Cimarosa and no one appreciates better than he the inimitable genius of
Weber. Finally, regarding Wagner. Mr. Richard is not far from
to claim that he, Richard, is the first in France and perhaps
"The only one who understood it."

I will stop my quote here, from which it seems to me to follow quite clearly
that Mr. Firmin Richard liked pretty much all music and all
For musicians, it was the duty of all musicians to love Mr.
Firmin Richard. Let us say in conclusion to this brief portrait that Mr. Richard
was what we have come to call an authoritarian, that is to say
that he had a very bad temper.

The first few days that the two partners spent at the Opera were
all the joy of feeling like the masters of such a vast and beautiful
company, and they had certainly forgotten this curious and bizarre thing.
The story of the ghost, when an incident occurred that proved to them
that--if there was a joke--the joke was not over.

Mr. Firmin Richard arrived at his office that morning at eleven o'clock. His
The secretary, Mr. Rémy, showed him half a dozen letters that he
had not opened them because they bore the inscription
"Personal." One of these letters immediately caught the eye.
Richard's not only because the envelope's inscription was
in red ink, but also because he seemed to have already seen
Somewhere he found this writing. He didn't search for long: it was
the red writing with which the strangely completed the
specifications. He recognized its stick-like and childlike appearance. He
She opened the casket and read:

“My dear director, I apologize for disturbing you by
those precious moments when you decide the fate of the best
Opera artists, where you are renewing important commitments and
where you draw new conclusions; and this with a sureness of vision, a
an understanding of the theatre, a science of the public and its tastes, a
authority that came very close to astounding my long experience.
I am aware of what you have just done for Carlotta, the
Sorelli and little Jammes, and for a few others of whom you have
guessed the admirable qualities, the talent or the genius.--(You know
I know exactly who I'm talking about when I write these words; it's obviously not
Not a point for Carlotta, who sings like a syringe and who wouldn't have
never had to leave the Ambassadors' or the Jacquin café; nor for the
Sorelli, which is mainly successful in coachbuilding; nor for the small
Jammes, who dances like a calf in the meadow. Nor is it
for Christine Daaé, whose genius is undeniable, but whom you leave
with meticulous care kept separate from any important creation.)--Finally,
You are free to run your small business as you see fit.
It seems so, doesn't it? All the same, I would like to take advantage of what
You haven't thrown Christine Daaé out the door yet to hear her
tonight in the role of Siebel, since that of Marguerite, since her
triumph of the other day, is forbidden to him, and I would ask you not to
I have no access to my box today or in the following days;
because I cannot finish this letter without confessing to you how much
I was unpleasantly surprised lately, upon arriving
at the Opera, to learn that my box had been rented, --at the office of
location, --_at your command._

I did not protest, firstly because I am an enemy of scandal,
secondly because I imagined that your predecessors, Messrs. Debienne
and Poligny, which have always been charming to me, had neglected
Before they leave, I wanted to tell you about my little quirks. Now, I just...
to receive a response from Messrs. Debienne and Poligny to my request
explanations, a response that proves to me that you are aware of _my
specifications_ and consequently that you don't care
outrageously towards me. If you want us to live in peace, it doesn't
Don't start by taking away my lodge!_ Under the benefit of these
A few minor observations, please consider me, my dear director, as
Your most humble and obedient servant.

Signed: F. of the Opera.

This letter was accompanied by an extract from the small
correspondence from the _Revue théâtrale_, where one read this: “_F. de
The O: R and M are inexcusable. We warned them and we told them
We have left your specifications in our possession. Regards!

Mr. Firmin Richard had barely finished reading when the door of
his office opened and Mr. Armand Moncharmin came to meet him
him, a letter in his hand, exactly like the one his
colleague had received it. They looked at each other and burst out laughing.

"The joke continues," said Mr. Richard; "but it's not funny!"

"What does that mean?" asked Mr. Moncharmin. "Do they think that..."
Because they were directors of the Opera, we will grant them
A lodge for life?

For both the first and the second, there was no doubt
that the double missive was not the result of a playful collaboration
of their predecessors.

"I'm not in the mood to be fooled for long!" he declared.
Firmin Richard.

"It's harmless!" observed Armand Moncharmin.

So, what do they want? A box for tonight?

Mr. Firmin Richard ordered his secretary to send the
first box no. 5 to Messrs. Debienne and Poligny, if it were not
rented.

It wasn't. It was sent to them immediately. Messrs.
Debienne and Poligny lived: the former, at the corner of Scribe Street and
of the Boulevard des Capucines; the second, on Rue Auber. The two letters of the
The ghost F. of the Opera had been placed at the post office of
Boulevard des Capucines. It was Moncharmin who noticed it while examining
the envelopes.

"You can see that!" said Richard.

They shrugged and regretted that people of that age
they still enjoy such innocent games.

"Still, they could have been polite!" Moncharmin observed.
Did you see how they're treating us about Carlotta and Sorelli?
and little Jammes?

—Well, my dear, those people are sick with jealousy!... When I
thinks they even went so far as to pay a small correspondence to the
_Theatrical revue!_... So they have nothing left to do?

"By the way!" Moncharmin added, "they seem interested."
much to little Christine Daaé...

--You know as well as I do that she has a reputation for being wise!
replied Richard.

"His reputation is so often stolen," replied Moncharmin. "Do I
I don't have a reputation for being musically knowledgeable, and I don't know
the difference between the treble clef and the bass clef.

"You've never had that reputation," Richard declared.
Don't worry.

At that point, Firmin Richard ordered the bailiff to let them in.
the artists who, for the past two hours, had been strolling through the large
administration corridor while waiting for the director's door
opened that door behind which glory awaited them and
Money... or time off work.

The entire day was spent in discussions, negotiations, signings, or
breaches of contract; therefore, I ask you to believe that that evening--the
evening of January 25th—our two directors, tired from a harsh
a day of anger, intrigue, recommendations, threats, and
protests of love or hate, they went to bed early, without
to even be curious enough to go and take a peek in the dressing room
number 5, to find out if Messrs. Debienne and Poligny found the
a show to their liking. The Opera had not been idle since the
departure of the old management, and Mr. Richard had carried out the
some necessary work, without interrupting the course of
representations.

The following morning, Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin found in their
mail, on the one hand, a thank-you card from the ghost, as well
designed:


"My dear Director.

"Thank you. Charming evening. Exquisite performance. Take care with the choirs. The
Carlotta, a magnificent yet commonplace instrument. I will write to you soon about
the 240,000 francs,—exactly 233,424.70 francs; Messrs. Debienne and Poligny
having sent me the 6,575 francs 30, representing the first ten
days of my pension this year, --their privileges ending on the 10th
in the evening.

"Servant.

"F. of the O."


On the other hand, a letter from Messrs. Debienne and Poligny:


"Gentlemen,

"We thank you for your kind attention, but you will understand
easily than the prospect of hearing _Faust_ again, however sweet it may be
to former directors of the Opera, let us not forget that
we have no right to occupy the first box number 5, which
belongs exclusively to the one we had the opportunity to tell you about
to speak, while rereading with you, one last time, the notebook of
charges,--last paragraph of article 63.

"Please accept, gentlemen, etc."


"Ah! But these people are starting to annoy me!" he declared.
violently Firmin Richard, tearing down the letter from Messrs. Debienne and
Poligny.

That evening, the first box, number 5, was rented.

The next day, upon arriving at their office, Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin
found an inspector's report relating to the events which
had taken place the previous evening in the first box, number 5.
Here is the essential passage from the report, which is brief:

"I was compelled," the inspector wrote, "to request this
evening—the inspector had written his report the previous evening—a guard
municipal authorities to evacuate twice, at the beginning and at the
In the middle of the second act, the first box, number 5. The occupants—they
had arrived at the beginning of the second act—they were causing a
a real scandal because of their laughter and their absurd remarks.
All around them, shouts of "Shh!" could be heard, and the room
I began to protest when the usherette came to me; I am
I entered the lodge and made the necessary observations.
These people did not seem to be in their right minds and held me
Stupid remarks. I warned them that if such a scandal were to occur...
If I renewed, I would be forced to evacuate the box. I wasn't
No sooner had I left than I heard their laughter again and the
protests from the room. I returned with a municipal guard who made them
They demanded to get out. They demanded, still laughing, declaring that they didn't want to.
They wouldn't go if their money wasn't returned. Finally, they...
They calmed down, and I let them go back into the box; immediately the laughter
They started again, and this time I had them expelled for good.

"Bring in the inspector!" Richard shouted to his secretary, who
had been the first to read this report and had already annotated it in pencil
blue.

The secretary, Mr. Rémy—twenty-four years old, with a thin mustache, elegant,
distinguished, formal attire—in those days a frock coat was mandatory in
During the day, intelligent and shy in front of the director, 2,400
of salary per year, paid by the director, consults the newspapers,
answers letters, distributes boxes and complimentary tickets,
arranges appointments, chats with those waiting in the anteroom, runs to
The sick artists, looking for understudies, corresponding with the bosses
service, but above all is the lock of the director's office, can
to be thrown out on the street overnight without any compensation,
because it is not recognized by the administration—the secretary, who had
He had the inspector brought in and ordered him to be let in.

The inspector entered, looking somewhat worried.

"Tell us what happened," Richard said abruptly.

The inspector immediately stammered and alluded to the report.

"Well! Why were those people laughing?" asked Moncharmin.

--Sir, they must have had a good dinner and seemed
more prepared to play pranks than to listen to good music.
Even before they arrived, they hadn't even entered the box.
that they had come out and called the usherette who
asked what they had. They told the usherette, "Look in
The box, there's nobody there, is there?...--No, replied
the usherette.--Well, they said, when we entered we
We heard a voice saying that there was someone there.

Mr. Moncharmin couldn't look at Mr. Richard without smiling, but Mr. Richard,
He didn't smile. He had once "worked" too much in that genre.
so as not to recognize in the story he was telling him, the most
naively, the inspector, all the marks of one of these
nasty jokes that initially amuse those who are their victims
and which eventually drive them into a rage.

The inspector, to pay his respects to Mr. Moncharmin, who was smiling,
had thought he should smile, too. What an unfortunate smile! Mr.
Richard thundered at the employee, who immediately set about showing a face
horribly dismayed.

"Finally, when those people arrived," the growling man asked
Terrible Richard, was there nobody in the box?

"Nobody, Mr. Director! Nobody! Not even in the box on the right,"
Not even in the left-hand box, nobody, I swear! I'll put my hand on it.
Fire! And that proves that it's all just a
joke.

--And what did the usherette say?

--Oh! For the usherette, it's quite simple, she says it's the ghost
From the Opera. So!

And the inspector sneered. But then he realized he had been wrong to
to sneer, for he had not sooner uttered these words: she said that
It's the _Phantom of the Opera!_ that Mr. Richard's physiognomy, of
Dark as she was, she became fierce.

"Get me the usherette!" he ordered. "Right away!" And
Bring her back to me! And put all those people in the...
door!

The inspector wanted to protest, but Richard silenced him with a
formidable: "Silence!" Then, when the unfortunate man's lips
subordinates seemed closed forever, the director ordered
that they reopen.

"What is the 'Phantom of the Opera'?" he finally asked.
with a grunt.

But the inspector was now unable to say a word. He did
to understand, through a desperate expression, that he knew nothing about it, or rather
that he didn't want to know anything about it.

--Have you seen him, the Phantom of the Opera?

With an energetic gesture of his head, the inspector denied ever having seen him.

"Too bad!" Mr. Richard declared coldly.

The inspector opened his enormous eyes, eyes that bulged from their
orbits, to ask why the director had pronounced this
sinister: too bad!

--Because I'm going to settle the score with all those who haven't
"Not seen!" explained the director. "Since he's everywhere, he's not..."
It's understandable that we don't see him anywhere. I like it when we make our own
At your service, me!




V


CONTINUATION OF "THE LODGE NO. 5"


Having said that, Mr. Richard paid no further attention to the inspector and dealt with
of various matters with its newly appointed administrator.
The inspector had thought he could leave quietly,
Very gently, oh! my God! so gently!... backwards, he had
approached the door when Mr. Richard, noticing the maneuver,
He pinned the man to the spot with a thunderous: "Don't move!"

Thanks to Mr. Rémy's efforts, they had gone to fetch the usherette, who
She was a concierge on Rue de Provence, a stone's throw from the Opera. She did
His entrance will be here soon.

--What is your name?

--Mame Giry. You know me well, Mr. Director; it's me
Little Giry's mother, little Meg, what!

This was said in a harsh and solemn tone which impressed Mr.
Richard. He looked at Mame Giry (faded shawl, worn shoes, old
taffeta dress, soot-colored hat). He was of all
evident from the director's attitude, that he was laughing
knew nothing of, or did not recall having known, Mame Giry, nor
not even little Giry, "nor even little Meg!" But Mame's pride
Giry was like that famous usherette (I think it was from
its name, which became the well-known word in backstage slang:
"Girdism." Example: an artist criticizes a colleague for her gossip,
her chatter; she will tell him: "All that is just nonsense"), that this
The usherette, let's say, imagined she was known by everyone.

"Never heard of it!" Mr. Director finally proclaimed... But, Mame Giry,
Nevertheless, I would still like to know what happened to you yesterday.
evening, so that you and the inspector were forced to have
resorting to a municipal guard...

--I wanted to see you to talk about it, sir.
director, solely so that the same things don't happen to you
inconveniences that Messrs. Debienne and Poligny experienced... They, too, at
At first, they didn't want to listen to me...

--I'm not asking you for all that. I'm asking you for what is
Arrived last night!

Mame Giry turned red with indignation. No one had ever spoken to her about
In a similar tone. She stood up as if to leave, already gathering the folds
from her skirt and waving with dignity the feathers of her hat, the color of
soot; but, changing her mind, she sat back down and said in a gruff voice:

--It happened that we bothered the ghost again!

At that point, just as Mr. Richard was about to explode, Mr. Moncharmin intervened and
directed the interrogation, from which it emerged that Mame Giry found everything
It was natural that a voice should be heard proclaiming that there was...
world in a box where there was no one. She couldn't
to explain this phenomenon, which was not new to her, that
through the intervention of the ghost. This ghost, nobody saw it in
the box, but everyone could hear it. She had heard it
Often, she did, and we could believe it, because she never lied.
could ask Messrs. Debienne and Poligny and all those who
knew, and also Mr. Isidore Saack, to whom the ghost had
Broken leg!

"Yes, indeed?" Moncharmin interrupted. "The ghost broke this guy's leg."
Poor Isidore Saack?

Mame Giry opened her eyes wide, reflecting the astonishment she
she felt confronted by so much ignorance. Finally, she agreed to teach
those two unfortunate innocents. The thing had happened during the time of Messrs.
Debienne and Poligny, still in box no. 5 and also during a
A performance of _Faust._

Mame Giry coughs, steadys her voice... she begins... it sounds like she
prepares to sing the entire score of Gounod.

--There you go, sir. That evening, Mr. Maniera was in the front row.
and his lady, the lapidaries of rue Mogador, and, behind Mrs. Maniera,
their close friend, Mr. Isidore Saack. Mephistopheles sang (_Mame
Giry sings: "You who play the sleepy one," and then Mr. Maniera
hears in his right ear (his wife was to his left) a voice
who said to her: "Ah! Ah! It's not Julie who's playing sleepy!" (Sa
(The lady's name is Julie). Mr. Maniera turns to the right to
He wanted to see who was talking to him like that. Nobody! He rubbed himself
he put his ear to it and said to himself, "Am I dreaming?" Then,
Mephistopheles continued his song... But perhaps I'm boring you
Directors?

--No! No! Continue...

--The directors are too kind!

(A grimace from Mame Giry.) So, Mephistopheles continued his
song (_Mame Giry sings_): "Catherine whom I adore—why
"To refuse—to the lover who begs you—such a sweet kiss?" and immediately
Mr. Maniera still hears, in his right ear, the voice that...
said: "Ha! Ha! It's not Julie who would refuse a kiss to Isidore?"
At that point, he turned around, but this time, towards his lady and
Isidore, and what does he see? Isidore, who had approached from behind
his lady's hand, and he covered her with kisses in the little hollow of the
glove... like this, my good gentlemen. (_Mame Giry covers the
a patch of flesh left bare by her filoselle glove._) So, you
Just remember, it wasn't a gentle affair! Click! Clack! Mr.
Maniera, who was tall and strong like you, Mr. Richard;
distributed a couple of slaps to Mr. Isidore Saack, who was thin and
Weak like Mr. Moncharmin, with all due respect. He was a
Scandal! In the room, people were shouting: "Enough! Enough! He's going to kill him!"
Finally, Mr. Isidore Saack was able to escape...

"So the ghost hadn't broken his leg?" asked Mr.
Moncharmin, a little annoyed that his physique had made such a small
printing on Mame Giry.

"He broke it for her, sir," replied Mame Giry haughtily (because
She understood the hurtful intention. He broke it clean in half.
_the grand_ staircase, which he descended too quickly, sir! and so well,
My goodness, the poor fellow won't be able to put it back up anytime soon!

--It was the ghost who told you what he had whispered.
in Mr. Maniera's right ear? he always asks with a
The investigating judge, who believes it to be highly comical,
Moncharmin.

"No, sir, it's Mr. Maniera himself. So..."

—But you, have you already spoken to the ghost, my good lady?

--As I speak to you, my good sir...

--And when the ghost speaks to you, what does he say?

--Well! He told me to bring him a little bench!

At these solemnly spoken words, the figure of Mame Giry became
marble, yellow marble, veined with red streaks, like that of the
columns that support the grand staircase and which are called marble
sarancolin.

This time, Richard had gone back to laughing together with Moncharmin.
and the secretary Rémy; but, having learned from experience, the inspector
He wasn't laughing anymore. Leaning against the wall, he wondered, fidgeting feverishly
His keys in his pocket, how would this story end? And more
Mame Giry took it in a "rogue" tone; the more he feared the return
The director's anger! And now, here he is, in front of
The director's hilarity was palpable; Mame Giry dared to become threatening! threatening!
in truth!

"Instead of laughing at the ghost," she cried indignantly, "you would
It would be better to do as Mr. Poligny did, who realized by
himself...

"Realized what?" asks Moncharmin, who has never been so...
amused.

--From the ghost!... I'm telling you... Here!... (She calms down
Suddenly, because she judges the situation to be serious. _Look!_... I'm going to...
It's like it was yesterday. This time, we were playing _The Jewish Woman_._ Mr.
Poligny had wanted to attend, all alone, in the ghost's box, the
performance. Mrs. Krauss had achieved tremendous success. She had just...
to sing, you know, the machine from the second act (_Mame Giry sings
(in a low voice):

Near the one I love, I want to live and die, and death,
She herself cannot divide us.

--Good! Good! I'm here... Mr. observed with a discouraging smile.
Moncharmin.

But Mame Giry continues in a low voice, swinging the pen of her
soot-colored hat:

Let's go! Let's go! Here below, in both, the same fate now binds us
wait for both of them.

"Yes! Yes! Are we here yet?" Richard repeated, impatient once more...
So what? So what?

--And then, it was at that moment that Leopold cried out: "Let's flee!"
Isn't that right? And Eleazar stopped them, asking them, "Where
"Are you running?" Well, just at that moment, Mr. Poligny, that
I was observing from the back of a nearby box, which had remained empty, Mr.
Poligny stood up straight, and left as stiff as a statue, and
I only had time to ask him, like Eleazar: "Where
"Are you going?" But he didn't answer me and he was paler than a
Dead! I watched him go down the stairs, but he didn't break.
his leg... Yet he walked as if in a dream, as if in a
A bad dream, and he just couldn't find his way back... he who
was paid to know the Opera well!

Thus spoke Mame Giry, and she remained silent to judge the effect she
had produced. The Poligny story had made people nod their heads at
Moncharmin.

--All of this doesn't tell me under what circumstances, nor how the
"Did the Phantom of the Opera ask you for a small bench?" he insisted,
staring fixedly at Mother Giry, as they say, between "four eyes".

Well, but it's been since that evening... because, from that
That evening, we left our ghost alone... we didn't try again.
to challenge him for his box. Messrs. Debienne and Poligny gave orders
so that it would be allowed to be given to him at all the performances. So, when he
He would come and ask me for his little bench...

--Uh! Uh! A ghost asking for a little bench? So it's a
"Woman, your ghost?" Moncharmin asked.

--No, the ghost is a man.

How do you know?

He has a man's voice, oh! a sweet man's voice! That's how it is
pass: When he comes to the Opera, he usually arrives around the middle
In the first act, he knocks three short, sharp knocks on the door of the
Box number 5. The first time I heard those three knocks,
while I knew very well that there was still no one in the
Lodge, you can imagine how intrigued I was! I open the door, I listen,
I look: nobody! And then, wouldn't you know it, I hear a voice that
he told me: "Mame Jules" (that's the name of my late husband), a little
"A bench, please?" With all due respect, Mr. Director, I was...
like a tomato... But the voice continued: "Don't be frightened, Mame
"Jules, it's me, the Phantom of the Opera!!!" I looked to the side
where did the voice come from, which was, moreover, so good, and so
"Welcoming," she almost didn't frighten me anymore. Her voice,
Mr. Director, was sitting in the first chair of the first
row, on the right._ Except I couldn't see anyone in the chair, we
would have sworn there was someone on it, talking, and someone
Very polite indeed.

"The lodge to the right of lodge number 5," asked Moncharmin, "was it
occupied?

No; neither lodge number 7 nor lodge number 3 on the left had yet been opened.
busy. We were only at the beginning of the show.

--And what did you do?

--Well, I brought the little bench. Obviously, it wasn't
He was asking for a small bench; it was for his lady! But
I've never heard of her or seen her...

Huh? What? The ghost had a wife now! From Mame Giry, the
Messrs. Moncharmin and Richard exchanged glances and went up to the inspector.
who, behind the usherette, was waving her arms in an attempt to attract
The attention of his superiors was on him. He tapped his forehead with his index finger.
sorry to make the directors understand that Mother Jules was
certainly a madcap pantomime that definitively committed Mr.
Richard to part ways with an inspector who kept a member of his department
hallucinating. The old woman continued, completely absorbed in her own thoughts, boasting
now his generosity.

--At the end of the show, he always gives me a forty-cent coin
sous, sometimes a hundred sous, sometimes even ten francs, when he has
I hadn't come for several days. But since we started again...
Because he's bored, he doesn't give me anything at all anymore...

"Forgive me, my good wife..." (New revolt of the hat's feather)
(sooty color, given such persistent familiarity) pardon!...
But how does the ghost manage to give you your forty cents?
Moncharmin, a born curious man, asks.

--Bah! He leaves them on the dressing room shelf. I find them there with
the program I always bring him; some evenings I even find myself
flowers in my dressing room, a rose that will have fallen from her bodice
lady... because, surely, he must sometimes come with a lady, so that a
one day, they forgot a fan.

--Ah! ah! The ghost forgot a fan? And what did you do with it?

--Well! I brought it back to him the next time.

Here, the inspector's voice could be heard:

--You did not follow the rules, Mame Giry, I am putting you to
the fine.

--Shut up, you idiot! (_Bass voice of Mr. Firmin Richard._)

--You brought back the fan! So what?

"So, they won it, Mr. Director; I don't have it anymore."
found at the end of the show, proof that they left at the
Place a box of English sweets that I love so much, sir.
director. That's one of the ghost's kindnesses...

--That's fine, Mame Giry... You may withdraw.

When Mame Giry had bowed respectfully, not without a certain
dignity, which never left him, his two directors, these
declared to the inspector that they were determined to deprive themselves
the services of that crazy old woman. And they dismissed Mr.
the inspector.

When the inspector had in turn withdrawn, after having protested
of his dedication to the house, the directors warned Mr.
the administrator that he had to settle Mr.'s account.
the inspector. When they were alone, the directors...
communicated the same thought, which had come to them at the same time
to both of them, the idea was to go for a little stroll over to lodge number 1
5.

We will follow them there soon.




VI


THE ENCHANTED VIOLIN


Christine Daaé, victim of intrigues which we will return to later
later, did not immediately find again at the Opera the triumph of the
famous gala evening. Since then, however, she had had the opportunity to
to make herself heard in town, at the Duchess of Zurich's, where she sang
the most beautiful pieces from his repertoire; and here is how the great
critic XYZ, who was among the distinguished guests,
expresses himself on his account:

"When you hear it in _Hamlet_, you wonder if Shakespeare came
from the Champs-Élysées to make him rehearse _Ophélie_... It is true that,
when she dons the starry diadem of the Queen of the Night, Mozart,
For his part, he must leave the eternal dwellings to come
to hear it. But no, he doesn't have to bother, because the high-pitched voice and
vibrant, from the magical interpreter of his _Magic Flute_ comes the
to find in the Sky, which she climbs with ease, exactly like
She was able, effortlessly, to move from her cottage in the village of Skotelof
to the palace of gold and marble built by Mr. Garnier.

But after the Duchess of Zurich's party, Christine didn't sing.
more in the world. The fact is that at that time, she refused all
An invitation, complete and official. Without giving any plausible excuse, she
renounces appearing at a charity event, for which she
had previously promised her support. She acts as if she
was no longer the mistress of her destiny, as if she were afraid
of a new triumph.

She knew that the Count of Chagny, to please his brother, had
took very active steps on his behalf with Mr. Richard;
She wrote to him to thank him and also to ask him not to do it again.
to talk about it to her managers. What could the...
What are the reasons for such a strange attitude? Some have claimed that there
had immeasurable pride there, others cried out to a divine
Modesty. One is not so modest when one is in the theatre;
In truth, I don't know if I shouldn't simply write this
Word: terror. Yes, I believe Christine Daaé was indeed afraid of then
what had just happened to her and that she was as astonished by it as
everyone around her. Stunned? Come on! I have a
Christine's letter (Persian collection) which relates to
events of that time. Well, after rereading it, I
I will not write that Christine was astonished or even frightened by
her triumph, but quite _horrified._ Yes, yes... horrified! "I
"I don't recognize myself when I sing!" she said.

The poor, pure, sweet child!

She was nowhere to be seen, and the Viscount of Chagny tried in vain.
to find themselves in his path. He wrote to her, to ask her for
permission to show up at her house, and he despaired of ever having a
In response, one morning she sent him the following note:

"Sir, I have not forgotten the little child who went to me
Looking for my scarf in the sea. I can't help but...
writing this today, as I leave for Perros, driven by a
Sacred duty. Tomorrow is the anniversary of my poor man's death.
Dad, whom you knew and who loved you dearly. He is buried
there, with his violin, in the cemetery surrounding the little
church, at the foot of the hill where, as little children, we played so much; at the
at the edge of this road where, a little older, we said goodbye
for the last time.

When he received this note from Christine Daaé, the Viscount of Chagny...
rushed to a railway indicator, dressed hastily,
wrote a few lines that his valet was to deliver to his
brother and jumped into a car, which, incidentally, dropped him off too late
on the platform at Montparnasse station to allow him to take the
the morning train he was counting on.

Raoul had a gloomy day and only regained his zest for life around
that evening, once he was settled in his carriage. Throughout the entire journey,
he reread Christine's note, he breathed in its scent; he resurrected
the sweet image of his younger years. He spent that entire abominable night
of a railway in a feverish dream that had as its beginning and
The end, Christine Daaé. Day was beginning to break when he arrived.
in Lannion. He ran to the stagecoach in Perros-Guirec. He was the
the only traveler. He questioned the coachman. He learned that the previous evening a
a young woman who looked every bit the Parisian had been driven
in Perros and had stayed at the Auberge du Soleil-Couchant. This did not
It could have been Christine. She had come alone. Raoul left
he let out a deep sigh. He would be able, in complete peace, to speak to
Christine, in this solitude. He loved her to the point of suffocation. This great
The boy, who had traveled the world, was as pure as a virgin
who never left her mother's house.

As he got closer to her, he remembered
devoutly the story of the little Swedish singer. Many
Details of this are still unknown to the public.

Once upon a time, in a small town near Uppsala, there was a
peasant who lived there with his family, cultivating the land during the
week and singing at the lectern on Sundays. This peasant had a small
daughter whom, long before she could read, he taught to
deciphering the musical alphabet. Daaé's father was, without him
He may have suspected it, he was a great musician. He played the violin and
was considered the best minstrel in all the
Scandinavia. Its reputation spread far and wide, and people sought it out.
always to him to make couples dance at weddings and
feasts. Mother Daaé, infirm, died as Christine entered
in her sixth year. Immediately the father, who loved only his daughter
and his music, sold his plot of land and went off to seek glory
In Uppsala, he found nothing but misery.

So he returned to the countryside, going from fair to fair, scraping
his Scandinavian melodies, while his child, who never left his side
never listened to him with rapture or sang along. One day,
At the Limby fair, Professor Valerius heard them both and
He took them to Gothenburg. He claimed that the father was the first
fiddler of the world and that his daughter had the makings of a great artist.
The child's education and instruction were provided for. Everywhere she
It amazed everyone with its beauty, its grace, and its thirst for goodness.
Speaking and doing well. His progress was rapid.
Valerius and his wife, meanwhile, had to come and settle in
France. They took Daaé and Christine. Mother Valérius was treating
Christine, like her daughter. As for the man, he was beginning to
He was wasting away, overcome by homesickness. In Paris, he never went out. He lived
in a kind of dream he entertained with his violin. For hours
whole, he would lock himself in his room with his daughter, and we
She could hear him playing the violin and singing very softly, very softly. Sometimes, the mother
Valerius came to listen to them from behind the door, pushing a loud
She sighed, wiped away a tear, and tiptoed back.
She too longed for her Scandinavian skies.

Father Daaé only seemed to regain his strength in the summer, when all
the family went on holiday to Perros-Guirec, in a corner of
Brittany, which was then almost unknown to Parisians. He loved
much like the sea of ​​this country, finding in it, he said, the same color as
there, and often on the beach, he would play her his most
They were grieving, and he claimed that the sea was silent to listen to them. And
Then, he had pleaded so earnestly with Mother Valerius that she had
consented to a new whim of the former minstrel.

In the time of "pardons", village festivals, dances and
"Stolen," he left as before, with his violin, and he had
the right to take his daughter for eight days. We never tired of it.
to listen to them. They poured harmony into the whole year.
the smallest hamlets, and slept at night in barns, refusing
the inn bed, huddled together on the straw, as
back when they were so poor in Sweden.

However, they were dressed very appropriately, and refused the money.
that was offered to them, they did not beg, and the people around
They didn't understand anything about the behavior of this fiddler who was running
the paths with this beautiful child who sang so well that one believed
to hear an angel from heaven. We followed them from village to village.

One day, a young boy from the city, who was with his governess,
He made her travel a long way, for he could not decide to
leaving the little girl whose voice, so sweet and so pure, seemed
having chained him up. They thus arrived at the edge of a cove which one
It is still called Trestraou. In those days, there was only one place there.
the sky and the sea and the golden shore. And, above all, there was a
A strong wind blew Christine's scarf into the sea. Christine
she cried out and stretched out her arms, but the veil was already far away
the waves. Christine heard a voice telling her:

Don't bother, miss, I'll pick up your
scarf in the sea.

And she saw a little boy running and running, despite the shouts.
and the indignant protests of a good lady, all in black. The
The little boy went into the sea fully clothed and brought back his
The scarf. The little boy and the scarf were in beautiful condition!
The lady in black couldn't calm down, but Christine laughed at everything.
her heart, and she kissed the little boy. It was Viscount Raoul
from Chagny. At the time, he was living with his aunt in Lannion.
During the season they saw each other almost every day and they
played together. At the aunt's request and through the intermediary of
Professor Valerius, the good man Daaé agreed to give lessons
of violin to the young viscount. Thus, Raoul learned to love the same
tunes like those that had enchanted Christine's childhood.

They had roughly the same small, dreamy, and calm soul. They didn't
they only liked stories, old Breton tales, and their
The main game was to go and get them at the doorstep, like...
Beggars. "Madam or sir, do you have a little story?"
"To tell us, please?" It was rare that they didn't
"Donated" point. What old Breton grandmother doesn't have
From this point of view, at least once in his life, he danced the korrigans, on the
Heather, in the moonlight?

But their greatest celebration was when, at dusk, in the great peace
In the evening, after the sun had set over the sea, the father
Daaé would come and sit next to them on the side of the road, and their
he spoke in a low voice, as if he were afraid of frightening the ghosts.
that he evoked, the beautiful, gentle or terrible legends of the land of
North. Sometimes it was as beautiful as an Andersen fairy tale, sometimes
It was sad, like the songs of the great poet Runeberg. When he
The two children were silent, and they said, "Again!"

There was a story that began like this:

“A king had sat in a small boat on one of these waters
quiet and deep that open like a bright eye in the middle
mountains of Norway...»

And another one:

"Little Lotte thought of everything and thought of nothing. Summer bird,
she hovered in the golden rays of the sun, wearing on her curls
blonde, her spring crown. Her soul was also clear, also
blue as her eyes. She cuddled her mother, she was loyal to her
doll, took great care of her dress, her red shoes and her
violin, but she loved, above all else, to hear in
"The Angel of Music falls asleep."

While the man was saying these things, Raoul was watching the eyes
blues and Christine's golden hair. And Christine thought that the
Little Lotte was so happy to hear the Angel of the
music. There was hardly a story about Father Daaé in which it didn't play a role.
The Angel of Music, and the children asked him for explanations.
on this Angel, endlessly. Father Daaé claimed that all
Great musicians, all great artists, receive at least one
once in their lives, the visit of the Angel of Music. This Angel has
sometimes leaning over their cradle, as happened to the little one
Lotte, and that's how there are little prodigies who play the violin
at six years old better than men of fifty, which, you will admit,
is quite extraordinary. Sometimes, the Angel comes much more
late, because the children are not well-behaved and do not want to
They learn their method and neglect their scales. Sometimes, the Angel
never comes, because we don't have a pure heart or a conscience
Peaceful. We never see the Angel, but he makes himself heard in souls.
predestined. It is often in the moments when they least expect it.
less so when they are sad and discouraged. Then, the ear
suddenly perceives celestial harmonies, a divine voice, and...
It's a lifelong memory. People who are visited by the Angel in
They remain as if ablaze. They vibrate with a shiver that no one knows
unlike the rest of mortals. And they have the privilege of no longer
being able to touch an instrument or open your mouth to sing, without
to make heard sounds that shame everyone with their beauty
other human sounds. People who don't know that the Angel has visited these
People say they have genius.

Little Christine asked her dad if he had heard the Angel.
But Father Daaé shook his head sadly, then his gaze
shone brightly as he looked at his child and said to him:

"You, my child, will hear it one day! When I am in Heaven, I will..."
I'll send it, I promise!

Father Daaé started coughing around that time.

Autumn came, which separated Raoul and Christine.

They met again three years later; they were young people. This...
passed through Perros again, and Raoul retained such an impression of it that she
It haunted him all his life. Professor Valerius was dead, but the
Valerius's mother had remained in France, where her interests...
they were holding on with old man Daaé and his daughter, the latter always singing
and playing the violin, drawing their dear one into their harmonious dream
protective, who seemed to live only for music. The young man
had come to Perros by chance and, likewise, he entered the
house formerly inhabited by his girlfriend. He first lived in the
old man Daaé, who rose from his seat with tears in his eyes and who
He kissed her, telling her that they had kept a faithful friend from him.
memory. In fact, hardly a day had passed without
Christine didn't speak of Raoul. The old man was still speaking when the
The door opened and, charming and eager, the young girl entered, wearing
The steaming tea was on a tray. She recognized Raoul and placed her
burden. A gentle flame spread across her charming face.
She remained hesitant, silent. The father watched them both. Raoul
He approached the young girl and kissed her, a kiss she did not avoid.
point. She asked him a few questions, and acquitted herself nicely of her
As a hostess, she picked up the tray and left the room. Then she
She went to take refuge on a bench in the solitude of the garden.
was experiencing feelings that stirred in his adolescent heart for
the first time. Raoul came to join her and they talked until
that evening, in a state of great embarrassment. They were completely changed, no
they did not recognize their characters, who seemed to have acquired a
of considerable importance. They were as cautious as diplomats and
they were telling each other things that had nothing to do with their
budding feelings. When they parted, by the side of the road,
Raoul said to Christine, placing a proper kiss on her hand
Trembling, he said, "Mademoiselle, I will never forget you!" And he left.
he went away regretting this bold remark, for he knew very well that Christine
Daaé could not be the wife of the Viscount of Chagny.

As for Christine, she went to find her father and said to him, "You don't
Don't you think Raoul isn't as nice as he used to be? I don't like him.
"Not anymore!" And she tried not to think about him anymore. She was quite successful at it.
with difficulty and threw himself back on his art which took up all his time.
His progress was becoming remarkable. Those who listened to him
predicted she would be the world's leading artist. But her
Her father, in the meantime, died, and, as a result, she seemed to have lost
With him went his voice, his soul, and his genius. He retained enough of
All this just to get into the Conservatory, but only just. She didn't
distinguished in no way, followed the classes without enthusiasm and
won a prize to please old Mama Valerius, with
which she continued to live. The first time Raoul had
Having seen Christine again at the Opera, he had been charmed by the beauty of the
young girl and by revocation of the sweet images of yesteryear, but he
She had been rather surprised by the negative side of his art.
She seemed detached from everything. He went back to listen to her. He followed her in
backstage. He waited for her behind a clothes rack. He tried to attract
his attention. More than once, he accompanied her right up to the threshold of
her dressing room, but she couldn't see him. She seemed, moreover, not to see...
No one. It was indifference that was passing by. Raoul suffered from it, because
She was beautiful; he was shy and didn't dare admit it to himself.
that he loved her. And then, it was like a thunderbolt from the
Gala evening: the skies torn apart, an angel's voice becoming
to hear on earth for the delight of men and consumption
from his heart...

And then, and then, there was that man's voice behind the door:
"You must love me!" and no one in the dressing room...

Why had she laughed when he told her, in the moment that she
opened his eyes: "I am the little child who picked up your
"Scarf in the sea"? Why hadn't she recognized him? And
Why had she written to him?

Oh! This coast is long... long... Here is the crucifix of the three
paths... Here is the deserted moor, the icy heather, the landscape
motionless beneath the white sky. The windows clink, shattering him.
Their windowpanes in their ears... What a noise this stagecoach makes!
which is making so little progress! He recognizes the cottages... the enclosures, the
embankments, trees along the path... Here is the last bend in the road, and
Then we'll go downhill and it will be the sea... the great bay of Perros...

So she went down to the Sunset Inn. Good heavens! There isn't
There's no other. And besides, it's very comfortable here. He remembers that in
Back then, beautiful stories were told there! How his heart beats!
What will she say when she sees him?

The first person he sees upon entering the old room
The smoke-filled inn is Mother Tricard. She recognizes him. She tells him
He compliments her. She asks him what brings him here. He blushes. He
said that, having come to Lannion on business, he was determined to "push himself this far"
to say hello to him.” She wants to serve him lunch, but he says:
"Later." He seems to be waiting for something or someone. The
The door opens. He is standing. He wasn't mistaken: it's her! He
He wants to speak, but he falls back. She remains in front of him, smiling, not at all
astonished. Her face is fresh and pink like a strawberry ripened
the shadow. No doubt, the young girl is moved by a walk
Quickly. Her breast, which holds a sincere heart, rises gently.
Her eyes, clear mirrors of pale azure, the color of the lakes that
dream, motionless, high up in the north of the world, his eyes...
quietly reflect her candid soul. The garment of
The fur is partially open at the waist, creating a harmonious silhouette.
of her graceful young body. Raoul and Christine look at each other.
For a long time. Mother Tricard smiled and, discreetly, slipped away. Finally
Christine speaks:

"You came, and that doesn't surprise me at all. I had a feeling..."
that I would meet you here, in this inn, on my way back from the
Mass. Someone told me over there. Yes, I had been told about your
arrival.

"Who then?" asked Raoul, taking the little hand of
Christine, whom she does not take away from him.

--But, my poor father who is dead.

There is a silence between the two young people.

Then Raoul continues:

Did your dad tell you that I loved you, Christine, and that
I cannot live without you?

Christine blushed to the roots of her hair and turned her head away. She said, the
trembling voice:

--Me? You're crazy, my friend.

And she bursts out laughing to, as they say, give herself composure.

--Don't laugh, Christine, it's very serious.

And she replies, gravely:

--I didn't bring you here so you could tell me things
similar.

--You "brought me here," Christine; you guessed that your
that letter would not leave me indifferent and I would hasten to
Perros. How could you have thought that, if you didn't think that
Did I love you?

--I thought you might remember the games we played as children
in which my father was so often involved. Deep down, I don't really know.
What I thought... Perhaps I was wrong to write to you... Your
That sudden appearance the other night in my dressing room had transported me far away.
It was a long time ago, and I wrote to you like a little girl.
that I was then, who would be happy to see again, in a moment of
sadness and loneliness, her little friend beside her...

For a moment, they remain silent. There is something in Christine's attitude
something that Raoul does not find natural without it being
It is possible to clarify his thoughts. However, he does not perceive her as hostile;
Far from it... the desolate tenderness in her eyes tells him
Enough. But why is this tenderness so forlorn?...
Perhaps this is what needs to be known, and what is already irritating the young man.
man...

--When you saw me in your dressing room, it was the first time that
Did you see me, Christine?

She doesn't know how to lie. She says:

No! I've already seen you several times in your dressing room
brother. And also on the set.

"I suspected as much!" said Raoul, pursing his lips. "But why
So then, when you saw me in your box, at your knees, and you
remembering that I had picked up your scarf from the sea,
Why did you answer as if you didn't know me?
Did you laugh too?

The tone of these questions is so harsh that Christine looks at Raoul,
She was surprised and didn't answer him. The young man was stunned.
himself in this sudden quarrel, which he dares to do at the very moment when
He had promised himself he would make Christine hear words of
Tenderness, love, and submission. A husband, a lover who has everything.
rights, wouldn't speak any differently to his wife or his mistress who
would have offended him. But he himself becomes irritated by his wrongdoing, and
Judging it stupid, he sees no other way out of this ridiculous situation.
than in the fierce decision he makes to be odious.

"You're not answering me!" he said angrily and unhappily. "Well, I
I'll answer for you! There was someone in that
that box that bothered you, Christine! someone you didn't want
to show that you could be interested in someone other than
him!...

"If anyone bothered me, my friend!" Christine interrupted in a tone
I was freezing... if anyone was bothering me that night, it must have been you.
Since it was you I kicked out!...

--Yes!... to stay with the other one!...

"What are you saying, sir?" the young woman asked breathlessly... and what
Is this something else?

--From the one to whom you said: _I only sing for you! I have
I gave my soul tonight, and I died!

Christine grabbed Raoul's arm: she hugged him tightly
that one would not suspect in this fragile being.

--So you were listening behind the door?

Yes! Because I love you... And I heard everything...

"What did you hear?" And the young girl, strangely reverting to her old self...
Calm down, let go of Raoul's arm.

He told you: "You must love me!"

At these words, a deathly pallor spread across the face of
Christine, her eyes are dark circles... She staggers, she's going to fall. Raoul
She rushes forward, reaches out her arms, but Christine has already overcome this
a passing weakness, and, in a low, almost dying voice:

--Tell us! Tell us again! Tell us everything you heard!

Raoul looks at her, hesitates, doesn't understand what's happening.

"But, look at that! You can see that you're killing me!"

--I also heard that he answered you when you told him
that you had given him your soul: _Your soul is indeed beautiful, my
child, and I thank you. There is no emperor who has received a
Same gift! The angels cried tonight!

Christine placed her hand on her heart. She stared at Raoul in a
Indescribable emotion. His gaze is so sharp, so fixed,
It looks like the voice of a madwoman. Raoul is horrified. But then...
Christine's eyes became moist, and on her ivory cheeks
Two pearls slip down, two heavy tears...

--Christine!...

--Raoul!...

The young man tries to grab it, but it slips through his hands and
She runs away in a great mess.

While Christine remained locked in her room, Raoul...
made a thousand reproaches for his brutality; but, on the other hand, the
Jealousy resumed its gallop in her burning veins. So that the young
The girl would have shown similar emotion upon learning that someone had
Having discovered his secret, it must have been important! Indeed,
Raoul, despite what he had heard, had no doubt about the
Christine's purity. He knew she had a great reputation for
wisdom, and he was not so inexperienced that he did not understand the necessity
where an artist sometimes finds herself cornered by having to hear comments
of love. She had answered that well by stating that she had given
his soul, but clearly, all of this was only about
Singing and music. Obviously? Then why all the fuss?
On time? My God, how unhappy Raoul was! And if he had held on
The man, _a man's voice_, reportedly asked him for an explanation.
precise.

Why did Christine run away? Why didn't she come down?

He refused to eat lunch. He was quite upset and in pain
It was great to see those hours passing by, far from the young Swedish woman.
that he had hoped would be so sweet? Why didn't she come with him to walk
the country where they shared so many memories? And why,
since she seemed to have nothing more to do in Perros and, that in
In fact, she did nothing about it, and didn't she immediately resume her journey.
From Paris? He had learned that in the morning, she had had a mass said.
for the repose of Father Daaé's soul and that she had spent
long hours in prayer in the small church and at the tomb of
minstrel.

Sad and discouraged, Raoul walked towards the cemetery that surrounded
The church. He pushed open the door. He wandered alone among the tombs,
deciphering the inscriptions, but as he arrived behind
the apse, he was immediately informed by the brilliant note of the
flowers that sighed on the granite tombstone and overflowed onto
the white earth. They perfumed this whole icy corner of winter.
Breton. They were miraculous red roses that appeared to have bloomed.
morning, in the snow. It was a little bit of life among the dead, because the
Death was everywhere there. It too overflowed from the earth that had
rejected its excess of corpses. Skeletons and skulls by
Hundreds were crammed against the church wall, held back
simply by a light network of wires which left
discovered the entire macabre structure. The skulls, piled high,
aligned like bricks, reinforced in the gaps, by
Bones, very neatly whitened, seemed to form the first layer on
which had had its sacristy walls built. The door of this
The sacristy opened in the middle of this ossuary, as one can see
many along the old Breton churches.

Raoul prayed for Daaé, then, lamentably impressed by these
eternal smiles that the mouths of skulls have, he emerged from the
cemetery, climbed the hillside and sat down at the edge of the heath overlooking
the sea. The wind raced viciously across the shores, barking after the
The poor, timid light of day. It gave way, fled, and was not
nothing more than a livid ray on the horizon. Then the wind fell silent. It was the
evening. Raoul was enveloped in icy shadows, but he didn't feel
The cold. All his thoughts wandered over the deserted and desolate moor,
all his memories. It was there, in that place, that he had come
often, at dusk, with little Christine, to see
to dance the korrigans, just as the moon rises. For its
He had never seen one before, and yet he had good
eyes. Christine, on the other hand, who was a little nearsighted, claimed in
he had seen a lot. He smiled at the thought, and then, all of a sudden, he
shuddered. A shape, a precise shape, but one that had come...
without him knowing how, without the slightest noise having warned him, a
standing at his side, he said:

--Do you think the korrigans will come tonight?

It was Christine. He wanted to speak. She closed his mouth with her
gloved hand.

Listen to me, Raoul, I am determined to tell you something
Serious, very serious!

His voice trembled. He waited.

She resumed, feeling oppressed.

--Do you remember, Raoul, the legend of the Angel of Music?

"If I remember correctly!" he said, "I believe this is where your
Our father told it to us for the first time.

--It was here also that he told me: "When I am in heaven, my child,
I'll send it to you." Well! Raoul, my father is in heaven and I have received
the visit of the Angel of Music.

"I don't doubt it," replied the young man gravely, "for he believed"
to understand that in a pious thought, her friend was mingling the memory of
his father in the glow of his latest triumph.

Christine seemed slightly surprised by the composure with which the
Viscount de Chagny learned that she had received a visit from the Angel of
Music.

"How do you hear it, Raoul?" she said, tilting her pale face.
so close to the young man's face that he could believe that Christine
was going to give him a kiss, but she only wanted to read, despite the
darkness in her eyes.

"I understand," he replied, "that a human being does not sing, no
as you sang the other night, without any intervention
A miracle, without heaven having anything to do with it. There is no
There is no professor on earth who can teach you accents like these.
You heard the Angel of Music, Christine.

"Yes," she said solemnly, "in my dressing room." That's where he comes to me.
to give his daily lessons.

The tone in which she said this was so penetrating and so singular that
Raoul looked at her anxiously, the way one looks at someone who says a
enormity or asserts some crazy vision in which she believes
all the strength of her poor, diseased brain. But she had
she receded and was now, motionless, nothing more than a shadow in the
night.

"In your dressing room?" he repeated like a stupid echo.

--Yes, that's where I heard it, and I wasn't the only one to
To hear it...

--Who else has heard it, Christine?

--You, my friend.

--Me? I heard the Angel of Music?

--Yes, the other night, he was the one speaking while you were listening
behind the door of my dressing room. He was the one who told me: "You have to
"To love me." But I thought I was the only one who could hear his voice.
So, imagine my astonishment when I learned this morning that you
You could hear it too...

Raoul burst out laughing. And instantly, the night dissipated over the moor.
deserted, and the first rays of the moon came to envelop the young
people. Christine had turned hostilely towards Raoul. Her eyes,
Ordinarily so gentle, they flashed with lightning.

Why are you laughing? Perhaps you think you heard a voice
of a man?

"Goodness!" replied the young man, whose thoughts were beginning to...
to be confused by Christine's combative attitude.

"It's you, Raoul! You're the one telling me this! An old friend of mine."
To me! A friend of my father! I don't recognize you anymore! But what
Do you really believe that? I am an honest girl, you know, Viscount.
de Chagny, and I do not shut myself away with men's voices, in my box.
If you had opened the door, you would have seen that there was no one there!

--That's right! When you left, I opened this door and
I didn't find anyone in the box...

--You see... then?

The count summoned all his courage.

--So, Christine, I think we're making fun of you!

She screamed and ran away. He ran after her, but she ran away from him.
Jeta, in fierce irritation:

--Leave me alone! Leave me alone!

And she disappeared. Raoul returned to the inn, very tired, very discouraged.
and very sad.

He learned that Christine had just gone up to his room and that she
had announced that she would not be coming down for dinner. The young man
asked if she was ill. The kind innkeeper replied
in an ambiguous way that, if she was suffering, it must be
of an illness that wasn't very serious, and, as she believed in the
The lovers' quarrel caused her to shrug off as she walked away and
by slyly expressing the pity she felt for young people,
who wasted in vain quarrels the hours that the good Lord had given them
permission to cross onto land. Raoul dined alone by the hearth.
and, as you can well imagine, in a very gloomy manner. Then, in his
In his room, he tried to read, then, in his bed, he tried to sleep.
No noise could be heard from the apartment next door.
What was Christine doing? Was she asleep? And if she wasn't asleep, what was she doing?
What was she thinking? And what was he thinking? Had he only
capable of saying? The strange conversation he had had with
Christine had completely unsettled him!... He was thinking less about
Christine, who was _around_ Christine, and this "around" was so diffuse,
so nebulous, so elusive, that he felt a very curious and
very distressing discomfort.

Thus the hours passed very slowly; it could be eleven o'clock and
half past the hour when he distinctly heard footsteps in the room
next to hers. It was a light, furtive step. Christine didn't
So she hadn't gone to bed? Without thinking about his actions, the young man
He dressed hastily, careful not to make the slightest noise. And,
Ready for anything, he waited. Ready for what? Did he know? His
His heart leaped when he heard Christine's door slowly turn
on her hinges. Where was she going at this hour when everything was at rest in
Perros? He opened his door very gently and could see, in a
moonbeam, the white form of Christine gliding
cautiously down the corridor. She reached the stairs; she
He went downstairs and, above her, he leaned over the railing. Suddenly, he
He heard two voices talking rapidly. A sentence caught his attention.
Then came the voice of the hostess: "Don't lose the key."
Downstairs, they opened the door that led to the harbor. They closed it again. And everything
He returned to calm. Raoul immediately went back to his room and ran
at his window, which he opened. Christine's white form stood there.
on the deserted platform.

This first floor of the Sunset Inn was hardly
tall and a espaliered tree that stretched its branches to the arms
Raoul's impatience allowed him to be outside without
The hostess could suspect her absence. Therefore, what was the
The good lady was astonished the next morning when she was brought
the young man, almost frozen, more dead than alive, and that she learned that one
had found him lying stretched out on the steps of the
high altar of the small church in Perros. She ran to learn
presto the news to Christine, who rushed downstairs and lavished,
aided by the innkeeper, her anxious care for the young man who did not delay
he barely opened his eyes and came completely back to life upon seeing
above him was the charming face of his friend.

What had happened? Commissioner Mifroid had the opportunity,
a few weeks later, when the Opera drama ensued
the action of the public prosecutor, to question the Viscount of Chagny about the
events of the night in Perros, and this is what kind of events they were
were transcribed onto the pages of the investigation file. (Reference 150.)

_Request._--Miss Daaé didn't see you come down from your room
by the singular path you had chosen?

_Answer._ --No, sir, no, no. However, I arrived behind
She neglected to muffle the sound of my footsteps. I wasn't asking
But one thing is certain: that she turned around, that she saw me and
that she recognized me. I had just told myself, in fact, that my pursuit
was completely incorrect and that the method of espionage which
I was giving myself up; it was beneath me. But she didn't seem
she heard me and, in fact, she acted as if I hadn't been there.
She left the platform calmly and then, all of a sudden, went back up
quickly followed the path. The church clock had just struck midnight.
A quarter to, and it seemed to me that the sound of the hour had determined
the haste of her run, for she almost began to run herself.
she arrived at the cemetery gate.

D. Was the cemetery gate open?

R. Yes, sir, and that surprised me, but did not seem to astonish me at all
Miss Daaé.

D. Was there nobody in the cemetery?

R. I didn't see anyone. If there had been someone, I would have seen them. The
The moonlight was dazzling and the snow that covered the
The earth, by reflecting its rays back to us, made the night even brighter.

D. Couldn't we hide behind the tombstones?

R. No, sir. They are just poor tombstones that
disappeared under the layer of snow and lined up their crosses at
close to the ground. The only shadows were those of these crosses and the two
ours. The church was dazzlingly bright. I have never
I saw such a night light. It was very beautiful, very
transparent and very cold. I had never been at night in the
cemeteries, and I was unaware that such light could be found there,
"A light that weighs nothing."

D. Are you superstitious?

R. No, sir, I am a believer.

D. What was your state of mind?

R. Very healthy and very calm, indeed. Certainly, the unusual outing of
Miss Daaé had at first deeply disturbed me; but immediately
When I saw the young girl enter the cemetery, I thought to myself
that she came there to fulfill some vow at her father's tomb, and I
I found it so natural that I regained my composure. I was
simply surprised that she hadn't heard me walking yet
behind her, for the snow crunched under my feet. But no doubt
Was she completely absorbed in her pious thoughts? I resolved, moreover
not to disturb her, and when she arrived at her tomb
Father, I stayed a few steps behind her. She knelt in
the snow, made the sign of the cross and began to pray. At that moment,
Midnight struck. The twelfth stroke was still ringing in my ear when,
Suddenly, I saw the young girl raise her head; her gaze fixed on the
celestial vault, her arms stretched out towards the star of the night; she me
appeared in ecstasy and I was still wondering what the reason had been
sudden and decisive of this ecstasy when I myself raised the
head, I cast a frantic glance around me and my whole being
reached towards the Invisible, the invisible that played music for us. And
What a song! We already knew it! Christine and I had
We'd already heard it in our youth. But never on our father's violin.
Daaé, she had never expressed herself with such divine artistry. I could not
It would be better, at this moment, than to remind myself of everything Christine
had just told me to put away the music, and I didn't quite know what to think
of those unforgettable sounds which, if they did not descend from the sky,
their origin on earth remained unknown. There was nothing there
no instrument, no hand to guide the bow. Oh! I remembered
the admirable melody. It was the _Resurrection of Lazarus_, which the
Father Daaé played for us in his moments of sadness and faith. The angel
If Christine had existed, he couldn't have played this role better.
That night with the violin of the deceased minstrel. The invocation of Jesus
it was taking us away from the earth, and, indeed, I almost expected to see
to lift the stone from Christine's father's tomb. The idea came to me
also that Daaé had been buried with his violin and, in truth, I
I do not know how far, in this funereal and radiant moment, to
at the back of this small, secluded provincial cemetery, next to these
skulls that laughed at us with all their motionless jaws,
No, I don't know how far my imagination went, nor where it
stopped.

But the music had stopped and I regained my senses. It seemed to me
to hear noise coming from the direction of the skulls in the ossuary.

D.--Ah! ah! you heard a noise coming from the direction of the ossuary?

R. Yes, it seemed to me that the skulls were now sneering and I
I couldn't help but shiver.

D. You didn't immediately think that behind the ossuary
The celestial musician who had just come from so many places might have been hiding there.
charm?

R. I thought about it so thoroughly that I thought of nothing else.
Commissioner, and I forgot to follow Miss Daaé who
had just gotten up and was calmly making his way to the cemetery gate.
As for her, she was so absorbed that there was no
It's surprising she didn't notice me. I didn't move, my eyes
fixed on the ossuary, determined to go all the way to the end of this
An incredible adventure, and to know the end of it.

D. So, what happened that led to you being found in the morning?
lying half-dead on the steps of the high altar?

R. Oh! That was quick... A skull rolled at my feet... then a
Another... then another... It was as if I were the purpose of this
a funereal game of boules. And I had this idea that a false move
had to destroy the harmony of the scaffolding behind which
was hiding our musician. This hypothesis seemed all the more plausible to me.
It was reasonable that a shadow suddenly glided across the bright wall of the
sacristy.

I rushed forward. The shadow had already, pushing open the door, entered.
in the church. I had wings, the shadow had a cloak. I was
quick enough to grab a corner of the shadow's cloak. At that moment,
The shadow and I were standing right in front of the high altar and the
moonbeams fell through the large stained-glass window of the apse
straight ahead. As I did not let go of the cloak, the shadow...
turned around and, the cloak in which she was wrapped had
half-opened, I saw, Your Honor, as I see you, a
a terrifying skull that glared at me with a burning gaze
the fires of hell. I thought I was dealing with Satan himself and, before
this apparition from beyond the grave, my heart, despite all its courage,
I fainted, and I remember nothing until the moment I...
I woke up in my little room at the Sunset Inn.




VII


A VISIT TO LODGE NO. 5


We left Messrs. Firmin Richard and Armand Moncharmin in the
the moment they decided to go and pay a little visit to the
first box no. 5.

They left behind the wide staircase that leads from the vestibule
from administration to the stage and its dependencies; they have crossed
the stage (the set), they entered the theatre through the entrance
subscribers, then, in the hall, through the first corridor on the left.
They then slipped between the first rows of seats
orchestra and looked at the first box, number 5. They saw it poorly.
because it was plunged into semi-darkness and that
huge covers were thrown over the red velvet of the
armrests.

At that moment, they were almost alone in the immense spaceship.
Darkness and a great silence surrounded them. It was time.
quiet place where the machinists go to drink.

The team had temporarily emptied the set, leaving a backdrop
half planted; a few rays of light (a pale light,
sinister, which seemed stolen from a dying star), had
insinuated through some unknown opening, leading to an old tower which
erected its cardboard battlements on the stage; things, in this
In this artificial night, or rather in this deceptive day, strange things took place.
shapes. On the orchestra seats, the canvas that covered them
had the appearance of a raging sea, whose murky waves had
were instantly immobilized on the secret order of the giant of
storms, which, as everyone knows, is called Adamastor. Messrs. Moncharmin
and Richard were the shipwrecked victims of this motionless upheaval of a
Sea of ​​painted canvas. They advanced towards the boxes on the left, at
large armfuls, like sailors who have abandoned their boat and
They seek to reach the shore. The eight large columns in a row
polished stones stood in the shadows like so many prodigious stilts
intended to support the menacing, crumbling, and bulging cliff, of which
The foundations were represented by parallel circular lines.
and sloping balconies of the first, second and third tiers
lodges. From the very top of the cliff, lost in the sky of
Mr. Lenepveu's copper, figures grimaced, sneered,
They mocked and scoffed at the concern of Messrs. Moncharmin and Richard.
They were, however, usually very serious figures.
Their names were: Isis, Amphitrite, Hebe, Flora, Pandora, Psyche,
Thetis, Pomona, Daphne, Clythia, Galatea, Arethusa. Yes, Arethusa
herself and Pandora, whom everyone knows because of her box,
were watching the two new directors of the Opera who had finished
by clinging to some wreckage, and from there, contemplating
Silence in the first box, number 5. I said they were worried. From
Less, I presume. Mr. Moncharmin, in any case, admits that he was
impressed. He said verbatim: "This 'swing' (what
style!) of the Phantom of the Opera, about which we had been so kindly
has increased, since we took over from Messrs. Poligny and
Debienne had probably ended up disrupting the balance of my
imaginative faculties, and, all things considered, visual ones, because (was it
the exceptional setting in which we moved, at the center of a
An incredible silence that impressed us so much?... were we the
toy of a kind of hallucination made possible by the
the near-darkness of the hall and the dimness that bathed box no.
5?) because I saw, and Richard also saw, at the same time, a shape
in box number 5. Richard said nothing; neither did I, for that matter. But
We took each other's hands in unison. Then we waited.
for a few minutes like this, without moving, eyes still fixed on the
Same point: but the shape had disappeared. So, we went outside and,
In the corridor, we shared our impressions and we
We talked about _the shape._ The problem is that my shape,
was not at all Richard's style. I had seen it as a
a skull that was placed on the edge of the box, while
Richard had glimpsed the shape of an old woman who resembled the
Mother Giry. So much so that we saw that we had truly been the
a plaything of illusion, which we ran away from without further delay, laughing.
like madmen in the first box, number 5, into which we entered
and in which we found no form whatsoever.

And now we are in lodge number 5.

It's a lodge like any other first-class lodge. In truth,
Nothing distinguishes this box from its neighbors.

Messrs. Moncharmin and Richard, openly enjoying themselves and laughing at each other
The other ones were moving the furniture in the box, lifting the slipcovers and
the armchairs and examined in particular the one on which _the voice
used to sit._ But they noticed that it was a
An honest armchair, nothing magical about it. In short, the box was
the most ordinary of boxes, with its red tapestry, its armchairs, its
rug and its red velvet armrest. After feeling the
More seriously, the world is a doormat, and not having, on this side, as
The others, having discovered nothing special, went down into the
The bathtub below, which corresponded to box number 5. In the
bathtub #5, which is just around the corner from the first exit on the left
orchestra seats, they found nothing either which
deserved to be noted.

"All these people are making fun of us," Firmin finally exclaimed.
Richard; on Saturday, they're performing _Faust_, we'll be attending the performance
Both of them in the first box, number 5!




VIII


WHERE MESSRS. FIRMIN RICHARD AND ARMAND MONCHARMIN HAVE THE AUDACITY TO DO
PERFORMING "FAUST" IN A "CURSED" AND TERRIFYING VENUE
RESULTING EVENT


But on Saturday morning, upon arriving at their office, the directors
found a double letter from F. de l'O. conceived as follows:


"My dear directors,

"So this is war?"

"If you still want peace, here is my ultimatum.

"It is subject to the following four conditions:

"1. Return my box to me—and I want it to be at my free disposal."
right now;

"2. The role of 'Marguerite' will be sung tonight by Christine"
Daaé. Don't worry about Carlotta, she'll be sick;

“3. I absolutely value the good and loyal services of Mrs. Giry, my
usherette, whom you will immediately reinstate in her duties;

"4° Inform me by a letter delivered to Mrs. Giry, who will tell me the
will send, which you accept, like your predecessors, the
conditions of my specifications relating to my compensation
monthly. I will let you know later in what form you
You will have to pay it to me.

"Otherwise, you will perform Faust tonight in a cursed hall."

"A word to the wise!"

"F. DE L'O."


"Well! He's bothering me!... He's bothering me!" Richard yelled,
raising his vengeful fists and letting them fall with a crash on
his desk.

Meanwhile, Mercier, the administrator, entered.

"Lachenal would like to see one of these gentlemen," he said. "It seems that..."
The matter is urgent, and the man seems completely distraught.

"Who is Lachenal?" asked Richard.

--He is your chief squire.

--What! My chief squire?

"Yes, sir," Mercier explained, "there are several at the Opera."
squires, and Mr. Lachenal is their leader.

--And what is this squire doing?

--He has the overall management of the team.

--Which stable?

--But yours, sir, the stable, of the Opera.

"There's a stable at the Opera? Honestly, I had no idea! And where is it?"
Does she find it?

--In the basement, near the Rotunda. It's a very
Importantly, we have twelve horses.

Twelve horses! And why, good God?

--But for the parades of the _Jewess_, the _Prophet_, etc., it is necessary
Trained horses that "know the boards." The equestrians
are responsible for teaching them. Mr. Lachenal is very skilled at it.
He is the former manager of Franconi's stables.

--Very well..., but what does he want from me?

--I don't know... I've never seen him in such a state.

--Bring him in!...

Mr. Lachenal enters. He has a riding crop in his hand and is holding it in a whip
nervously grabbed one of his boots.

"Good morning, Mr. Lachenal," said Richard, impressed. "What is it?"
Is your visit worthy of our honor?

--Sir, I have come to ask you to put all
the stable at the gate.

--What! You want to throw our horses out?

--It's not about the horses, it's about the grooms!

--How many stable boys do you have, Mr. Lachenal?

--Six!

Six grooms! Two is at least too many!

"These are 'places,'" Mercier interrupted, "that have been
created and imposed on us by the undersecretariat of
Fine Arts. They are occupied by government protégés, and
if I may...

"I don't care about the government!" Richard asserted energetically.
We don't need more than four grooms for twelve
horses.

"Eleven!" corrected the squire, a chief.

"Twelve!" repeated Richard.

"Eleven!" Lachenal repeated.

"Ah! It was the administrator who told me you had twelve."
horses!

--I used to have twelve, but I only have eleven left since we were
Stolen Caesar!

And Mr. Lachenal gives himself a good whack with his riding crop on the boot.

"They've stolen Caesar from us!" cried the administrator. "Caesar, the
The Prophet's white horse.

"There are not two Caesars!" declared the chief equerry in a curt tone.
I spent ten years at Franconi's and I saw a lot of horses! Well!
There are only two Caesars! And one was stolen from us.

--How so?

--Hey! I don't know! Nobody knows! That's why I
He came to ask you to throw the whole stable out.

--What are your stable boys saying?

--Nonsense... some accuse extras... others
claim that he is the administration's caretaker.

--The administration's concierge? I vouch for that as if I were myself!
Mercier protested.

"But surely, Sir First Equerry," cried Richard, "you must
to have an idea!...

--Well! Yes, I have one! I have one! declared Mr.
Lachenal, and I'll tell you. For me, there's no doubt.--Mr.
The first equerry approached the directors and whispered to them
The ear: --It was the ghost who did it!_

Richard jumped.

--Ah! You too! You too!

--What? Me too? That's the most natural thing to do...

--But how! Mr. Lachenal! But how, Mr.
first squire...

--...Let me tell you what I think, after what I've seen...

--And what did you see, Mr. Lachenal?

--I saw, as clearly as I see you, a dark shadow riding a horse
white, who looked exactly like Caesar!

--And you didn't run after that white horse and that black shadow?

--I ran and called, Mr. Director, but they
fled with disconcerting speed and disappeared into the night.
the gallery...

Mr. Richard stood up:

"That's fine, Mr. Lachenal. You may withdraw... we will..."
to file a complaint against the _ghost_...

--And you're going to throw my stable out!

--That's settled! Goodbye, sir!

Mr. Lachenal bowed and left.

Richard was foaming at the mouth.

--You're going to settle the score with this idiot!

"He's a friend of the government commissioner!" Mercier dared...

--And he has his aperitif in Tortoni with Lagréné, Scholl and
Pertuiset, the lion killer, added Moncharmin. We're going to put ourselves
The entire press corps is on his back! He'll tell the story of the ghost and everything else.
The world will have fun at our expense! If we are ridiculous, we are
dead!

"That's fine, let's not talk about it anymore..." conceded Richard, who was already thinking
to something else.

At that moment the door opened and, no doubt, this door was not
no point then defended by her usual Cerberus, for we saw Mame Giry
enters immediately, letter in hand, and says hurriedly:

Excuse me, gentlemen, but I received a letter this morning from
Phantom of the Opera. He told me to come to your place, that you have
supposedly something to me...

She didn't finish her sentence. She saw the figure of Firmin Richard, and
It was terrible. The honorable director of the Opera was ready to
erupt. The fury that agitated him had not yet manifested itself in
the exterior, only by the scarlet color of his furious face and by
the flash of his blazing eyes. He said nothing. He couldn't
He was speaking. But suddenly, his gesture began. First, it was his arm.
left who undertook the pale person of Mame Giry and made him describe
such an unexpected about-turn, such a quick pirouette that this one in
let out a desperate cry, and then, it was the right foot, the foot
right of the same honorable director who went to imprint his sole on the
black taffeta of a skirt which, certainly, had not yet, in
Such a place, suffered such an outrage.

The event had been so rushed that Mame Giry, when she
found herself in the gallery, still somewhat dazed, and seemed
not to understand. But suddenly she understood, and the Opera House resounded with
his indignant cries, his fierce protests, his threats of
dead. It took three boys to carry her down in the courtyard of
the administration and two agents to carry it into the street.

At about the same time, Carlotta, who lived in a small
her chambermaid rang the bell at the hotel on rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré.
and had her mail brought to her bed. In this mail, she
found an anonymous letter which told him:

"If you sing tonight, beware that something great might happen to you."
A misfortune at the very moment you sing... a misfortune worse than the
dead."

This threat was written in red ink, in hesitant handwriting.
and baton-like.

Having read this letter, Carlotta no longer had an appetite for lunch.
She pushed away the tray on which the chambermaid was presenting her with the
Steaming hot chocolate. She sat on her bed and thought deeply.
This was not the first letter of this kind that she had received, but
She had never read one so threatening before.

At that moment, she believed herself to be the target of a thousand attempts by the
jealousy and commonly recounted that she had a secret enemy who
had sworn his downfall. She claimed that he was plotting against her.
some evil plot, some cabal that would erupt one of these
days; but she was not a woman to be intimidated,
she added.

The truth was that, if there was a cabal, it was led by
Carlotta herself against poor Christine, who had no idea what was going on.
Hardly. Carlotta had not forgiven Christine for the triumph that
She had won by replacing her at the last minute.

When he learned of the extraordinary welcome he had received
Carlotta felt instantly cured by her replacement.
of the onset of bronchitis and a bout of sulking against
the administration, and it had no longer shown the slightest inclination to
quit her job. Since then, she had worked with all her might.
to "smother" her rival, using powerful friends to influence the
directors so that they no longer give Christine the opportunity to
new triumph. Some newspapers that had begun to sing the praises
Christine's talent now only concerned itself with the glory of the
Carlotta. Finally, at the theater itself, the famous diva held court.
Christine made the most outrageous remarks and tried to cause him
a thousand little inconveniences.

Carlotta had neither heart nor soul. She was just an instrument!
Indeed, a marvelous instrument. Its repertoire included everything that
who can tempt the ambition of a great artist, as much among the
German masters, like the Italians or the French. Never,
Until that day, Carlotta had never been heard to sing off-key, nor
lacking the necessary voice volume to translate any passage
from its immense repertoire. In short, the instrument was extensive, powerful
and with admirable accuracy. But no one could have told Carlotta this
that Rossini said to Krauss, after she had sung for him in
German “Dark forests?... “: “You sing with your soul, my
"Daughter, and your soul is beautiful!"

Where was your soul, oh Carlotta, when you danced in the dives of
Barcelona? Where was she, when later, in Paris, you sang about
Are your cynical, music-hall bacchante verses just sad trestles?
Where is your soul, when, before the masters assembled at one of your
Lovers, you made this docile instrument resonate, whose marvelous
was that he sang with the same indifferent perfection the sublime
Love and the basest orgy? Oh Carlotta, if you had ever had a
soul and that you had it, lost then, you would have found it again when you
become Juliette, when you were Elvire, and Ophelia, and Marguerite! For
Others have risen from lower places than you, and art, aided by
Love has purified!

In truth, when I think of all the pettiness, the vileness which
Christine Daaé had to suffer at that time from this
Carlotta, I cannot contain my anger, and it does not surprise me that
My indignation translates into somewhat broad insights into art in
general, and that of singing in particular, where admirers of the
Carlotta will certainly not find what they're looking for.

When Carlotta had finished considering the threat of the letter
It was strange that she had just received something; she stood up.

"We'll see," she said... And she uttered, in Spanish, a few
oaths, with a very resolute air.

The first thing she saw when she put her nose to the window was a
hearse. The hearse and the letter persuaded her that she was running,
That night, the most serious dangers. She gathered the household at her home and
her inner circle of friends informed them that she was threatened, at the
evening performance, of a cabal organized by Christine Daaé, and
declared that this little thing had to be done by filling the
A room full of her own admirers, Carlotta herself. She didn't have any.
They weren't lacking, were they? She was counting on them to be ready.
to every eventuality and silence the troublemakers, if, like her
They feared it, they unleashed a scandal.

Mr. Richard's private secretary having come to take some
news of the diva's health, she returned with assurance
that she was doing wonderfully and that, "even if she were dying", she
would sing the role of Marguerite that very evening. Like the secretary
had, on behalf of her boss, strongly recommended to the diva not
to commit no imprudence, not to leave her home, and to
To avoid drafts, Carlotta couldn't help but, after her
from the outset, to bring these exceptional recommendations closer together and
unexpected threats were included in the letter.

It was five o'clock when she received news in the mail.
an anonymous letter in the same handwriting as the first. It was
brief. She simply said, "You have a cold; if you were
If you're being reasonable, you'd understand that it's madness to want to sing this.
evening."

Carlotta sneered, shrugged her shoulders, which were magnificent, and
he played two or three notes that reassured her.

His friends were true to their promise. They were all there.
that evening at the Opera, but they searched around in vain.
of them, those ferocious conspirators they were tasked with fighting. If
with the exception of a few laypeople, a few honest bourgeois among whom
the placid figure reflected no other purpose than to hear again
a music that had long since won their favor,
There were only regulars there, whose manners were elegant,
peaceful and proper, they dismissed any idea of ​​demonstrations.
The only thing that seemed abnormal was the presence of Mr. Richard.
and Moncharmin in box number 5. The friends of the Carlotta thought
that, perhaps, the directors had, for their part,
wind of the planned scandal and that they had insisted on going to the
a room to stop it as soon as it burst, but that was a
an unjustified hypothesis, as you know; Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin
they thought only of their ghost.

Nothing?... In vain I question, in a fervent vigil, Nature and the
Creator. Not a voice, not a word of comforting whispers in my ear!

The famous baritone Carolus Fonta had barely launched the first
Doctor Faust's appeal to the powers of hell, by Mr. Firmin Richard,
who had sat down in the very chair of the ghost—the chair on the right,
in the front row—leaning, in the best of moods, towards his
partner, and said to him:

--And you, has a voice ever whispered a word in your ear?

"Let's wait! Let's not be too hasty," he replied in the same tone.
Mr. Armand Moncharmin is amusing. The performance has only just begun.
and you know very well that the ghost usually only arrives around the
middle of the first act.

The first act passed without incident, which did not surprise the friends.
Carlotta, since Marguerite does not sing in this act. As for the
As the curtain fell, the two directors looked at each other and smiled:

"And that's one!" said Montcharmin.

"Yes, the ghost is late," declared Firmin Richard.

Moncharmin, still joking, continued:

In short, the room isn't too badly lined tonight for a
cursed room.

Mr. Richard deigned to smile. He pointed out a good one to his colleague.
a rather vulgar, large woman dressed in black who was sitting in a
an armchair in the middle of the room, flanked by two men,
looking rough in their frock coats made of dress cloth.

"What is this 'world'?" asked Montcharmin.

--That world, my dear, is my concierge, her brother and her husband.

--Did you give them tickets?

--Well, yes... My concierge had never been to the Opera... it's
the first time... and since, now, she has to come every
In the evenings, I wanted her to be well-positioned before spending her time at
place the others.

Moncharmin asked for an explanation, and Richard told him that he had
decided, for a while, his concierge, in whom he had the most
great confidence, to come and take the place of mam' Giry.

"About Mother Giry," said Moncharmin, "you know she's going to wear..."
complaint against you.

--With whom? With the ghost?

The ghost! Moncharmin had almost forgotten about it.

Moreover, the mysterious character did nothing to remind us of his existence.
In memory of the directors.

Suddenly, the door to their dressing room burst open in front of the stage manager.
horrified.

"What is it?" they both asked, astonished to see this one
in such a place, at this time.

"There is," said the manager, "a cabal being set up by the friends of
Christine Daaé versus Carlotta. The latter is furious.

"What's this all about now?" said Richard.
frowning.

But the curtain was rising on the fair, and the director signaled to
the manager withdrew.

When the steward had cleared the square, Moncharmin leaned over
Richard's ear:

"So Daaé has friends?" he asked.

"Yes," said Richard, "she has some."

--Who?

Richard glanced towards a front box in which there was no
than two men.

--The Count of Chagny?

Yes, he recommended it to me... so warmly, that if I didn't
I didn't know about Sorelli's friend...

"Well, well!" murmured Moncharmin.

And who is this pale young man sitting next to him?

--That's his brother, the viscount.

He'd better go to bed. He looks sick.

The stage resounded with joyful songs. Musical intoxication. Triumph of
cup.

Wine or beer, beer or wine, let my glass be full!

Students, bourgeois, soldiers, young girls and matrons, the heart
cheerful, they whirled in front of the cabaret bearing the sign of the god
Bacchus. Siebel made his entrance.

Christine Daaé was charming in drag. Her fresh youth, her
Their melancholic grace was captivating at first sight. Immediately, the
Carlotta's supporters imagined she would be greeted with applause.
an ovation that would inform them about the intentions of his friends.
This indiscreet ovation would, moreover, have been quite clumsy.
badge. It did not happen.

On the contrary, when Marguerite crossed the stage and had sung
the only two lines of his role in this second act:

No gentlemen, I am neither a damsel nor a beauty, and I have no need
Give me your hand!

The Carlotta was greeted with thunderous applause. It was so unexpected and
so useless that those who knew nothing looked at each other in disbelief
wondering what was happening, and the act ended without any
incident. Everyone was thinking, "This is going to be for the act."
"Next, obviously." Some, who were, it seems, better
Informed that the others, they asserted that the "noise" must
they began at the "Cup of the King of Thule", and they rushed off
towards the return of subscribers to go and warn Carlotta.

The directors left the box during this intermission to...
to inquire about this cabal story that the
stage manager, but they soon returned to their places, raising the
shoulders and treating the whole thing as nonsense. The
The first thing they saw upon entering was, on the tablet of
The armrest, a box of English sweets. Who had brought it there? They
the ushers asked. But no one could give them any information.
Having then turned back towards the armrest they
this time, they spotted, next to the box of English sweets, a
opera glasses. They looked at each other. They didn't feel like laughing. All this
What Mrs. Giry had told them came back to them... and then...
It seemed to them that there was a strange current around them.
They sat in silence, truly impressed.

The scene depicted Marguerite's garden...

Convey my confessions to him, carry my vows...

As she sang those first two lines, her bouquet of roses and
With lilacs in her hand, Christine, raising her head, glimpsed in her dressing room
the Viscount of Chagny, and from then on, it seemed to everyone that his voice was
Less assured, less pure, less crystalline than usual. Somewhat
something unknown muffled, weighed down his song... There
underneath, there was trembling and fear.

"Strange girl," remarked a friend of Carlotta's, almost aloud.
seated in the orchestra... The other night, she was divine and
Now, here she is, trembling. No experience, no method!

It is in you that I have faith, speak for me.

The viscount put his head in his hands. He was crying. The count,
behind him, bit the tip of his mustache violently, raised
his shoulders and frowned. So that he would translate it as much
The count, usually so devoid of outward signs of his innermost feelings,
Correct and so cold, he must have been furious. He was. He had seen his
brother returning from a quick and mysterious trip in a state of health
alarming. The explanations that followed were without
No doubt it had the power to reassure the count who, desirous of
to know where she stood, she had asked Christine for a meeting
Daaé. She had the audacity to reply that she couldn't...
Neither he nor his brother would receive it. He believed it was some abominable scheme. He did not
he did not forgive Christine for making Raoul suffer, but above all he
He could not forgive Raoul for suffering over Christine. Ah! he had
It's a mistake to pay even a moment's attention to this little girl, whose triumph
The events of one night remained incomprehensible to everyone.

May the flower on her lips at least know how to bestow a sweet kiss.

"You little hussy," growled the count.

And he wondered what she wanted... what she could possibly want.
To hope... She was pure, oh, she said, without a friend, without a protector
Not of any kind... that angel from the North must have been cunning!

Raoul, behind his hands, a curtain that hid his childlike tears,
he could only think about the letter he had received upon his return to Paris
where Christine had arrived before him, having escaped from Perros
like a thief: "My dear ex-boyfriend, you must have the courage
to never see me again, to never speak to me again... if you love me even a little,
Do this for me, for me who will never forget you... my dear
Raoul. Above all, never set foot in my dressing room again. My life depends on it.
life. Yours is at stake. Your little Christine.

A thunderous round of applause... It's Carlotta doing her
entrance.

The garden scene unfolded with its usual twists and turns.

When Marguerite had finished singing the King of Thule's aria, she was
She was acclaimed; she was again when she finished the Jewel Song:


Ah! I laugh to see myself
So beautiful in this mirror...


Now, confident in herself, confident in her friends in the room, confident in her
With her voice and her success, fearing nothing more, Carlotta gave everything
wholeheartedly, ardently, enthusiastically, and passionately. His playing had no
No more restraint or modesty... She was no longer Marguerite.
It was Carmen. She was applauded all the more, and her duet with Faust...
It seemed that he was preparing for another success, when suddenly...
something dreadful.

Faust had knelt down:


Let me, let me gaze upon your face
Under the pale light
Including the star of the night, as if in a cloud,
Caress your beauty.


And Marguerite replied:


O silence! O happiness! Ineffable mystery!
Intoxicating languor!
I'm listening!... And I understand that lonely voice
Who sings in my heart!


At that moment, then... at that precise moment... something happened...
I said something terrible...

...The entire room rose as one... In their box, the
Two directors could not suppress an exclamation of horror...
The spectators look at each other as if wondering
The explanation for such an unexpected phenomenon remains to be seen... The face
Carlotta expresses the most excruciating pain; her eyes seem haunted.
by madness. The poor woman sat up, her mouth still
half-open, having finished letting through "that solitary voice which
sang in her heart... But that mouth no longer sang...
_she no longer dared to speak, not to make a sound_...

Because this mouth, created for harmony, this agile instrument that
had never failed, magnificent organ, generator of the most beautiful
sounds, from the most difficult chords to the softest modulations,
the most ardent rhythms, sublime human mechanism to which he
All that was missing, to be divine, was the fire from heaven which alone gives the
genuine emotion and stirs the soul... that mouth had left
pass...

From that mouth had escaped...

... _A toad!_

Ah! the dreadful, the hideous, the scaly, venomous, foaming, frothing,
yelping toad!...

How had he gotten in? How had he squatted down on his tongue?
With its hind legs folded, to jump higher and further,
Slyly, it had slipped out of the larynx, and... smack!

Quack! Quack!... Ah! The terrible quack!

Because you surely understand that we should only speak of the toad figuratively.
We couldn't see him, but, by hell! we could hear him. Quack!

The room was as if splashed. Never an amphibian, by the edge of the ponds.
resounding, had not torn the night apart with a more dreadful squawk.

And indeed, it was quite unexpected by everyone. Carlotta didn't...
Neither his throat nor his ears could believe it. Lightning, striking his
feet, would have surprised her less than that croaking toad that had just come from
to come out of his mouth...

And she would not have dishonored her. Whereas it is understood that a
A toad huddled on the tongue always dishonors a singer. There are some
to whom they died.

My God! Who would have believed it?... She sang so calmly: "And I
"Understand this lonely voice that sings in my heart!" She
sang effortlessly, as always, with the same ease as you,
Say: "Hello, madam, how are you?"

It cannot be denied that there are presumptuous female singers who have
the great mistake of not measuring their strengths, and who, in their
pride, they want to attain, with the weak voice that heaven gives them
partit, to exceptional effects and launch notes that have
They were defended by coming into the world. It was then that the sky for the
to punish them, sends them, without their knowledge, into their mouths, a
A toad, a toad that goes quack! Everyone knows that.
no one could admit that a Carlotta, who had at least two
octaves in the voice, there was still a toad.

One could not have forgotten his strident _counter-fa_, his _staccato_
unheard of in _The Magic Flute_. We remembered _Don Juan_, where
She was Elvira, and it was there that she won her most resounding triumph.
one evening, by giving the _B_ flat that she herself could not give
her friend Dona Anna. So, really, what did this blunder mean in the end?
of this quiet, peaceful, tiny "solitary voice that
was singing in his heart?

It wasn't natural. There was some kind of spell involved. This
The toad smelled like something was burning. Poor, miserable, desperate, devastated.
Carlotta!...

In the room, the rumor was growing. It would have been someone else rather than...
If Carlotta had experienced a similar adventure, she would have been booed!
But with this one, whose perfect instrument was known, we did not
showed no anger, but consternation and terror.
Thus, men must have endured this kind of terror, if such a thing exists.
who witnessed the catastrophe that broke the arms of the Venus of
Milo!... and yet they were able to see the blow that struck... and
to understand...

But this? This toad was incomprehensible!...

So much so that after a few seconds spent wondering if really
she herself had heard it, coming out of her own mouth, this
Note—was it a note, that sound?—could it be called a sound? A
It's still music—this infernal noise, she wanted to
to persuade that nothing of the sort had happened; that there had been, for a moment,
an illusion of his ear, and not a criminal betrayal of
the vocal organ...

She cast her eyes frantically around her as if searching for a
refuge, protection, or rather the spontaneous assurance of innocence
of his voice. His clenched fingers had moved to his throat in a
a gesture of defense and protest. No! no! this blunder was not at
She did! And it seemed that Carolus Fonta himself shared this opinion.
who were looking at her with an indescribable expression of astonishment
childlike and gigantic. For finally, he was near her, he was. He didn't
had not left her. Perhaps he could tell her how a
Something like that had happened! No, he couldn't! His
eyes were stupidly fixed on Carlotta's mouth as
the eyes of the little ones considering the inexhaustible hat of
magician. How could such a small mouth have contained a
Such a big blunder?

All of this—toad, quack, emotion, terror—rumor from the room,
confusion on stage, backstage, --a few extras were showing
startled faces—all of which I describe to you in detail
It lasted a few seconds.

A few awful seconds that seemed especially endless to both of them
directors up there, in box number 5. Moncharmin and Richard were
very pale. This incredible and inexplicable episode...
filled with an anguish all the more mysterious because they were
for a moment under the direct influence of the ghost.

They had felt his breath. A few of Moncharmin's hairs had
erected by that breath... And Richard had passed his handkerchief over
His brow sweated... Yes, he was there... around them... behind them
They, right beside them, could feel it without seeing it!... They could hear it
her breathing... and so close to them, so close to them!... _We know when
Someone is present... Well, they knew now!... _they
were sure there were three of them in the box... They were trembling... They
They had the idea of ​​fleeing... They didn't dare... They didn't dare to
a movement, an exchange of words that could have taught the ghost
They knew he was there!... What was going to happen? What was going to happen?
occur?

The hiccup occurred! Above all the noises in the hall...
heard their double exclamation of horror. They felt themselves under the
blows of the phantom._ Leaning over their box, they watched the
Carlotta, as if they no longer recognized her. That daughter of hell
His blunder must have signaled some impending catastrophe. Ah!
The disaster, they were expecting it! The ghost had promised it to them!
The room was cursed! Their double-breasted directors were already panting
under the weight of the catastrophe. We heard the strangled voice of
Richard, who was shouting at Carlotta:

--Well then! Go on!

No! Carlotta did not continue... She bravely started again,
heroically, the fatal worm at the end of which the toad had appeared.

An eerie silence followed all the noises. Only the voice of the
Carlotta once again filled the sound vessel.

I'm listening!...

--The audience is also listening--

...And I understand that solitary voice (quack!) Quack!... that sings
in my... blunder!

The toad has started again too.

The hall erupted in a tremendous uproar. Having fallen back into their seats,
The two directors don't even dare turn around; they don't have the
force. The ghost laughed down their necks! And finally they heard
distinctly in the right ear his voice, the impossible voice, the voice
Without a mouth, the voice that says:

She's singing so loudly tonight she could bring down the chandelier!

With a unified movement, they raised their heads to the ceiling and pushed
a terrible cry. The chandelier, the immense mass of the chandelier, was sliding, coming
to them, at the call of that satanic voice. The chandelier was taken down.
plunged from the heights of the hall and crashed down in the middle of
the orchestra, amidst a thousand clamor. It was a terror, a
A general free-for-all. My intention is not to revive this here.
A historic hour. Those curious need only open the newspapers of
at the time. There were many injured and one dead.

The chandelier had crashed down on the head of the unfortunate woman who was
came that evening to the Opera, for the first time in her life, on
the one that Mr. Richard had designated as replacing in his
Mame Giry, the usherette of the phantom! She was
She died instantly, and the next day a newspaper article appeared with this
Headline: _Two hundred thousand kilos on a concierge's head!_ It was
his entire funeral oration.




IX


THE MYSTERIOUS COUPE


That tragic evening was bad for everyone. Carlotta
had fallen ill. As for Christine Daaé, she had disappeared
after the performance. Fifteen days had passed without anyone
would have seen her again at the theatre, without her having shown herself out of the
theater.

This first disappearance, which happened without
scandal, with the infamous kidnapping which, some time later,
must have occurred under such inexplicable and tragic circumstances.

Raoul was the first, naturally, to understand nothing about the absence
of the diva. He had written to her at the address of Mrs. Valerius and had not
No response was received. Initially, it hadn't been otherwise.
astonished, knowing her state of mind and the resolve she
was to break off all relations with him without, moreover, him having
I could still guess the reason.

His pain had only intensified, and he eventually began to worry about
The singer was never seen on any program. _Faust_ was performed without her.
In the afternoon, around five o'clock, he went to inquire with the
He investigated the causes of Christine Daaé's disappearance. He found
The directors were very concerned. Even their own friends didn't...
They no longer recognized themselves: they had lost all joy and enthusiasm.
they could see them crossing the theater, heads bowed, brows furrowed with worry, and
their cheeks were pale as if they were being pursued by some abominable
thought, or prey to some malice of fate that takes its
man and never let him go.

The fall of the chandelier had brought many responsibilities, but it
It was difficult to get the directors to explain themselves on this subject.

The investigation concluded that it was an accident, caused by wear and tear on the
means of suspension, but it would still have been the duty of the elders
directors, as well as new ones, have observed this wear and tear and are working on it.
to remedy the situation before it causes a catastrophe.

And I must say that Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin appeared at
that era, so changed, so distant... so mysterious... so
incomprehensible, that many subscribers imagined that
something even more dreadful than the fall of the chandelier, had
altered the state of mind of the directors.

In their daily interactions, they displayed considerable impatience.
except, however, for Ms. Giry, who had been reinstated in her
functions. One can imagine how they received the Viscount of
Chagny when he came to ask them for news of Christine.
They simply told him she was on leave. He asked
how long this leave was to last; he was told quite simply
curtly stating that it was unlimited, Christine Daaé having requested it for
health cause.

"So she's sick!" he exclaimed. "What's wrong with her?"

--We don't know anything about it!

--So you didn't send him the theatre doctor?

No! She didn't claim it, and since we trust in
We took her at her word.

The affair did not seem natural to Raoul, who left the Opera in
prey to the darkest thoughts, he resolved, whatever might happen,
to go and get the news from Valerius's mother. No doubt
he recalled the forceful terms of Christine's letter, which
He forbade anyone to attempt anything to see her. But what he had
seen in Perros, what he had heard behind the door of the lodge, the
the conversation he had had with Christine at the edge of the moor, him
hinted at some kind of plot which, to be even slightly
diabolical, yet still human. The exalted imagination of the
young girl, her tender and credulous soul, the primitive education which
had surrounded his early years with a circle of legends, the
constant thoughts of his dead father, and above all the state of sublime
ecstasy into which music plunged her as soon as this art manifested itself
she under certain exceptional conditions—hadn't he been
able to judge that during the cemetery scene? --all of that
it appeared to him as constituting a moral ground conducive to
malicious enterprises of some mysterious and without character
scruples. Whose victim was Christine Daaé? That's the
a very sensible question that Raoul was asking himself as he hurried off
at Valerius's mother's house.

For the viscount had a most sound mind. No doubt, he was
He was a poet and loved music in its most ethereal form, and he
was a great lover of old Breton tales where korrigans dance,
And above all, he was in love with this little fairy from the North.
that Christine Daaé was; nevertheless, he did not believe in the supernatural.
that in matters of religion and that the most fantastic story of
The world was not capable of making him forget that two plus two make
four.

What would he learn at Mother Valerius's house? He trembled at the thought of it as he rang the bell.
at the door of a small apartment on Notre-Dame-des-Victoires Street.

The maid who, one evening, had come out of the dressing room in front of him
Christine came to open the door for him. He asked if Mrs. Valerius was visible.
She was told that she was ill, in bed, and unable
to "receive".

"Pass me my card," he said.

He didn't have to wait long. The maid returned and ushered him into
a small, rather dark and sparsely furnished living room where the two
portraits of Professor Valerius and Father Daaé were being made
vis à vis.

"Madame apologizes to Monsieur le Vicomte," said the maid.
She will only be able to receive him in her room, because of her poor legs.
they no longer support her.

Five minutes later, Raoul was ushered into a nearly
obscure, where he immediately distinguished, in the dim light of a
alcove, the kind face of Christine's benefactress. Now,
Valerius's mother's hair was completely white, but her eyes
had not aged: never, on the contrary, had his gaze been
Neither as clear, nor as pure, nor as childlike.

"Monsieur de Chagny!" she exclaimed joyfully, extending both hands to
Visitor... Ah! Heaven has sent you!... we will be able to
to talk about her.

This last sentence resonated with the young man's ears.
gloomily. He asked immediately:

--Madam... where is Christine?

And the old lady calmly replied:

--But she's with her "good genie"!

"What a good genie!" cried poor Raoul.

--But _the angel of music!_

The Viscount of Chagny, dismayed, fell to his knees. Truly,
Christine was with _the angel of music!_ And Valerius's mother,
in his bed, he smiled at her, putting a finger to his lips, for him
She recommended silence. She added:

--Don't repeat this to anyone!

"You can count on me!" replied Raoul, not quite knowing what he was saying.
he said, because his ideas about Christine were already quite confused,
things were becoming increasingly confusing, and it seemed that everything was beginning to
circle around him, around the room, around this
extraordinary brave lady with white hair and sky-blue eyes
Pale, with eyes like an empty sky... You can count on me...»

"I know! I know!" she said with a happy, hearty laugh. But
Come closer to me, like when you were very little.
Give me your hands like when you told me the story of the
Little Lotte, the one Father Daaé told you about. I like you.
You know, Mr. Raoul. And Christine likes you too!

"...She likes me..." sighed the young man, who was gathering his thoughts.
his thoughts were difficult to grasp regarding the _genius_ of his mother, Valerius, of
the _angel_ that Christine had spoken of so strangely, from the head
_of death_ that he had glimpsed in a kind of nightmare about the
steps of the high altar of Perros and also of the _phantom of the Opera_,
whose fame had reached his ears one evening when he
had lingered on the set, a few steps away from a group of stagehands
which recalled the cadaverous description that had been given before his
The mysterious end of Joseph Buquet, the hanged man...

He asked in a low voice:

--What makes you think, madam, that Christine likes me?

--She talked about you every day!

--Really?... And what was she telling you?...

--She told me that you had declared your love for her?...

And the good old woman burst out laughing, showing all her
teeth, which she had jealously guarded. Raoul stood up, blushing.
front, suffering terribly.

Well! Where are you going?... Would you mind sitting down?... You
Do you really think you're going to leave me like that?... You're angry because
I laughed, I beg your pardon... After all, it's not...
It's your fault, what happened... You didn't know... You are
young... and you thought Christine was free...

"Is Christine engaged?" the unfortunate man asked in a choked voice.
Raoul.

--No! No!... You know very well that Christine,--the
Would she want to—cannot get married!

"What! But I don't know anything!... And why can't Christine..."
Get married?

--But because of the _genius of music!_...

--Again...

--Yes, he forbids it!...

He forbids it!... The genius of music forbids him to
marry!...

Raoul leaned over Valerius's mother, his jaw jutting out, as if
to bite her. He had wanted to devour her, but he hadn't
looked at with fiercer eyes. There are times when the too
great innocence of mind appears so monstrous that it
becomes hateful. Raoul found Mrs. Valerius far too innocent.

She had no idea of ​​the dreadful gaze that weighed upon her. She
resumed his most natural expression:

"Oh! He forbids it to her... without forbidding it. ... He tells her"
Simply that if she got married, she wouldn't hear from him anymore! That's it
Everything!... and that he would leave forever!... So, you understand,
She doesn't want to let go of the musical genius. That's good.
natural.

"Yes, yes," Raoul obeyed in a whisper, "that's perfectly natural."

—Besides, I thought Christine had told you all that, when
She found you in Perros where she had gone with her "good
genius".

--Ah! ah! she had gone to Perros with the "good genie"?

--That is to say, he had arranged to meet her there in the
Perros cemetery, at Daaé's grave! He had promised to play
The _Resurrection of Lazarus_ on his father's violin!

Raoul de Chagny stood up and pronounced these decisive words with great
authority:

--Madam, you're going to tell me where that genius lives!

The old lady did not seem particularly surprised by this question.
indiscreet. She looked up and replied:

--To heaven!

Such candor bewildered him. Such simple and perfect faith in a
genius who, every evening, descended from heaven to frequent the boxes
of artists at the Opera, left him dumbfounded.

He now realized the state of mind in which he could
to find a young girl raised between a superstitious minstrel
and a kind, "enlightened" lady, and he shuddered at the thought of
consequences of all this.

"Is Christine still an honest girl?" he couldn't help but wonder.
to ask all of a sudden.

"On my share of paradise, I swear it!" exclaimed the old woman who, this
She seemed outraged... and if you doubt it, sir, I don't know what
that you came here to do!...

Raoul was tearing off his gloves.

How long ago did she meet this person?
"genius"?

--About three months!... Yes, it's been three months since he started
to give him lessons!

The viscount stretched out his arms in a vast and desperate gesture and he
he let them fall back down with dejection.

--The genius is giving him lessons!... And where?

Now that she's gone with him, I couldn't tell you.
But two weeks ago, it was happening in Christine's dressing room.
Here, it would be impossible in this small apartment. The whole house...
would hear. Whereas at the Opera, at eight o'clock in the morning, there is
Nobody. We're not bothering them!... Do you understand?...

"I understand! I understand!" cried the viscount, and he took his leave.
with haste from the old mother who wondered in an aside if
Wasn't the viscount a little crazy?

As he crossed the living room, Raoul found himself facing the maid and, a
At that moment, he intended to question him, but he thought he overheard him on
A slight smile played on her lips. He thought she was making fun of him.
He ran away. Didn't he know enough?... He had wanted to be informed,
What more could he want?... He returned to his brother's house
on foot, in a pitiful state...

He wanted to punish himself, to bang his forehead against the walls! To have
I believed in such innocence, such purity! I tried, for just a moment,
to explain everything with naivety, simplicity of mind, of
Immaculate innocence! The genius of music! He knew him
Now! He could see it! It was undoubtedly some awful
He was a tenor, a handsome young man, who sang with such passion! He was
Ridiculous and utterly wretched! Ah! The miserable little thing,
What an insignificant and foolish young man Monsieur le Vicomte de Chagny thought!
Furiously Raoul, and she, what an audacious and devilishly cunning woman
creature!

Nevertheless, that run through the streets had done him good.
refreshed the flame of his brain a little. When he entered his
In his room, all he could think about was throwing himself onto his bed and suffocating.
his sobs. But his brother was there and Raoul let himself fall into
His arms, like a baby's. The count, paternally, consoled him, without
to ask him for explanations; besides, Raoul would have hesitated to tell him
The story of the musical genius. If there are things one cannot
Don't boast, there are others for whom there is too much humiliation.
to be pitied.

The count took his brother to dinner at the cabaret. With such a fresh
In despair, it is likely that Raoul would have declined that evening, all
invitation if, in order to decide, the count had only informed him that the
The night before, in an alley in the Bois de Boulogne, the lady of his thoughts had
was encountered in the company of a woman. At first, the viscount refused to...
he could not believe it, and then he was given such precise details that he did not
protested further. After all, wasn't this the most commonplace adventure?
She was seen in a coupe with the window down.
It seemed to be inhaling the icy night air for a long time. It was a clear
of a superb moon. We recognized it perfectly. As for its
companion, we had only made out a vague silhouette of him, in
the shadow. The car was moving at a walking pace, down a deserted driveway,
behind the Longchamp stands.

Raoul dressed frantically, already ready, to forget his
distress, to throw oneself, as they say, into the "whirlwind of pleasure".
Alas! He was a sad guest, and having left the Count of Bonne
At the hour, around ten o'clock in the evening, he found himself in a car
circle, behind the Longchamp stands.

It was bitterly cold. The road appeared deserted and very
illuminated by the moonlight. He ordered the coachman to wait for him.
patiently at the corner of a small adjacent alley, and concealing himself
As much as possible, he began to stamp his feet.

He hadn't been engaged in this hygienic activity for half an hour.
exercise, when a car, coming from Paris, turned the corner of the road
and, calmly, at the pace of his horse, he headed in his direction.

He immediately thought: it's her! And his heart began to pound.
loud, muffled thumps, like those he had already heard in his
chest when he listened to the man's voice behind the door of the
Lodge... My God! How he loved her!

The car kept moving. As for him, he hadn't moved. He
waited!... If it was her, he was determined to jump at the
horses' heads!... At all costs, he wanted to have a
An explanation with the angel of music!...

Just a few more steps and the coupe would be level with him. He wouldn't
He had no doubt it was her... A woman, indeed, was tilting her head
at the door.

And suddenly, the moon illuminated him with a pale halo.

--Christine!

The sacred name of his love burst forth from his lips and heart. He did not
could hold him back!... He leaped to catch him, for this name thrown at the
facing the night, had been like the expected signal for a rush
furious with the entire crew, who passed in front of him without him having taken
time to put his plan into action. The car door window
had gotten up. The young woman's face had disappeared. And the
cut off, behind which he was running, was already nothing more than a point
black on the white road.

He called out again: Christine!... There was no answer. He stopped, at
amidst the silence.

He cast a desperate glance at the sky, at the stars; he pounded his fist
His chest was on fire; he loved and he was not loved!

With a dull look, he considered this desolate and cold road at night.
pale and lifeless. Nothing was colder, nothing was more dead than
His heart: he had loved an angel and he despised a woman!

Raoul, how she tricked you, that little fairy from the North! Didn't she
No, isn't it pointless to have such a fresh cheek, a
a timid front, always ready to cover itself with the pink veil of
modesty to spend the night alone, in the back of a luxury coupe,
in the company of a mysterious lover? Shouldn't there be
Sacred limits to hypocrisy and lies?... And that we don't
one shouldn't have the clear eyes of childhood when one has the soul of
courtesans?

She had passed by without answering his call...

So why had he come across his path?

By what right did he suddenly stand before her, when all she asked of him was...
His forgetfulness, the reproach of his presence?...

"Go away!... disappear!... You don't matter!..."

He was thinking of dying, and he was only twenty years old!... His servant
He was surprised in the morning, sitting on his bed. He hadn't undressed and
The valet was afraid of some misfortune when he saw him, so much did he have a
A disastrous figure. Raoul snatched the letter from his hands.
He brought it. He had recognized a letter, a piece of paper, handwriting.
Christine told him:

"My friend, please be at the masked ball at the Opera the day after tomorrow, at midnight,"
in the small sitting room which is behind the fireplace of the large hearth;
Stand by the door leading to the Rotunda.
Don't tell anyone in the world about this date. Get yourself into a domino effect.
White, well masked. I swear on my life, don't let anyone recognize you.
Christine.




X


AT THE MASQUERADE BALL


The envelope, covered in mud, bore no stamp. "For
"To be delivered to Viscount Raoul de Chagny" and the address in pencil. This
had certainly been thrown away in the hope that a passerby would pick it up
the ticket and would bring it home; which is what happened. The ticket
had been found on a sidewalk in the Place de l'Opéra. Raoul the
reread feverishly.

That was all it took for her to be reborn with hope. The dark
the image he had momentarily formed of a Christine who had forgotten her
duties towards herself, gave way to the first imagination that he
had had an unfortunate, innocent child, the victim of carelessness
and her excessive sensitivity. To what extent, at this point,
Was she truly a victim? Whose prisoner was she? In what
Had she been dragged into the abyss? He wondered with a truly cruel anguish.
anguish; but even this pain seemed bearable to him compared
the delusion he was under at the thought of Christine being a hypocritical and lying woman!
What had happened? What influence had she been subjected to? What a monster!
had delighted her, and with what weapons?...

...With what weapons, then, if not those of music? Yes,
Yes, the more he thought about it, the more convinced he became that it was on that side.
that he would discover the truth. Had he forgotten the tone with which, at
Perros, she had told him that she had received a visit from the envoy
heavenly? And Christine's own story, in these last days, doesn't
Shouldn't she have helped him to illuminate the darkness in which he was
Was he debating? Had he ignored the despair that had seized her?
after her father's death and the disgust she then felt for
all aspects of life, even her art? At the Conservatory, she
had passed like a poor, soulless singing machine. And,
Suddenly, she woke up, as if from a breath of
Divine intervention! The angel of music had come! She sings!
Marguerite from _Faust_ and triumph!... The Angel of Music!... Who then,
Who is pretending to be this marvelous genius in his eyes?... Who
Therefore, informed about the legend dear to old Daaé, he uses it in this
to the point that the young girl is nothing more than an instrument in his hands
defenseless, which he makes vibrate at will?

And Raoul reflected that such an adventure was not
exceptional. He remembered what had happened to the princess
Belmonte, who had just lost her husband and whose despair was
shocking... For a month, the princess could neither
Neither speaking nor crying. This physical and moral inertia was worsening.
every day and the weakening of reason gradually led
the annihilation of life. Every evening the sick woman was carried in
her gardens; but she didn't even seem to understand where she was
found. Raff, Germany's greatest singer, who was passing through
Naples wanted to visit these gardens, renowned for their beauty. One of the
The princess's women begged the great artist to sing, without
show, near the grove where she lay. Raf y
consented and sang a simple tune that the princess had heard in the
her husband's mouth in the early days of their marriage. This tune was
Expressive and touching. The melody, the lyrics, the admirable voice of
the artist, everything comes together to deeply stir the soul of the
princess. Tears welled up in her eyes... she wept, was
saved and remained convinced that her husband had gone downstairs that evening
from heaven to sing him the tune of yesteryear!

"Yes... that evening!... One evening," Raoul now thought, "a unique one."
evening... But this beautiful imagination would not have held up against a
repeated experience...

She would eventually have discovered Raff, behind his thicket,
the ideal and sorrowful princess of Belmonte, if she had returned there
Every night, for three months...

The angel of music had been giving lessons for three months to
Christine... Ah! He was such a punctual teacher!... And now, he
He was taking her for a walk in the Bois de Boulogne!

With her clenched fingers, slid across her chest, where her heart beat
Jealous, Raoul tore at his flesh. Inexperienced, he wondered
now, with terror, at what game was the young lady inviting him for a
The next masquerade? And to what extent can an opera girl...
To mock a good young man, new to love? What a shame!

Thus Raoul's thinking went to extremes. He no longer knew
whether he should pity Christine or curse her, and, in turn, he
he complained and cursed her. Just in case, however, he armed himself with a
white domino.

Finally, the time for the appointment arrived. His face was covered with a decorated mask.
The viscount, wearing a long, thick lace dress, all studded with white jewels
It proved quite ridiculous to have donned this masquerade costume.
romantics. A gentleman of the world did not dress up to go to a ball.
The Opera. It would have made him smile. One thought consoled the viscount:
The thing was, he certainly wouldn't be recognized! And then, that costume and
This wolf had another advantage: Raoul would be able to go for a walk
in there "as if he were at home", all alone, with the disarray of his soul
and the sadness of his heart. He would have no need to feign; he
It would be superfluous for him to make a mask for his face: he already had it!

This ball was an exceptional celebration, held before the Shrove Tuesday festivities, in
honoring the birthday of an illustrious cartoonist
the jubilation of yesteryear, from an emulator of Gavarni, whose pencil had
immortalized the "chicards" and the descent of the Courtille. Also
It was supposed to have a much more cheerful, noisier, more bohemian appearance
than the usual masked balls. Many artists had been there.
gave an appointment, followed by a whole clientele of models and
street urchins who, around midnight, began to make a great racket.

Raoul climbed the grand staircase at five minutes to midnight, and did not linger.
no way to consider the spectacle of costumes around him
multicolored, spreading along the marble steps, in one of the
the most sumptuous scenery in the world, did not allow itself to be undertaken by any
facetious mask, did not respond to any jokes, and shook the
enterprising familiarity of several couples already too gay. Having
crossed the large foyer and escaped a farandole which, for a moment,
had imprisoned him, he finally entered the living room that the ticket of
Christine had pointed it out to him. There, in that small space, there was a
crazy world; for this was the crossroads where all those
who were going to have supper at the Rotonde or who were returning from having a drink
of champagne. The commotion was ardent and joyous. Raoul thought that
For their mysterious rendezvous, Christine had preferred this
A crowd gathered in some secluded corner: we were there, under our masks, more
concealed.

He leaned against the door and waited. He didn't wait long. One
A black domino passed by, quickly squeezing his fingertips.
realized it was her.

He followed.

"Is that you, Christine?" he asked through gritted teeth.

The domino turned sharply and raised its finger to the height of
her lips, no doubt to advise him not to repeat his
name.

Raoul continued to follow in silence.

He was afraid of losing her, after having found her again in such a strange way.
He no longer felt hatred towards her. He didn't even doubt it anymore.
that she should "have nothing to reproach herself for," so bizarre and
His behavior seemed inexplicable. He was ready for anything.
He was merciful, forgiving of all acts of cowardice. He loved.
And, certainly, we were going to explain everything to him very naturally.
the time, the reason for such a peculiar absence...

The black domino, from time to time, turned around to see if it was
always followed by the white domino.

As Raoul thus crossed again, behind his guide, the great hearth of the
public, he could not help but notice among all the
Crowds, a crowd... among all the groups trying their hand at the craziest things
extravagances, a group that crowded around a character whose
The disguise, the original look, the macabre aspect caused a sensation...

This character was dressed all in scarlet with an enormous hat
Feathers on a skull. Ah! What a beautiful imitation of a skull!
That it was there! The young artists around him were giving him a big
success, they congratulated him... they asked him which master, in
what workshop, frequented by Pluto, had been made, drawn for him,
She had painted such a beautiful skull! Death herself had
had to ask.

The man with the skull, the feathered hat and the clothing
Scarlet trailed behind him an immense red velvet cloak
whose flame stretched regally across the parquet floor; and upon this cloak
A phrase had been embroidered in gold letters, which everyone read and
repeated aloud: "Don't touch me! I am the Red Death who
pass!..."

And someone wanted to touch it... but a skeleton hand emerged
with a purple sleeve, he brutally seized the wrist of the imprudent man and
He, having felt the grip of the knucklebones, the frenzied embrace of
Death, which seemed never to let him go, let out a cry of
Pain and terror. The Red Death having finally restored to him the
Freedom! He fled, like a madman, amidst the jeers. It was at
It was at that moment that Raoul crossed paths with the gloomy figure who, in fact, had just come
to turn away. And he was about to let slip
A cry: "The skull of Perros-Guirec!" He had recognized it!
He wanted to rush ahead, forgetting Christine; but the black domino, which
he too seemed to be in the grip of a strange emotion, had seized him
arm and dragged him... dragged him away from home, out of this
demonic mob where the Red Death passed...

At every moment, the black domino turned over and it seemed to him without
doubt, twice, to glimpse something that terrified him, because
he quickened his pace even further, and Raoul's too, as if they were
pursued.

So they went up two floors. There, the stairs, the corridors
were almost deserted. The black domino pushed open the door of a
lodge and signaled to the white domino to enter behind him.
Christine (for it was indeed her, he could still recognize her by her
(voice), Christine immediately closed the door of the box on him.
recommending in a low voice to stay in the rear part of this
lodge and not to show himself. Raoul removed his mask. Christine kept
his own. And as the young man was about to beg the singer to leave
undoing it, he was quite astonished to see her lean against the
partition and listened attentively to what was happening next door. Then she
opened the door a crack and looked into the corridor, saying in a low voice:
"He must have gone up above, to the 'Lodge of the Blind!'..."
Suddenly she cried out: He's coming down!

She wanted to close the door, but Raoul objected, because he had seen over
the top step of the staircase leading to the upper floor
The upper hand lands _one red foot_, and then another... and slowly,
Majestically, the entire scarlet garment of the Red Death descended.
And he saw again the skull of Perros-Guirec.

"It's him!" he cried. "This time, he won't escape me!"

But Christine had closed the door, at the moment that Raoul
he was darting forward. He wanted to push him out of his way...

"Who then, him?" she asked, her voice completely changed... "who then not
You won't escape, will you?...

Abruptly, Raoul tried to overcome the girl's resistance,
But she rejected him with unexpected force... He understood, or perhaps he believed
he understood and immediately became furious.

"Who then?" he said angrily. "Him? The man who hides beneath..."
that hideous deathly image!... the evil spirit of the cemetery of
Perros!... the Red Death!... Finally, your friend, madam... _Your Angel of
Music! But I'll tear the mask off his face, like
I will tear mine off, and we will look at each other, this time face to face.
without veil and without lie, and I will know who you love and who you
love!

He burst into insane laughter, while Christine, behind her
The wolf let out a painful moan.

With a tragic gesture, she stretched out both arms, which placed a
A barrier of white flesh on the door.

"In the name of our love, Raoul, you shall not pass!"

He stopped. What had she said?... In the name of their love?... But
Never, never before had she told him she loved him. And
However, she hadn't lacked opportunities!... She had seen him
already quite unhappy, in tears before her, begging for a good
A word of hope that hadn't come!... She had seen him ill, almost
Did he die of terror and cold after the night at the Perros cemetery?
Had she even stayed by his side during that moment he had
She needed his care the most? No! She had run away!... And she
She said she loved him! She spoke "in the name of their love." Come on!
So! Her only goal was to delay him for a few seconds...
The Red Death needed time to escape... Their
Love? She was lying!

And he told her so, with an accent of childish hatred.

"You're lying, madam! For you do not love me, and you have never..."
Loved! You have to be a poor, unfortunate little young man like me.
to let myself be played, to let myself be fooled like I was!
Why then, by your attitude, by the joy in your eyes, by your
Even silence, having told me, during our first interview in Perros,
allowed all hopes?—all honest hopes, madam, for I
I am an honest man and I believed you to be an honest woman, when you
You only intended to mock me! Alas! You have
Mocked by everyone! You have shamefully abused an innocent heart.
from your benefactress herself, who nevertheless continues to believe in
your sincerity when you stroll through the Opera ball, with the
Red Death!... I despise you!...

And he cried. She let him insult her. She was only thinking of one thing.
thing: to hold him back.

--One day you will ask my forgiveness for all these nasty words,
Raoul, and I will forgive you!...

He shook his head.

--No! No! You drove me crazy!... when I think that I
I had only one goal left in life: to give my name to a girl
Opera!...

Raoul!... poor fellow!...

--I'll die of shame!

"Live, my friend," came Christine's deep, altered voice... and
farewell!

Goodbye, Raoul!...

The young man stepped forward, his steps unsteady. He dared one more
sarcasm:

--Oh! You'll allow me to come and applaud you again from time to time
time.

--I won't sing anymore, Raoul!...

"Really," he added, even more ironically... "They create..."
Leisure: My compliments!... But we'll meet again in the Bois one of these evenings!

--Neither in the woods, nor anywhere else, Raoul, will you see me again...

Could we at least know to what darkness you will return?...
What hell are you returning to, mysterious lady?... or what
heaven?...

I came to tell you... my friend... but I can't anymore
I have nothing to say to you...

You wouldn't believe me! You've lost faith in me, Raoul, that's
finished!...

She said, "It's over!" in such a desperate tone that the young man
The man shuddered, and remorse for his cruelty began to overwhelm him.
to disturb the soul...

"But surely," he exclaimed, "will you tell us what all this means?"
This!... You are free, unhindered... You stroll through the
town... you put on a domino to run to the ball... Why not
Aren't you going home yet?... What have you been doing for the past two weeks?...
What's this business about the angel of music that you
Did you tell Valerius's mother? Someone might have deceived you.
to take advantage of your credulity... I myself witnessed it.
Perros... but now you know what to expect!... You
You seem very sensible to me, Christine... You know what you
Do it!... and yet Mother Valerius continues to wait for you, in
Invoking your "good genius"!... Explain yourself, Christine, I'll tell you
Pray!... Others would be deceived!... What is this?
comedy?...

Christine simply removed her mask and said:

"It's a tragedy, my friend..."

Raoul then saw his face and couldn't help but exclaim in surprise
and dread. The fresh colors of yesteryear had vanished. A
A deathly pallor spread over those features he had known so well
charming and so gentle, reflections of peaceful grace and awareness
without a fight. How tormented they were now! The furrow of the
Pain had mercilessly hollowed them out, and the beautiful clear eyes of
Christine, once as clear as the lakes that served as eyes to the
Little Lotte, appeared this evening from an obscure depth,
mysterious and unfathomable, and all surrounded by a terrifying shadow
sad.

"My friend! My friend!" he moaned, stretching out his arms... "You have..."
I promised to forgive myself...

"Maybe!... maybe one day..." she said, putting her mask back on.
and she left, forbidding him to follow her with a gesture that...
hunted...

He wanted to rush after her, but she turned around and repeated
with such sovereign authority his farewell gesture that he dared no longer
take a step.

He watched her walk away... And then he went down into the
The crowd, not knowing exactly what he was doing, their temples
his heart pounding, his soul broken, and he asked, in the room that he
would have crossed, if the Red Death hadn't been seen passing by. He was told
He would say, "Who is this Red Death?" He would reply, "It's a gentleman."
disguised with a skull and crossbones and a large red coat.” They told him
everywhere she had passed, the Red Death, dragging her royal
coat, but he didn't meet her anywhere, and he returned, towards two
hours in the morning, in the corridor that, behind the stage, led to
Christine Daaé's dressing room.

His steps had led him to this place where he had begun to
to suffer. He knocked on the door. No one answered. He entered as if
He had entered while he was searching everywhere for a man's voice.
The dressing room was deserted. A gas lamp was burning, on a pilot light. On a small
In the office, there was writing paper. He thought about writing to
Christine, but footsteps were heard in the corridor... He didn't have
that time to hide in the boudoir, which was separate from the lodge
through a simple curtain. A hand pushed open the door of the box. It was
Christine!

He held his breath. He wanted to see! He wanted to know!... Something
Something told him he was going to witness part of the mystery and
that he might begin to understand...

Christine entered, wearily removed her mask and threw it on the
table. She sighed, let her beautiful head fall into her hands... At
What was she thinking?... About Raoul?... No! For Raoul heard her murmur:
"Poor Erik!"

At first, he thought he had misheard. At first, he was convinced that if
Someone was to be pitied, and that was him, Raoul. What could be more natural?
after what had just happened between them, she said in a
"Poor Raoul!" she sighed. But she repeated, shaking her head:
"Poor Erik?" What was this Erik doing amidst the sighs of
Christine, and why was the little fairy from the North complaining, Erik, when
Was Raoul so unhappy?

Christine began to write, calmly, quietly, so
peacefully, that Raoul, who was still trembling from the drama that had befallen them
separated, was singularly and unpleasantly impressed by it. "That
"In cold blood!" he told himself... She wrote like this, filling in two,
three, four sheets of paper. Suddenly, she raised her head and hid the
papers tucked into her bodice... She seemed to be listening... Raoul too
listened... Where was that strange noise coming from, that distant rhythm?... One
A muffled chant seemed to come from the walls... Yes, it sounded as if the
The walls were singing!... The song was becoming clearer... the words were
intelligible... a voice could be distinguished... a very beautiful and very sweet one
and a very captivating voice... but so much gentleness still remained masculine.
and thus it could be judged that this voice did not belong to a
Woman... The voice kept getting closer... it went beyond the wall...
She arrived... and the voice was now in the room, in front
Christine. Christine stood up and spoke in a voice as if she had
spoke to someone who had been standing by his side.

"Here I am, Erik," she said, "I'm ready. You're the one who is in..."
late, my friend.

Raoul, who was watching cautiously from behind his curtain, couldn't help it.
to believe his eyes, which showed him nothing.

Christine's face brightened. A warm smile spread across her face.
her bloodless lips, a smile like those of convalescents when
They begin to hope that the evil that has struck them will not
will not take away.

The disembodied voice began to sing again, and certainly Raoul had not
nothing yet heard in the world—like a voice uniting, at the same time,
with the same breath, the extremes—more broadly and
heroically suave, moreover victoriously insidious, more
delicate in its strength, even stronger in its delicacy, finally, even more
irresistibly triumphant. There were definitive accents there that
sang like masters and who certainly owed it to the virtue of
from their hearing, to evoke lofty accents in mortals
who feel, love, and translate music. There was a source there.
tranquil and pure harmony to which the faithful could
They diligently drank with complete certainty, certain that they would drink from it.
Musical grace. And their art, consequently, having touched the divine, in
was transfigured. Raoul listened to that voice feverishly and he
was beginning to understand how Christine Daaé could have appeared
one evening, to the astonishment of the audience, with accents of an unknown beauty,
of a superhuman exaltation, no doubt still under the influence of
Mysterious and invisible master! And he understood all the more a so
a considerable event, listening to the exceptional voice that
She didn't sing anything particularly exceptional: with silt, she
had made of azure. The banality of the verse and the ease and the almost
The popular vulgarity of the melody only appeared
transformed further into beauty by a breath that lifted them and
carried them high into the sky on the wings of passion. For that voice
Angelique was glorifying a pagan hymn.

This voice sang "The Wedding Night" from _Romeo and Juliet_.

Raoul saw Christine stretch her arms towards the voice, as she had done
in the Perros cemetery, towards the invisible violin that played _La
The Resurrection of Lazarus...

Nothing could render the passion of which the voice says:

Destiny binds you to me with no turning back!

Raoul's heart was pierced, and he struggled against the spell that
seemed to take away all his will and all his energy, and almost all
With lucidity at the very moment he needed it most, he managed to
He drew back the curtain that hid him and walked towards Christine. She,
who was moving towards the back of the box, the entire side of which was occupied
through a large mirror that reflected his image, he could not
to see, because he was completely behind her and entirely hidden.
by her.

Destiny binds you to me with no turning back!

Christine was always walking towards her image, and her image was descending towards
She. The two Christines—the body, and the image—eventually touched.
to become confused, and Raoul stretched out his arm to seize them all at once
both.

But by a kind of dazzling miracle that made him stagger, Raoul
was suddenly thrown back, while an icy wind...
swept across his face; he saw no longer two, but four, eight, twenty
Christine, who circled around him with such lightness, who
They mocked him and fled so quickly that his hand could not reach him.
touch nothing. Finally, everything became still again and he saw himself in the
Ice. But Christine had disappeared.

He rushed onto the ice. He bumped into the walls. Nobody! And
However, the lodge still resonated with a distant, passionate rhythm:

Destiny, you're chained to me with no turning back!

Her hands pressed against his sweating forehead, felt his flesh
Awake, they groped in the twilight, returned to the flame of the beak of
gas with all his might. He was sure he wasn't dreaming. He
found himself at the center of a formidable game, both physical and moral, in which he
He didn't have the key, and perhaps he was going to be crushed. He was becoming...
vaguely the effect of an adventurous prince who has crossed the boundary
defended from a fairy tale and who should no longer be surprised to be the
prey to the magical phenomena he recklessly defied and
unleashed by love...

Which way? Which way had Christine gone?...

Which way would she come back?...

Would she come back?... Alas! Hadn't she assured him that everything
It was over!... and didn't the wall keep repeating: _Destiny
You're chained to me with no return?_ To me? To whom?

So, exhausted, defeated, his mind a blank, he sat down in the very same place
that Christine had been occupying earlier. Like her, he let his head
fall into his hands. When he picked her up, tears were flowing.
Abundant, real, heavy tears streamed down her young face.
like jealous children, tears that wept over a
A misfortune not at all fantastic, but common to all lovers of the
earth, and he specified aloud:

"Who is this Erik?" he said.




XI


WE MUST FORGET THE NAME "THE VOICE OF A MAN"


The day after Christine had disappeared from his sight in a
A kind of dazzling light that made him doubt his senses even more, Mr.
Viscount de Chagny went to inquire about the news at Valerius's mother's house.
stumbled upon a charming painting.

At the bedside of the old lady who, sitting in her bed, was knitting,
Christine made lace. Never a more charming oval, never
A purer brow, never did a gentler gaze bend over a work
of virgin. Fresh colors had returned to the young girl's cheeks
girl. The bluish ring under her light eyes had disappeared. Raoul didn't
no longer recognized the tragic face of the previous day. If the veil of the
The melancholy that pervaded these adorable features had not appeared to the young
man like the last vestige of the unheard-of drama in which this struggled
mysterious child, he might have thought that Christine was not one at all
the incomprehensible heroine.

She stood up as he approached, without any apparent emotion, and handed him the
hand. But Raoul's astonishment was such that he remained there,
Devastated, without a gesture, without a word.

"Well, Monsieur de Chagny," exclaimed Mother Valerius. "You don't
So you know our Christine better? Her "good genius" has...
returned!

"Mom!" the girl interrupted abruptly, while a
A vivid red rose to his eyes, Mama, I thought he wouldn't
That would never happen again!... You know very well that there is no
musical genius!

—My daughter, he did give you lessons for three months!

--Mom, I promised I would explain everything to you one day soon; I
I hope so... but, until that day, you promised me silence
and never question myself again!

"If you promised me you'd never leave me again! But did you promise me?"
That, Christine?

"Mother, none of this would interest Mr. de Chagny..."

"That's what's deceiving you, miss," interrupted the young man.
in a voice he wanted to make firm and brave, and which was not yet
that trembling; everything that touches you interests me to a point that
You might eventually understand. I won't hide from you that my
My astonishment equals my joy at finding you alongside your
adoptive tolerance and what happened yesterday between us, what you
You were able to tell me, and I was able to guess, nothing led me to expect a
also a prompt return. I would be the first to rejoice if you did not
You were determined to keep all of this a secret that could...
to be fatal..., and I have been your friend for too long not to
to worry, along with Mrs. Valerius, about a disastrous adventure that will remain
dangerous until we unravel its plot and of which
You will end up becoming a victim, Christine.

At these words, Valerius's mother stirred in her bed.

"What does that mean?" she exclaimed... "So Christine is in..."
hazard?

"Yes, madam..." Raoul declared bravely, despite the signs of
Christine.

"My God!" exclaimed the kind, naive old woman, panting. "We must..."
Tell me everything, Christine! Why were you reassuring me? And what danger were you talking about?
Is this, Mr. de Chagny?

--An imposter is abusing his good faith!

--Is the angel of music an imposter?

--She told you herself that there is no angel of music!

"Well! What is it, for heaven's sake?" begged the helpless woman! "You're..."
will kill!

--There is, madam, around us, around you, around Christine,
an earthly mystery far more to be feared than all ghosts.
and all the geniuses!

Valerius's mother turned a terrified face towards Christine, but
She had already rushed towards her adoptive mother and the
held in his arms:

"Don't believe it! Good mother... don't believe it," she repeated...
and she tried, with her caresses, to console her, for the old lady
was letting out soul-rending sighs.

"Then tell me you'll never leave me again!" begged the widow of
teacher.

Christine remained silent and Raoul continued:

"That's what you have to promise, Christine... It's the only thing that..."
May this reassure your mother and me! We promise not to do this again.
ask us just one question about the past, if you promise to
to remain under our protection in the future...

--This is a commitment I am not asking of you, and it is a
"A promise I will not make to you!" the young girl said with
pride. I am free to act as I please, Monsieur de Chagny; you have no
I have no right to control them and I would ask you to refrain from doing so.
now. As for what I've done in the last two weeks, there's nothing
that a man in the world who would have the right to demand that I do it for him
Story: My husband! But I don't have a husband, and I never will!

Saying this emphatically, she extended her hand towards Raoul, as if
to make his words more solemn, and Raoul paled, not
only because of the very words he had just heard, but
because he had just noticed a gold ring on Christine's finger.

--You don't have a husband, and yet you wear a "wedding ring".

And he wanted to take her hand, but Christine quickly had
withdrawn.

"It's a gift!" she said, blushing again and trying hard
It was pointless trying to hide his embarrassment.

—Christine! Since you have no husband, this ring cannot be for you
to have been given only by the one who hopes to become so! Why us
Deceive me further? Why torture me any more? This ring is a
A promise! And that promise was accepted!

"That's what I told him!" exclaimed the old lady.

--And what did she reply, madam?

"That's what I wanted!" cried Christine, exasperated. "Don't you think?"
The point, sir, is that this interrogation has gone on for too long?... As for me...

Raoul, deeply moved, was afraid to let him utter the words of a
A definitive break. He interrupted him:

"I apologize for speaking to you like that, miss... You know very well"
What honest feeling compels me to involve myself, at this moment, in things which,
No doubt, they don't look at me! But let me tell you what I have
I've seen... and I've seen more than you think, Christine... or what I've
I thought I saw, for, in truth, it is the very least that in such a
adventure, we doubt the testimony of his eyes...

--So what did you see, sir, or think you saw?

--I saw your ecstasy _at the sound of the voice_, Christine! of the voice that
was coming out of the wall, or from a box, or from an apartment next door... yes,
_Your ecstasy!_... And that's what terrifies me, for you!... You
You are under the most dangerous spell!... And yet it seems,
that you realized the deception, since you say
Now that there are no musical geniuses... So,
Christine, why did you follow him again? Why did you
Did you stand up, your face radiant, as if you were hearing
Really, angels?... Ah! That voice is quite dangerous, Christine.
because I myself, while I was listening to it, was so
I am delighted that you have disappeared from my sight, without my being able to say by
Where have you been!... Christine! Christine! In the name of heaven, in the name
from your father who is in heaven and who loved you so much, and who has
Beloved Christine, you will tell us, your benefactress and me,
Whose voice is this? And despite you, we will save you!...
Come on! What's this man's name, Christine?... This man who had
the audacity to slip a gold ring onto your finger!

"Monsieur de Chagny," the young woman declared coldly, "you don't..."
You'll never know!...

At which point the shrill voice of Valerius's mother was heard, who, all at
Suddenly, he sided with Christine, seeing with what hostility his
The ward had just addressed the viscount.

—And if she loves him, Viscount, that man, that doesn't concern you
Don't look yet!

"Alas, madam," Raoul humbly replied, unable to restrain his
Tears... Alas! I truly believe that Christine loves him... Everything about it tells me so.
This proves it, but that is not the only thing that causes my despair.
For what I am not sure of, madam, is that he who is loved
May Christine be worthy of this love!

"That's for me to judge, sir!" said Christine, looking
Raoul, right in front of him, and showing him a face gripped by a
sovereign irritation.

"When you take," continued Raoul, who felt his strength abandoning him,
To seduce a young girl, such romantic methods...

--It must be, mustn't it, that the man be miserable or that the young
Is the girl really that silly?

--Christine!

Raoul, why do you condemn a man you have never known?
Given that nobody knows about it and that you yourself know nothing about it?...

Yes, Christine... Yes... I at least know the name you claim to be mine.
Hidden forever... Your musical angel, miss,
His name is Erik!...

Christine gave herself away immediately. This time, she turned as white as...
an altar cloth. She stammered:

--Who told you that?

--Yourself!

--How so?

--By pitying him, the other evening, the evening of the masked ball. Upon arriving
In your box, didn't you say: "Poor Erik!" Well!
Christine, there was, somewhere, a poor Raoul who heard you.

--This is the second time you've eavesdropped, sir.
Chagny!

--I wasn't behind the door!... I was in the box!...
in your boudoir, miss.

"Unhappy girl!" moaned the young woman, who showed all the signs of a
Unspeakable terror... Wretched man! So you want us to kill you?

--Maybe!

Raoul uttered that "perhaps" with so much love and despair that
Christine couldn't hold back a sob.

She then took his hands and looked at him with pure tenderness.
which she was capable of, and the young man, under those eyes, felt
that his pain had already subsided.

"Raoul," she said. "You must forget the _man's voice_ and stop..."
even remembering his name... and never again attempting to enter the
mystery of the _man's voice_

So this mystery is truly terrible?

--There is none more dreadful on earth!

A silence separated the young people. Raoul was overwhelmed.

"Swear to me that you won't do anything to 'find out'," she insisted...
Swear to me that you will not enter my dressing room again unless I call you.
not.

--You promise to call me there sometimes, Christine?

--I promise you.

--When?

--Tomorrow.

--So, I swear to you!

Those were their last words that day.

He kissed her hands and left, cursing Erik and...
promising to be patient.




XII


ABOVE THE HATCHES


The next day, he saw her again at the Opera. She still had it on her finger
the gold ring. She was gentle and kind. She told him about her plans
that he was shaping, his future, his career.

He informed him that the departure of the polar expedition had been
advanced and that, in three weeks, in a month at the latest, it
would leave France.

She almost cheerfully encouraged him to view this trip with joy.
as a step towards his future glory. And as he replied that the
Glory without love held no charm in her eyes; she treated it
like a child whose sorrows must be temporary.

He said to him:

—How can you, Christine, speak so lightly of things
So serious? We may never see each other again!... I can
to die during this expedition!...

"Me too," she said simply...

She no longer smiled, she no longer joked, she seemed lost in thought.
to something new that was entering him for the first time
his mind. His gaze was illuminated by it.

--What are you thinking about, Christine?

--I don't think we'll see each other again.

--And that's what makes you so radiant?

And that, in a month, we will have to say goodbye... forever!

Unless, Christine, we pledge our faith and we
We waited forever.

She put her hand over his mouth:

"Be quiet, Raoul!... That's not what this is about, you know that."
Okay!... And we'll never get married! That's settled!

She seemed to have difficulty containing her sudden overflowing joy.
She clapped her hands with childlike glee... Raoul
he watched, worried, without understanding.

"But... but..." she said again, hearing her two hands at the young man's
man, or rather by giving them to him, as if, suddenly, she had
resolved to give it to him as a gift. But if we cannot get married,
We can... we can get engaged!... No one will know that
Us, Raoul!... There have been secret marriages!... There may well have been
A secret engagement!... We are engaged, my friend, for a
months!... In a month, you will leave, and I will be able to be happy, with
The memory of that month, all my life!

She was delighted with her idea... And then she became serious again.

"This," she said, "is a happiness that will harm no one."

Raoul understood. He seized upon this inspiration. He wanted to make of it
immediately became a reality. He bowed before Christine with a
unparalleled humility and said:

--Mademoiselle, I have the honor of asking for your hand in marriage!

--But you already have them both, my dear fiancé!... Oh!
Raoul, how happy we're going to be!... We're going to play in the future
To the little husband and future little wife!...

Raoul thought to himself: the foolish woman! In a month, I'll have had time to...
to make people forget, or to pierce and destroy, "the mystery of the voice"
"of a man," and in a month Christine will agree to become my wife.
In the meantime, let's play!

It was the most beautiful game in the world, and they enjoyed it immensely.
They were such pure children. Ah! How wonderful things they said to each other!
things! And what eternal oaths were exchanged! The idea that he
There would be no one left to keep those oaths in the past month
left them in a state of confusion which they experienced with dreadful anguish.
delights, between laughter and tears. They played "at heart" as
Others play "ball"; only, as these were indeed their
Two hearts that they sent back and forth, they had to be very, very
skillful, to receive it without hurting them. One day—it was the
eighth of the game—Raoul's heart ached greatly and the young man
stopped the game with these extravagant words: "I'm not leaving for the
North Pole."

Christine, who, in her innocence, had not thought of the
The possibility of this, he suddenly discovered the danger of the game and...
she reproached bitterly. She didn't answer Raoul a word and went back to
the house.

This took place in the afternoon, in the singer's dressing room where she...
he arranged all his meetings and where they had real fun
little dinners around three biscuits, two glasses of port, and a
bouquet of violets.

In the evening, she didn't sing. And he didn't receive the letter.
customary, although they had given themselves permission to write to each other
every day of that month. The next morning, he ran to the
Mother Valerius, who informed him that Christine was absent for two
days. She had left the previous evening, at five o'clock, saying
that she wouldn't be back until the day after tomorrow. Raoul was
devastated. He hated Valerius's mother, who told him
He received such news with astonishing composure. He tried
to "get something out of it," but, obviously, the good lady did not
She knew nothing. She simply agreed to answer the questions.
The young man's panicked state:

--That's Christine's secret!

And she raised her finger, saying this with a touching unction that
recommended discretion and, at the same time, had the pretension
to reassure.

"Ah! Good," exclaimed Raoul spitefully, as he descended the stairs.
Like a madman, ah! good! the young girls are well looked after with this
Mother Valerius there!...

Where could Christine be?... Two days... Two days less in
Their happiness was so short-lived! And this was his fault!... Wasn't he
I understand that he had to leave?... And what if his firm intention was not to
He had no intention of leaving, so why had he spoken so soon? He accused himself of
clumsiness and was the most unhappy of men for forty-eight
hours, at the end of which Christine reappeared.

She reappeared in triumph. She finally regained her unprecedented success.
of the gala evening. Since the "toad" adventure, Carlotta
had been unable to perform on stage. The terror of another "blunder"
dwelt in his heart and deprived him of all his resources; and the places,
Witnesses to his incomprehensible defeat had become hateful to him.
She found a way to break her treaty. Daaé, momentarily, was
asked to fill the vacant position. A veritable frenzy greeted her in
_the Jewish woman._

The viscount, who was present at the party, was naturally the only one to
to suffer while listening to the thousand echoes of this new triumph; for he
He saw that Christine still had her gold ring: A distant voice
she whispered in the young man's ear: "Tonight, she's still wearing the ring"
of gold, and it wasn't you who gave it to her. Tonight, she still has
He gave his soul, and it was not for you.

And again the voice pursued him: "If she doesn't want to tell you this
that she has done, for the past two days..., if she is hiding the location of her
"Retirement? You'll have to go ask Erik!"

He ran across the plateau. He stepped into her path. She saw him, because
Her eyes were searching for him. She said to him, "Quickly! Quickly! Come!" And she
led him into the box, no longer worrying about any of the
courtiers of his youthful glory who murmured before his closed door:
"This is a scandal!"

Raoul immediately fell to his knees. He swore to her that he would leave and
he begged her not to deduct another hour from ideal happiness.
that she had promised him. She let her tears flow. They
They embraced like a desperate brother and sister who have just arrived
to be struck by a shared grief and to come together to mourn
One dead.

Suddenly, she tore herself away from the young man's gentle and timid embrace,
seemed to be listening to something unknown... and, with a gesture
In short, she showed Raoul the door. When he was on the threshold, she...
he said, so quietly that the viscount guessed his words more than he heard them
heard:

"Tomorrow, my dear fiancé! And be happy, Raoul... it's for you."
that I sang tonight!...

So he came back.

But, alas! those two days of absence had broken the spell of their
A pleasant lie. They looked at each other in the box, without saying a word.
to say, with their sad eyes. Raoul was holding back from crying out:
"I'm jealous! I'm jealous! I'm jealous!" But she could hear him.
still.

Then she said, "Let's go for a walk, my friend, the air will do us good."
GOOD".

Raoul thought she was going to suggest some kind of country outing, far away
of this monument, which he hated like a prison and from which he felt
The jailer angrily paced the walls... the jailer, Erik...
But she led him onto the stage and made him sit on the edge.
wood from a fountain, in the peace and dubious coolness of a
The first set is in place for the next show; another day, she
wandered with him, holding his hand, through the deserted alleys of a
garden whose climbing plants had been cut by the
skillful hands of a decorator, as if the real heavens, the real
Flowers, the real earth, were forever forbidden to her, and that she might
condemned to breathe no other atmosphere than that of the
theater! The young man hesitated to ask him any questions,
because, as it immediately appeared to her, she could not
He was afraid of causing her unnecessary suffering when he answered. From time to time
At one point, a fireman passed by, watching over their romance from afar.
melancholic. Sometimes, she bravely tried to deceive herself and to
to deceive him about the deceptive beauty of this invented setting for
the illusion of men. His ever-vivid imagination makes him appear most
vibrant colors, and such, she said, that nature could not match them.
to provide comparable examples. She was becoming increasingly excited, while Raoul, slowly,
pressed her feverish hand. She said, "Look, Raoul, at these walls,
these woods, these cradles, these painted canvas images, all of this has seen the
the most sublime loves, for here they were invented by the
poets, who are a hundred cubits taller than men. Tell me
So that our love is indeed found there, my Raoul, since he too has
It was invented, and it too is, alas! only an illusion!

Sorry, he wasn't responding. So:

--Our love is too sad on earth, let's take it for a walk in the
Good heavens!... Look how easy it is here!

And she was leading him higher than the clouds, in chaos
magnificent on the grill, and she enjoyed making him dizzy by
running ahead of him on the fragile bridges of the arch, among the thousands
of ropes that were attached to pulleys, winches, drums,
amidst a veritable aerial forest of yards and masts. If he
Hesitating, she said to him with an adorable pout: "You, a sailor!"

And then they would come back down onto dry land, that is to say
in some sturdy corridor that led them to laughter,
to dances, to youth scolded by a stern voice:
"Flex, young ladies!... Watch your toes!"... It's the
class of little girls, those who have just turned six years old or
who are going to have nine or ten... and they already have the bodice
low-cut neckline, light tutu, white trousers and pink stockings, and
They work, they work with all their little feet.
painful in the hope of becoming students of the compiled quadrilles,
small subjects, prima ballerinas, with lots of diamonds around them...
Meanwhile, Christine is handing out candy to them.

Another day, she led him into a vast room of her
palace, full of finery, knights' robes, lances,
of shields and plumes, and she reviewed all the ghosts of
motionless warriors covered in dust. She addressed them with
kind words, promising them they would see the bright evenings again
of light, and the musical parades in front of the resounding footlights.

She thus paraded him throughout her entire empire, which was artificial, but
immense, extending over seventeen floors from the ground floor to the
summit and inhabited by an army of subjects. She passed through the midst of them
like a popular queen, encouraging the work, sitting in the
shops, giving wise advice to the female workers whose hands
hesitated to cut into the rich fabrics that were meant to clothe
Heroes. People from this country did all kinds of jobs. There
It had cobblers and goldsmiths. They had all learned to love it,
because she was interested in everyone's troubles and little quirks. She
knew of unknown corners secretly inhabited by old couples.

She would knock on their door and introduce Raoul as a prince.
charming man who had asked for her hand, and both of them sitting on something
worm-eaten accessory listened to the legends of the Opera like
In their childhood, they had once listened to old tales.
Bretons. These old men remembered nothing but the Opera. They
had lived there for countless years. The administrations
vanished, they had forgotten them; the palace revolutions
had ignored them; outside, the history of France had passed without
had they noticed, and no one remembered them.

Thus the precious days passed, and Raoul and Christine, by
the excessive interest they seemed to show in external things,
were clumsily trying to hide the only
thought of their hearts. One certain fact was that Christine, who
had previously proven to be the strongest, suddenly became
nervous beyond words. On their expeditions, she...
would start running for no reason or would stop abruptly, and his
His hand, which had turned icy cold in an instant, held the young man. His eyes
sometimes seemed to chase imaginary shadows. She would shout: "By
"Here," then "this way," then "this way," laughing, a panting laugh
which often ended in tears. Raoul then wanted to talk,
to question despite his promises and commitments. But, even before
Whenever he asked a question, she would reply feverishly:
"Nothing!... I swear there's nothing there."

Once on stage, they passed in front of a trapdoor
With the door ajar, Raoul leaned over the dark chasm and said: "You
You gave me a tour of the upper echelons of your empire, Christine... but we
tells strange stories about what goes on underneath... Would you like us to go there?
"Shall we go downstairs?" Hearing this, she took him in her arms, as if
She was afraid of seeing him disappear into the black hole, and she...
he said quietly, trembling: "Never!... I forbid you to go there!..."
And besides, it's not mine!... _Everything under the earth belongs to him
belongs!

Raoul looked deep into his eyes and said in a gruff voice:

--So he lives down there?

"I didn't tell you that!... Who told you that?"
The same? Come on! Come on! There are times, Raoul, when I wonder if
You're not crazy, are you?... You always hear things
Impossible!... Come! Come!

And she was literally dragging him along, because he stubbornly wanted to stay.
near the trapdoor, and that hole attracted him.

The trapdoor was suddenly closed, and so abruptly, without them
had even glimpsed the hand that made it happen, that they remained
completely giddy.

"Perhaps it was _him_ who was there?" he finally said.

She shrugged, but she didn't seem reassured at all.

--No! No! They're the "trapdoor closers." The
"Trap-closers" do something... They open and they
They close the trapdoors for no reason... It's like the "trapdoor shutters"
doors"; they have to "pass the time" somehow.

--What if it was _him_, Christine?

--No! No! He's locked himself in! He's working.

--Ah! Really, _he_ works?

Yes, he cannot open and close the hatches and work. We
We are quite calm.

As she said this, she shivered.

--So what is he working on?

Oh! Something terrible!... We are well
peaceful!... When he works on that, he sees nothing; he doesn't
He neither eats, nor drinks, nor breathes... for days and nights...
He's a living dead man and he doesn't have time to play with the
traps!

She shivered again, leaned forward, and listened from the direction of the
trapdoor... Raoul let her do and talk. He remained silent. He was afraid
Now that the sound of his voice suddenly made her think,
stopping him in the still fragile course of his confidences.

She hadn't left him... she was still holding him in her arms...
She sighed in turn:

--If it were him!_

Raoul, timidly, asked:

Are you afraid of him?

She said:

--No! No!

The young man, quite unintentionally, adopted the attitude of taking her
out of pity, as one does with an impressionable person who is still in
prey to a recent dream. He seemed to be saying, "because you
"You know, I'm right here!" And his gesture was, almost involuntarily,
threatening; then, Christine looked at him in astonishment, like a
a phenomenon of courage and virtue, and she seemed, in her thoughts,
to appreciate the true value of so much useless and audacious chivalry.
She embraced poor Raoul like a sister rewarding him.
in a fit of tenderness, by having closed his little fraternal fist
to defend it against the ever-present dangers of life.

Raoul understood and blushed with shame. He felt as weak as she did.
He thought to himself, "She claims she's not afraid, but she's us
"He moved away from the trapdoor, trembling." That was the truth. The next day
and in the following days, they went to house their curious and chaste
Love affairs, almost in the attic, far from the trapdoors. The commotion of
Christine only increased in size as time went on
the hours. Finally, one afternoon, she arrived very late, the
his face was so pale and his eyes so reddened by certain despair, that
Raoul resolved to go to all extremes, to that, for example,
which he expressed to her point-blank, "not to leave for the North Pole unless..."
she confided in him the secret of the Voice of a Man_”.

"Be quiet! For heaven's sake, be quiet. If he could hear you,"
Poor Raoul!

And the girl's wild eyes circled around them
things.

"I will take you away from his power, Christine, I swear! And you will not
You won't even think about him anymore, which is necessary.

--Is that possible?

She allowed herself this doubt, which was an encouragement, by training the
young man up to the top floor of the theater, "at altitude", there
where we are very, very far from the traps.

--I will hide you in an unknown corner of the world, where he will not come
You will be saved, and then I will leave since you
You swore you would never get married.

Christine threw herself onto Raoul's hands and squeezed them with a
Incredible transport. But, worried again, she turned the
head.

"Higher!" she said simply... "even higher!" And she
led him towards the summits.

He had trouble keeping up with her. They were soon under the eaves, in the
a labyrinth of timber frames. They slipped between the flying buttresses, the
rafters, struts, panels, slopes and sloping sides;
They ran from beam to beam as if they were in a forest
running from tree to tree, with formidable trunks...

And, despite her careful attention to watching at every moment,
Behind her, she did not see a shadow following her like her
shadow, which stopped with her, which started again when she paid again and
which made no more noise than a shadow should. Raoul,
He noticed nothing, because when he had Christine in front of him,
He wasn't interested in anything that was happening behind the scenes.




XIII


APOLLO'S LYRE


And so they reached the rooftops. She glided over them, light and
familiar, like a swallow. Their gaze, between the three domes and
the triangular pediment, traversed the deserted space. She breathed with
force, above Paris, of which the entire valley could be seen
work. She looked at Raoul confidently. She called him over.
from her, and side by side they walked, up there, on the streets
of zinc, in the cast-iron avenues; they admired their twin forms
in the vast reservoirs filled with still water where, in the good
season, the kids of the dance, about twenty little boys
They dive in and learn to swim. The shadow behind them, always faithful
At their feet, it had sprung up, flattening itself on the rooftops, stretching out
with movements of black wings, at the crossroads of the iron alleyways,
turning around the pools, silently skirting the domes; and
The unfortunate children had no idea of ​​his presence when they
They finally sat down, confident, under the high protection of Apollo, who
with his bronze gesture raised his prodigious lyre to the heart of a sky
on fire.

A fiery spring evening surrounded them. Clouds, which were coming
to receive from the setting sun their light robes of gold and purple, passed
slowly, letting it trail above the young people; and
Christine said to Raoul: "Soon, we will go further and faster
that the clouds, at the end of the world, and then you will abandon me, Raoul.
But if, when the time came for you to take me away, I no longer consented to
"Follow you, well then! Raoul, you'd sweep me away!"

With what force, which seemed directed against herself, she told him
This happened while she nervously pressed herself against him. The young man
He was struck by it.

--So you're afraid of changing your mind, Christine?

"I don't know," she said, shaking her head strangely. "It's a
demon!

And she shivered. She snuggled into his arms with a moan.

--Now I'm afraid to go back to living with him: in the earth!

--What compels you to go back, Christine?

If I don't go back to him, serious problems could happen.
Oh dear!... But I can't go on anymore!... I can't go on anymore!... I know it well
that we must have pity on the people who live "underground..." But
That one is too horrible! And yet, the moment is approaching; I have not
Just one more day? And if I don't come, he'll come to me.
search with his voice. He will take me with him, to his home, under the
earth, and he will kneel before me, with his skull and crossbones! And
He'll tell me he loves me! And he'll cry! Ah! Those tears! Raoul! Those
Tears in the two black holes of the skull! I can't take it anymore
To see those tears flowing!

She wrung her hands horribly, while Raoul, himself seized
To this contagious despair, he pressed her against his heart: "No! no!
You will never hear him say he loves you again! You will never see him again!
"She'll shed her tears! Let's run away!... Right now, Christine, let's run away!" And
He already wanted to train him.

But she stopped him.

"No, no," she said, shaking her head painfully, "not
Now!... That would be too cruel... Let him hear me sing
One last time tomorrow night... and then we'll leave.
At midnight, you will come and get me in my dressing room; at midnight exactly.
At that moment, he will be waiting for me in the lakeside dining room... we
We will be free and you will take me away!... Even if I refuse, you must...
I swear to that, Raoul... because I know that this time, if I go back,
I may never come back from this...

She added:

--You can't understand!...

And she sighed, and it seemed to her that, behind her, a
Another sigh had answered.

Didn't you hear?

Her teeth were chattering.

"No," Raoul assured him, "I didn't hear anything..."

"It's awful," she admitted, "to tremble all the time like this."
That!... And yet, here, we are in no danger; we are
at home, at my place, in the sky, outdoors, in broad daylight. The
The sun is ablaze, and the night birds don't like to watch.
The sun! I've never seen it in daylight... It must
"How horrible!" she stammered, turning her eyes towards Raoul.
lost. Ah! The first time I saw him!... I thought he
was going to die!

"Why?" asked Raoul, genuinely frightened by the tone this was taking.
strange and wonderful confession... why did you think he was going to
die?

--BECAUSE I SAW IT!!!

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

This time Raoul and Christine turned around at the same time.

"There's someone here who's suffering!" said Raoul... "perhaps a
injured... Did you hear that?

"I couldn't tell you," Christine confessed, "even when it isn't
Not here, my ears are full of her sighs... However, if you
Have you heard...?

They stood up, looked around them... They were all right.
alone on the immense lead roof. They sat back down. Raoul asked:

--How did you first see it?

--For three months I had been hearing him without seeing him. The first
The first time I "heard" it, I believed, like you, that this voice
adorable, who had suddenly started singing _by my side_,
was singing in a nearby box. I went out and looked for her everywhere;
But my lodge is very isolated, Raoul, as you know, and it was
It was impossible to find the voice outside my dressing room, while she remained
faithfully in my dressing room. And not only did she sing, but she...
She spoke, she answered my questions like a real voice
of a man, with this difference that she was beautiful like the voice of a
Angel. How can one explain such an incredible phenomenon? I had no idea.
I never stopped thinking about the "angel of music" that my poor dad was
He had promised to send me as soon as he died. I dare you
to speak of such childishness, Raoul, because you knew my
father, and that he loved you and that you believed, at the same time
me, when you were very little, at the "angel of music", and that
I'm quite sure you won't smile, nor will you make fun of me.
I had retained, my friend, the tender and credulous soul of little Lotte
and it was not the company of Mother Valerius that would have
removed. I held this tiny, all-white soul in my hands
Naively, I held it out, I offered it to the man's voice,
believing they were offering it to the angel. The mistake was certainly, to some extent,
to my adoptive mother, to whom I hid nothing of the inexplicable
phenomenon. She was the first to tell me: "It must be the angel;
"In any case, you can always ask him." That's what I did and
The man's voice replied that indeed it was the voice of an angel that
I was waiting for what my father had promised me on his deathbed. From that point on
At that moment, a great intimacy was established between the voice and me, and I had
She had absolute confidence in her. She told me she had gone down to
the earth to let me taste the supreme joys of eternal art, and
She asked my permission to give me music lessons, all
the days. I consented to it with fervent ardor and missed none
appointments she gave me, from the very first hour, in my
box, when that corner of the Opera was completely deserted. I mean,
What were those lessons! You yourself, who heard the voice, did not
Can you get an idea of ​​it?

"Obviously not! I can't even imagine it," the young man stated.
Man. What were you with?

--With music I don't know, which was behind the wall and which
was of incomparable accuracy. And then, my friend, it seemed that the
Voix knew exactly how much my father, in dying, had
left of my work and what simple method he had also used;
and so, remembering me, or rather, my organ remembering all the
Having learned from past experiences and benefiting from them, along with the present ones, I
made prodigious progress, such that, under other conditions, they
It would have taken years! Just think, I'm quite delicate, my
friend, and that my voice was at first rather uncharacteristic; the lower strings
were naturally underdeveloped; the high tones were
quite harsh and the medium veiled. It is against all these flaws that my
Father had fought and triumphed for a moment; it is these flaws that
The Voice finally triumphed. Little by little, I increased the volume of
sounds in proportions that my past weakness did not allow me
to hope: I learned to give my breathing the widest possible reach.
But above all, the Voice entrusted me with the secret of developing the sounds of
chest in a soprano voice. Finally, she enveloped it all in fire
sacred to inspiration, it awakened in me a passionate life,
Devouring, sublime. The Voice had the power, in making itself heard, to
to lift me up to her. She brought me into harmony with her soaring flight.
Superb. The soul of the Voice dwelt in my mouth and breathed harmony into it!

After a few weeks, I no longer recognized myself when I
I was singing!... I was even terrified... I was afraid, for a moment,
that there was some kind of spell involved; but Valerius's mother told me
reassured her. She knew I was too simple a girl, she said, to give
possessed by the demon.

My progress had remained secret, between the Voice and Mother Valerius.
and I, on the very order of the Voice. Curious thing, outside the lodge,
I sang with my everyday voice, and nobody noticed.
You're welcome. I did everything the Voice wanted. It told me, "It
"We have to wait... you'll see! We'll amaze Paris!" And I waited.
I was living in a kind of ecstatic dream where the Voice was in control.
Meanwhile, Raoul, I saw you one evening in the hall. My
My joy was so great that I didn't even think to hide it when I got home.
in my dressing room. Unfortunately for us, the Voice was already there and she saw
Well, from my expression, there was something new. She told me
he asked "what I had" and I saw no problem with it
to tell our sweet story, nor to hide from him the place that you
held in my heart. Then the Voice fell silent: I called to it, it did not answer me.
She did not answer; I begged her, but it was in vain. I was terrified.
If only she had left forever! Would to God, my friend!... I returned
at home that evening, in a desperate state. I threw myself into the arms of
Valerius's mother told him, "You know, the Voice is gone! It doesn't
"She may never come back!" And she was just as frightened as I was.
and asked me for an explanation. I told her everything. She said:
"Good heavens! The Voice is jealous!" This, my friend, made me reflect that
I loved you...

Here, Christine paused for a moment. She bent her head to rest on the breast of
Raoul and they remained silent for a moment, in each other's arms.
the other. The emotion that gripped them was such that they did not see
to the point, or rather that they did not feel any movement, at some
not of them, the creeping shadow of two large black wings that
she moved closer, skimming the rooftops, so close, so very close to them, that she could have,
by closing in on them, suffocating them...

"The next day," Christine continued with a deep sigh, "I returned to
My lodge, deep in thought. The Voice was there. Oh, my friend! It spoke to me with
a great sadness. She told me quite plainly that, if I were to give
My heart on earth, she, the Voice, had only to go back up
to heaven. And she said this to me with such an accent of _human_ pain that
I should have been wary from that day on and started to understand
that I had been strangely misled by my senses. But my faith
in this appearance of Voice, in which was so intimately intertwined
My father's thoughts were still intact. I feared nothing.
as long as I no longer heard her; on the other hand, I had reflected on the
the feeling that drew me towards you; I had fully grasped its futility.
danger; I didn't even know if you remembered me. Whatever
arrived, your situation in the world forever forbade me the
thought of an honest union; I swore to the Voice that you were nothing
for me, you are just a brother, and you will never be anything else, and that
My heart was empty of all earthly love... And here is the reason, my
friend, for whom I averted my eyes when, on the set or in
The corridors, you were trying to get my attention, the reason for
which I didn't recognize you for... which I didn't see you for
No!... Meanwhile, the hours of lessons, between the Voice and me,
took place in a divine frenzy. Never did the beauty of the sounds
had possessed me to that point, and one day the Voice told me: "Go
Now, Christine Daaé, you can bring a little bit of the
Music from heaven!

How could Carlotta not have done that evening, which was the gala night?
Didn't she come to the theater? How did I get called to the
Replace? I don't know; but I sang... I sang with such passion
unknown; I was light as if I had been given wings; I
I thought for a moment that my burning soul had left its body!

"Oh, Christine!" exclaimed Raoul, whose eyes were moist at this
I remember, that evening, my heart vibrated with every note of your
voice. I saw your tears running down your pale cheeks, and I wept.
with you. How could you sing, sing while crying?

"My strength left me," said Christine, "I closed my eyes..."
When I reopened them, you were by my side! But the Voice was there too.
It was, Raoul!... I was afraid for you, and again, this time, I didn't
I didn't want to recognize you and I started laughing when you told me
I remembered you picked up my scarf from the sea!...

Alas? You can't fool the Voice!... It recognized you perfectly well.
She!... And the Voice was jealous!... The next two days, she...
She made atrocious scenes... She told me: "You love him! If you don't
Even if you didn't like him, you wouldn't run away from him! He's an old friend you
You would shake his hand, like everyone else... If you didn't like him,
You wouldn't be afraid of finding yourself alone with him in your box.
And with me!... If you didn't love him, you wouldn't chase him away!...

"That's enough!" I said to the irritated Voice; "tomorrow I have to go to..."
Perros, at my father's grave; I will ask Mr. Raoul de Chagny to help me there
to accompany.

"At your leisure," she replied, "but know that I too will be at
Perros, because I am everywhere you are, Christine, and if you are
always worthy of me, if you haven't lied to me, I'll play you, at
At the stroke of midnight, on your father's tomb, the _Resurrection of
Lazare, with the dead man's violin.

Thus, my friend, I was led to write you the letter that brought you
In Perros. How could I have been so completely deceived? How, in front of
the personal concerns of the Voice, have I not
Suspecting some kind of deception? Alas! I was no longer in control of myself: I was
his thing!... And the means at the Voice's disposal should easily
"To abuse a child like me!"

"But finally," exclaimed Raoul, "at this point in Christine's story where..."
she seemed to lament, with tears in her eyes, the all-too-perfect innocence of a
a rather unwise mind... but anyway you soon learned the
Truth!... How come you didn't leave that place immediately?
an abominable nightmare?

--Learn the truth!... Raoul!... Get out of this nightmare!... But I
I only entered, wretchedly, into this nightmare from the day I
I knew this truth!... Be quiet! Be quiet! I told you nothing
said... and now that we are going to descend from heaven to earth,
Pity me, Raoul!... pity me!... One evening, a fateful evening... look...
It was the night when so many misfortunes were to happen... the night when
Carlotta could have imagined herself transformed on stage into a hideous toad.
and where she began to scream as if she had lived
all his life by the marshes... the evening the room suddenly
plunged into darkness, under the thunderous crash of the chandelier which
crashed onto the parquet floor... That night there were deaths and
wounded, and the whole theatre resounded with the saddest cries.

My first thought, Raoul, in the face of the catastrophe, was in
same time for you and for the Voice, for you were, at that
At that time, the two equal halves of my heart. I was immediately
I was reassured as far as you were concerned, because I had seen you in the lodge.
from your brother and I knew you were not in any danger.
As for the Voice, it had told me that it would be attending the
representation, and I was afraid for her; yes, truly afraid, as
if she had been "an ordinary living person who was capable of
to die.” I thought to myself, “My God! The chandelier may have crushed the
"Voice." I was on stage at the time, and so panicked that
I was about to run into the room to search for the Voice among the dead
and the wounded, when the idea came to me that, if nothing had happened to him
Having arrived in a bad way, she must have already been in my dressing room, where she
would be eager to reassure me. I jumped straight to my dressing room. The
My voice wasn't there. I locked myself in my dressing room, with tears in my eyes,
I begged her, if she was still alive, to reveal herself to me.
The Voice did not answer me, but suddenly I heard a long, a
admirable moaning that I knew well. It was the lament of
Lazarus, when, at the voice of Jesus, he begins to raise his
eyelids and to see the daylight again. These were the tears of the
my father's violin. I recognized Daaé's bow stroke, the
Even Raoul, who used to hold us motionless on the roads of Perros,
The same one who had "enchanted" the night in the cemetery. And then, it was
again, on the invisible and triumphant instrument, the cry of jubilation
of Life, and the Voice, finally making itself heard, began to sing the
A dominant and sovereign phrase: "Come! And believe in me!" Those who
Those who believe in me will live again! March! Those who have believed in me will not know
"Die!" I couldn't tell you the impression I received from this.
music, which sang of eternal life in the moment that was noted
we, poor wretches, crushed by this fatal luster, yielded
the soul... It seemed to me that it was commanding me too to come, to
I got up and walked towards her. She walked away, and I followed her.
"Come! And believe in me!" I believed in her, I came... I came,
and, incredibly, my box, right before my steps, seemed
to lie down... to lie down... Obviously, there must have been an effect there
of ice cream... because I had the ice cream in front of me... And, all of a sudden, I
I found myself outside my dressing room, without knowing how.

Raoul abruptly interrupted the young girl here:

—What! Without knowing how? Christine, Christine! We should try
to stop dreaming!

"Ah! Poor friend, I wasn't dreaming! I was just outside my box without..."
know how! You who saw me disappear "from my dressing room one evening,
My friend, perhaps you could explain this to me, but I don't.
Then not!... I can only tell you one thing, which is that, finding myself
In front of my mirror, I suddenly couldn't see her anymore, and I
I looked for it behind... but there was no more ice, no more
I was in a dark corridor... I was scared and I screamed!

Everything was black around me; in the distance, a faint red glow
It illuminated a corner of a wall, a crossroads. I shouted. My voice
The walls were filled with nothing but sound, for the singing and the violins had fallen silent.
And then suddenly, in the darkness, a hand landed on mine...
or, rather, something bony and icy that imprisoned me
He grabbed my wrist and wouldn't let go. I screamed. An arm gripped my waist.
and I was lifted up... I struggled for a moment in horror; my
fingers slid along the damp stones, where they
They didn't cling on. And then, I didn't move anymore, I thought I was going to
to die of terror. I was being carried towards the small red glow; we
We entered into that glow and then I saw that I was in the hands
of a man wrapped in a large black coat and who had a mask that
It hid his whole face... I made a supreme effort: my limbs
they stiffened, my mouth opened again to scream my terror, but a
A hand closed it, a hand that I felt on my lips, on my flesh...
and who smelled of death! I fainted.

How long was I unconscious? I couldn't say.
When I opened my eyes again, we were still there, the black man and I,
In the darkness. A dim lantern, placed on the ground,
illuminated the gushing of a fountain. The water, rippling, emerged from
the wall disappeared almost immediately beneath the ground on which
I was lying down; my head rested on the knee of the man in the cloak
and the black mask and my silent companion refreshed me
temples with a care, an attention, a delicacy that seemed to me
more horrible to bear than the brutality of his abduction from all
on time. Her hands, light as they were, felt nothing.
minus death. I pushed them back, but without strength. I asked in a
breath: "Who are you? Where is the Voice?" Only a sigh from me
replied. Suddenly, a warm breath passed over my face and
vaguely, in the darkness, beside the black shape of the man,
I made out a white shape. The black shape lifted me up and set me down.
on the white shape. And immediately, a joyful neighing came and struck
My ears were stunned, and I whispered, "Caesar!" The beast
shuddered. My friend, I was half-lying on a saddle and I had
recognized the white horse of _The Prophet_, which I had spoiled so often,
of sweets. Now, one evening, the rumor had spread through the theater
that this animal had disappeared and had been stolen by the
Phantom of the Opera. I believed in the Voice; I had never believed
to the ghost, and yet here I was, shivering, wondering if I
I was not the ghost's prisoner! I called out, from the bottom of my heart,
The Voice came to my rescue, for I never would have imagined that the Voice
And the ghost were all one! You've heard of the ghost of
The Opera, Raoul?

"Yes," replied the young man... "But tell me, Christine, that you
Did it happen when you were on the Prophet's white horse?

--I made no move and let myself be led... Little by little a
A strange torpor followed the state of anguish and terror where
had thrown this infernal adventure at me. The black shape supported me and
I was no longer doing anything to escape him. A singular peace was
it spread throughout me and I thought I was under its influence
beneficial from some elixir. I had full control of my
sense. My eyes were getting used to the darkness which, moreover,
They lit up here and there with brief flashes of light... I judged that we
we were in a narrow circular gallery and I imagined that this
The gallery circled the Opera House, which, underground, is immense. A
Once, my friend, only once, I had gone down into those undergarments which
are prodigious, but I had stopped on the third floor,
not daring to go any further into the earth. And yet, two stories
Again, where a city could have been housed, opened up beneath my feet.
But the figures that had appeared to me had made me flee. There is
There are demons, all black, in front of boilers, and they are waving
shovels, pitchforks, stir up fires, light flames, you
threaten, if you approach, by suddenly opening the
red mouth of the ovens!... Now, while Caesar, calmly, in
that nightmarish night, she carried me on her back, I could see everything at
Suddenly, far, very far away, and tiny, tiny, as if at the end of a
glasses turned upside down, the black demons before the red braziers of
Their radiators... They appeared... They disappeared... They
reappeared at the strange whim of our walk... Finally, they
disappeared completely. The human form still supported me, and
Caesar walked without a guide and with a sure footing... I couldn't tell you,
even approximately how long this journey, in the night, lasted;
I only had the idea that we were filming! That we were filming! That
we descended in an inflexible spiral to the very heart of the
depths of the earth; and yet, were it not my head that
Was it turning?... However, I don't think so. No! I was incredibly
Lucid. Caesar, for a moment, raised his nostrils, sniffed the air and
He quickened his pace a little. I felt the humid air and then Caesar
stopped. The night had cleared. A bluish glow...
surrounded. I looked to see where we were. We were at the edge
of a lake whose leaden waters were lost in the distance, in the darkness...
But the blue light illuminated that shore, and I saw a small
boat, tied to an iron ring, on the quay!

Of course, I knew that all of this existed, and the vision of this lake and of
This boat underground was nothing supernatural. But consider the
exceptional conditions under which I approached this shore.
souls of the dead should not feel any more anxiety in
approaching the Styx. Charon was certainly no more gloomy nor more
mute as the form of man who carried me in the boat.
Had the elixir worn off? The coolness of these places
Was that enough to make me completely myself again? But my torpor
was fainting, and I made some movements that betrayed the
The return of my terror. My sinister companion had to leave.
to notice, for, with a swift gesture, he dismissed Caesar, who fled.
in the darkness of the gallery, and whose four horseshoes I heard
pounding the resounding steps of a staircase, then the man threw himself into the
boat which he freed from its iron bonds; he seized the oars and rowed
with strength and speed. His eyes, beneath the mask, never left me.
No; I felt the weight of their motionless eyes upon me. The water,
There was no sound around us. We glided in that glow
bluish, as I told you, and then we were all at
It was done during the night, and we landed. The boat struck a hard object. And
I was swept into arms again. I had regained the strength of
I screamed. I howled. And then, suddenly, I fell silent, stunned by the
light. Yes, a dazzling light, in the midst of which I had
I had landed. I jumped up. I had all my strength. At
center of a living room that seemed to me to be adorned, decorated, furnished only with
flowers, magnificent and silly flowers because of silk ribbons that
they tied them to baskets, like the ones sold in shops
boulevards, of flowers too civilized like the ones I used to wear
to find in my dressing room after each "premiere"; at the center of this
In a very Parisian embalming style, the black, masked man's form stood
standing with her arms crossed... and she spoke:

"Don't worry, Christine," she said; "you're not in any danger."

_That was the Voice!_

My fury was equal to my astonishment. I jumped on the mask and wanted
to tear it away, to know the face of the Voice. The form of a man...
said:

--You are in no danger if you don't touch the mask!

And gently grasping my wrists, she made me sit down.

And then she knelt down in front of me, and said nothing more!

The humility of this gesture restored some of my courage; the light, in
clarifying everything around me, brought me back to the reality of the
life. However extraordinary it seemed, the adventure was surrounded
now of deadly things that I could see and touch. The
tapestries on these walls, this furniture, these torches, these vases and
even these flowers, whose origin I could almost have revealed,
in their golden baskets, and how much they had cost,
inevitably confined my imagination within the limits of such a living room
commonplace, like many others who at least had the excuse of not being
points located in the basement of the Opera House. I was probably dealing with
to some terrifying original who, mysteriously, had taken up residence
in the cellars, like others, out of necessity, and with the mute
complicit with the administration, they had found a permanent home in
the attics of this modern Tower of Babel, where intrigue took place, where
We sang in every language, we loved in every language
patois.

And then the _Voice_, the _Voice_ that I had recognized beneath the mask,
which one could not hide it from me, that was the one who was on his knees
In front of me: a man!

I didn't even think about the horrible situation I was in anymore, I
I didn't even ask what would become of me and what the
obscure and coldly tyrannical design that had led me into this
salon as one locks a prisoner in a cell, a slave in
harem. No! no! no! I was slandering: The Voice, that's it: a man! and I
I started to cry.

The man, still on his knees, undoubtedly understood the meaning of my tears.
for he says:

"That's true, Christine!... I'm neither an angel, nor a genius, nor
"Ghost... I'm Erik!"

Here again, Christine's story was interrupted. It seemed to the young
people whose echo had repeated behind them: Erik!... What echo?...
They turned around, and they realized that night had fallen.
Raoul made a movement as if to stand up, but Christine held him back.
close to her: "Stay! You need to know everything _here!_

--Why here, Christine? I'm worried about the night chill for you.

"We have nothing to fear but trapdoors, my friend, and here we are."
at the ends of the earth, in the traps... and I have no right to see you
Outside of the theater... This is not the time to upset him...
Let's not arouse his suspicions...

Christine! Christine! Something tells me we're wrong
to wait until tomorrow evening and that we should flee immediately!

--I'm telling you, if he doesn't hear me sing tomorrow night, he'll be in trouble.
an infinite pain.

--It is difficult not to cause Erik pain and to flee from him
forever...

--You are right, Raoul, in that... for, certainly, from my flight he
will die...

The young girl added in a low voice;

--But also the stakes are even... because we risk him killing us.

--So he likes you?

--Even to the point of crime!

--But his home is not impossible to find... We can go and look for him there.
As long as Erik isn't a ghost, we can talk to him and even...
force them to answer!

Christine shook her head:

--No! No! There's nothing we can do against Erik!... We can only run away!

--And how, being able to flee, did you return to him?

Because it had to be done... And you'll understand that when you know
How did I get out of his house?...

"Ah! I hate him!" exclaimed Raoul. "And you, Christine?"
Tell me... I need you to tell me this so I can listen more.
The rest of this extraordinary love story will unfold calmly... and you,
Do you hate him?

"No!" said Christine simply.

Hey! Why all the talk?... You certainly love her! Your
Fear, your terrors, all of that is still love and more
Delicious! The one we don't admit to ourselves, Raoul explained bitterly.
The one that gives you chills when you think about it... Just imagine, a
man who lives in a palace underground!

And he sneered...

"So you want me to go back!" the young woman interrupted abruptly.
Girl... Be careful, Raoul, I told you: I won't come back from this
more!

There was an eerie silence between the three of them... the two who were speaking
and the shadow that was listening, behind...

"Before I answer you," Raoul finally said in a slow voice, "I
I would like to know what feeling _he_ inspires in you, since you don't
Don't hate...

"Horror!" she said... And she uttered these words with such force,
that they would cover the sighs of the night.

"That's what's so terrible," she continued, feverishly.
growing... I loathe it and I don't hate it. How can it
Hate, Raoul? Look at Erik at my feet, in the lake house, under the
Earth. He accuses himself, he curses himself, he begs my forgiveness!...

He confesses his deception. He loves me! He lays a huge and
Tragic love!... He stole me out of love!... He locked me up with
He, in the earth, out of love... but he respects me, but he crawls.
But he moans, he cries!... And when I get up, Raoul, when I
I told him that I could only despise him if he didn't return me immediately.
This freedom, which he took from me, incredibly... he offers it to me... I
I just have to leave... He's ready to show me the mysterious
path;... only... only he got up, he too, and I am
I am forced to remember that, if he is neither a ghost, nor an angel, nor
A genius, he is still the Voice, because he sings!...

And I listen to him... and I stay!

That evening, we didn't exchange another word... He had seized a
harp and he began to sing to me, he, a man's voice, an angel's voice, the
Desdemona's romance. The memory I had of singing it.
I myself was ashamed. My friend, there is virtue in music.
which means that nothing else in the outside world exists apart from these
sounds that strike your heart. My extravagant adventure was
forgotten. Only the voice lived again, and I followed it, intoxicated, into its
harmonious journey; I was part of Orpheus's flock! She told me
walked in pain, and in joy, in martyrdom, in the
despair, in joy, in death, and in triumph
weddings... I was listening... She was singing... She sang to me
unknown pieces... and made me hear a new kind of music that...
caused a strange impression of gentleness, languor, and rest... a
music which, after uplifting my soul, gradually calmed it, and the
led to the threshold of dreams. I fell asleep.

When I woke up, I was alone, on a chaise longue, in a
a small, very simple room, furnished with a plain mahogany bed, with walls
covered in toile de Jouy fabric, and lit by a lamp placed on the
Marble top from an old Louis-Philippe commode. What was this decor?
new?... I ran my hand over my forehead, as if to chase away a
Bad dream... Alas! I didn't realize for long that I
I hadn't been dreaming! I was a prisoner and I couldn't get out of my
room only to enter a most comfortable bathroom;
Unlimited hot and cold water. Upon returning to my room,
I noticed a note written in red ink on my dresser which informed me
completely regarding my sad situation and who, if it had been still
necessary, would have removed all my doubts about the reality of the
events: "My dear Christine," the paper said, "be all at
It reassured me about your fate. You have no better option in the world.
nor a more respectful friend than myself. You are alone, at this moment, in
this house that belongs to you. I'm going out to do some shopping and
"We will bring you all the laundry you might need."

"Definitely!" I exclaimed, "I've fallen into the hands of a madman!"
What will become of me? And how long does this wretch think?
Keep me locked up in her underground prison?

I ran around my small apartment like a madwoman, looking
always a way out that I couldn't find. I bitterly accused myself of
my stupid superstition and I took a terrible pleasure in mocking the
perfect innocence with which I had welcomed, through the walls,
The voice of the musical genius... When we were that foolish, he
We should have expected the most unheard-of catastrophes, and we had them.
They all deserved it! I felt like hitting myself and I started laughing at
me and crying over myself at the same time. It was in this state that Erik
found me.

After tapping three short, sharp blows on the wall, he entered
quietly through a door that I hadn't been able to find and that he
left it open. It was full of boxes and packages and he
he laid it unhurriedly on my bed, while I heaped insults upon it and
that I demanded he remove that mask, if he had the pretension of...
to conceal the face of an honest man.

He replied to me with great serenity:

--You will never see Erik's face.

And he reproached me for not having yet washed myself.
this hour of the day;--he deigned to inform me that it was two o'clock
in the afternoon. He gave me half an hour to do it, --saying
He then took care to wind my watch and put it on
the hour.--After which, he invited me to go into the dining room,
where, he told me, an excellent lunch awaited us. I had
starving, I threw the door in his face and went into the office of
toilet. I took a bath after placing a toilet near me.
magnificent pair of scissors with which I was determined to...
to kill, if Erik, after behaving like a madman, stopped
to behave like an honest man. The coolness of the water made me
greater good and, when I reappeared before Erik, I had taken the
wise resolution not to offend or upset him in any way whatsoever,
to flatter him if necessary in order to obtain his prompt freedom. This was
He was the first one to tell me about his plans for me, and to tell me about them.
he specified, to reassure me, he said. He was too comfortable in my
company to deprive themselves of it immediately, as they had a moment ago
consented the day before, faced with the indignant expression of my horror. I
I had to understand now that I had no reason to be
I was horrified to see him beside me. He loved me, but he didn't tell me.
would say that as much as I allowed him and the rest of the time
would be accompanied by music.

"What do you mean by the rest of the time?" I asked him.

He replied firmly:

--Five days.

--And then, I will be free?

--You will be free, Christine, because, once these five days have passed, you
You will have learned not to fear me anymore, and then you will come back to see, from
Poor Erik, from time to time!...

The tone with which he spoke those last words moved me deeply. He...
seemed to discover there such a real, such a pitiful despair that I raised
A tender face was behind the mask. I couldn't see the eyes behind it.
the mask, and this was in no way to diminish the strange feeling of
the unease one felt when questioning this mysterious square of silk
black; but beneath the fabric, at the end of the mask's beard,
One, two, three, four tears appeared.

Silently, he indicated a seat for me opposite him, a short distance away.
a small table that occupied the center of the room where, the day before, he had
He played the harp, and I sat down, very disturbed. I ate, however
Enjoy your meal with some crayfish and a chicken wing drizzled with a
a little Tokay wine that he had brought himself, he told me, from
The cellars of Kœnisgberg, once frequented by Falstaff. As for
He didn't eat, he didn't drink. I asked him what was
his nationality, and whether the name Erik did not reveal an origin
Scandinavian. He replied that he had neither name nor homeland, and that he
had taken the name Erik by chance. I asked him why, since he
He loved me; he hadn't found any other way to let me know.
than to train with him and lock myself in the earth!

"It's very difficult," I said, "to be loved in a tomb."

"We have," he replied, in a peculiar tone, "the 'appointments' that we
can.

Then he stood up and held out his fingers to me, because he wanted, he said, to me
to show him around his apartment, but I quickly withdrew my hand
from his own, letting out a cry. What I had touched there was at the
moist and bony, and I remembered that his hands smelled of death.

"Oh! Sorry," he moaned.

And he opened a door in front of me.

"This is my room," he said. "It's quite curious to visit... if
Do you want to see her?

I didn't hesitate. His manner, his words, his whole demeanor told me
to have confidence... and then, I felt that it was necessary not to have
fear.

I entered. It seemed to me that I was entering a mortuary chamber.
The walls were all draped in black, but instead of tears
white ones, which usually complete this funereal ornament, could be seen
on an enormous musical staff, the repeated notes of the _Dies
irae._ In the middle of this chamber, there was a canopy from which hung
Red brocade curtains and, beneath this canopy, an open coffin.

At that sight, I stepped back.

"That's where I sleep," said Erik. "You have to get used to everything."
in life, even in eternity.

I turned my head away, so sinister was the impression I had received from this
spectacle. My eyes then met the keyboard of an organ which
held up an entire section of the wall. On the desk was a notebook, all
smeared with red marks. I asked permission to look at it
And I read on the first page: _Don Juan triumphant._

"Yes," he told me, "I sometimes compose. I've been doing this for twenty years."
I have started this work. When it is finished, I will take it with me into
this coffin and I will never wake up again.

"We should work there as little as possible," I said.

--I sometimes work there for fifteen days and fifteen nights in a row,
during which I live only for music, and then I rest from
years.

Would you like to play me something from your _Triumphant Don Juan_?
I asked, thinking I was pleasing him and overcoming my reluctance
that I had to stay in that death chamber.

"Never ask me that," he replied in a somber voice. "This gift..."
Juan--là was not written to the words of a Lorenzo d'Aponte,
Inspired by wine, fleeting romances, and vice, ultimately punished
of God. I'll play you Mozart if you like, which will make your
beautiful tears and will inspire honest reflections. But, my _Don
Juan, to me, burns, Christine, and yet, he is not
Struck down by lightning from heaven!...

With that, we went back into the living room we had just left.
I noticed that nowhere in this apartment was there any
Ice cream. I was about to mention it, but Erik had just sat down.
at the piano. He was saying to me:

"You see, Christine, there is music so terrible that it consumes"
everyone who approaches him. You haven't reached that point yet.
That music, thankfully, because you would lose your fresh colors and
You wouldn't be recognized when you returned to Paris. Let's sing!
The Opera, Christine Daaé.

He told me:

--Let's sing the Opera, Christine Daaé, as if he were hurling an insult at me.

But I didn't have time to dwell on the air he had given
at his words. We immediately began the Othello duet, and
Disaster was already looming over us. This time, he had
left the role of Desdemona, which I sang with despair, a
real terrors that I had never experienced before. The
Being near such a partner, instead of annihilating me, inspired me
a magnificent terror. The events of which I was a victim...
were remarkably close to the poet's thought, and I found some
accents that would have dazzled the musician. As for him, his voice
was thunderous, her vindictive soul focused on every sound, and in
increased the power tremendously. Love, jealousy, hatred,
erupted around us in heart-rending cries. Erik's black mask...
It brought to mind the natural mask of the Moor of Venice. He was Othello.
himself. I thought he was going to hit me, that I was going to fall beneath his
blows, and yet I made no movement to flee from him, to
to avoid his fury like the timid Desdemona. On the contrary, I
I drew closer to him, attracted, fascinated, finding charm in death
at the heart of such a passion; but, before dying, I wanted
to know, so that I may carry away its sublime image in my final glance.
these unknown features that the fire of eternal art was to transfigure. I
wanted to see the _face_ of the _Voice_ and, instinctively, with a gesture
of which I was not the mistress, for I no longer possessed myself, my
Quick fingers tore off the mask...

Oh! Horror!... horror!... horror!...

Christine paused, at this vision which she still seemed to be pushing away from
her two trembling hands, while the echoes of the night, like
They had repeated Erik's name, repeating the clamor three times:
"Horror! Horror! Horror!" Raoul and Christine, more closely
united still by the terror of the story, they raised their eyes towards the
stars that shone in a peaceful and clear sky.

Raoul said:

"It's strange, Christine, how this night, so sweet and so calm, is..."
Full of moans. It's like she's lamenting with us!

She replied:

Now that you know the secret, your ears, like
Mine will be full of lamentations.

She imprisons Raoul's protective hands in her own and,
Shaken by a long shudder, she continued:

--Oh yes! Even if I lived a hundred years, I would still hear the clamor
superhuman cry he uttered, a cry of his infernal pain and rage,
while the thing appeared before my eyes, filled with immense horror, as
my mouth that did not close and yet no longer screamed.

Oh! Raoul, the thing! How can I not see the thing anymore! If my ears are
Forever filled with her cries, my eyes are forever haunted by her
Face! What an image! How can I stop seeing it and how can I make you see it?
See?... Raoul, did you see the skulls when they were
dried out by the centuries and perhaps, if you haven't been
A victim of a terrible nightmare, did you see his skull face?
In the night at Perros. Did you see them strolling at the last ball?
masked, "the Red Death"! But all those skulls were
motionless, and their mute horror did not live! But imagine, if you
You can, the mask of Death suddenly coming to life for
express with the four black holes of his eyes, his nose and his
mouth anger to its ultimate degree, the sovereign fury of a
demon, and no staring into the eye sockets, for, as I have
Later, we only ever glimpse his fiery eyes at night.
deep... I must have been, pressed against the wall, the very image of
The horror, like that of hideousness.

Then, he brought me closer, the awful grinding of his teeth without
lips and, as I fell to my knees, if me whistled
hatefully senseless things, meaningless words,
Curses, delirium... Do I know!... Do I
know?...

Leaning over me, he cried, "Look! You wanted to see! Look!"
Feast your eyes, intoxicate your soul with my cursed ugliness! Look at the
Erik's face! Now you know the face of the Voice! This doesn't...
Wasn't it enough, tell me, to just hear me out? You wanted to know what I was like
Done. You women are so curious!

And he would start laughing, repeating: "You're so curious, you
"Others, the women!..." with a rumbling, hoarse, foaming laugh,
Fantastic... He used to say things like these:

Are you satisfied? I'm handsome, aren't I?... When a woman saw me, like
You, she's mine. She loves me forever! Me, I'm a guy
in the style of Don Juan.

And, rising to his full height, fist on hip, swaying
On his shoulders, the hideous thing that was his head, he thundered:

--Look at me! _I am Don Juan triumphant!_

And as I turned my head away, begging for mercy, he brought it back to me.
him, my head, brutally, by my hair, in which his fingers of
dead had entered.

"Enough! Enough!" Raoul interrupted. "I'll kill him! I'll kill him! In the name of the..."
Good heavens, Christine, tell me where the _lake dining room is!_
I have to kill him!

--Hey! Be quiet, Raoul, if you want to know!

--Ah! Yes, I want to know how and why you went back! It's
That, Christine, is the secret, beware! There is no other! But,
Anyway, I'll kill him!

--Oh! my Raoul! Listen then! Since you want to know, listen! He told me
was dragging by the hair, and then... and then... Oh! that's more
Horrible again!

"Well, tell me now!" exclaimed Raoul fiercely. "Tell me quickly!"

Then he hissed at me: "What? Am I scaring you? Maybe!... You
Maybe I still have a mask on, huh? And that... that! My
Head, is that a mask? Well, but! he began to yell. Tear it off
Like the other one! Come on! Come on! Again! Again! I want it! Your hands!
Your hands!... Give me your hands!... If they're not enough for you, I'll...
I'll lend mine... and we'll work together to pull them out
"The mask." I rolled at his feet, but he grabbed my hands,
Raoul... and he shoved them into the horror of his face... With my
With his nails, he tore at his flesh, his horrible dead flesh!

"Learn! Learn!" he cried from deep in his throat, which was panting like
A forge... learn that I am made entirely of death!
From head to toe!... and that it's a corpse that loves you, that
I adore you and will never leave you again! Never!... I'm going to do
enlarge the coffin, Christine, for later, when we are at
The end of our love!... Look! I'm not laughing anymore, you see, I'm crying... I
I weep for you, Christine, who tore off my mask, and who, because
Because of this, you will never be able to leave me again!... As long as you could...
Believe me, Christine, you could have come back!... I know you would have
returned... but now that you know how hideous I am, you would run away from
Always... I'm keeping you!!! Also, why did you want to see me?
Insane! Crazy Christine, who wanted to see me!... when my father,
He never saw me, and when my mother, in order to avoid seeing me, made me
A tearful gift, my first mask!

He had finally let go of me and was now dragging himself across the parquet floor.
with terrible hiccups. And then, like a reptile, he crawled,
he dragged himself out of the room, entered his bedroom, the door of which
closed it again, and I remained alone, left to my horror and my
reflections, but freed from the vision of the thing. A prodigious
Silence, the silence of the grave, had followed this storm, and I
could reflect on the terrible consequences of the act that had torn
the mask. The Monster's last words had been enough for me
I had inquired. I had imprisoned myself forever and my
Curiosity was to be the cause of all my misfortunes. He had
sufficiently warned... He had repeated to me that I wasn't running any risks.
danger as long as I didn't touch the mask, and I had touched it. I
I cursed my imprudence, but I noted with a shudder that the
The monster's reasoning was logical. Yes, I would have come back if I
I hadn't seen his face... He had already touched me deeply enough.
interested, even moved by her masked tears, so that I wouldn't
restaise point insensible to his prayer. Finally, I was not a
ungrateful, and its impossibility could not make me forget that it was
his voice and how his genius had warmed me. I would have come back!
And now, having left these catacombs, I certainly won't be returning!
You don't go back to locking yourself in a tomb with a corpse that...
love!

To certain frenzied ways he had displayed during the scene,
to look at me, or rather to approach me, the two black holes of his
With an invisible gaze, I had been able to gauge the savagery of his passion.
not having taken me in his arms, when I could not offer him
no resistance; this monster had to be doubled by an angel
And perhaps, after all, he was a little bit like that, the Angel of Music, and
Perhaps he would have been completely so if God had clothed him in beauty
instead of dressing it in rot!

Already, lost in thought of the fate that awaited me, prey to
to the terror of seeing the door of the coffin room reopen, and
to see the figure of the monster without a mask, I had slipped into
my own apartment and I had seized the scissors, which
could put an end to my dreadful fate... when the
Organ sounds could be heard...

It was then, my friend, that I began to understand Erik's words.
on what he called, with a contempt that had astonished me: the
opera music. What I was hearing had nothing to do with that anymore.
which had charmed me until that day. His _Don Juan Triumphant_, (for he
there was no doubt in my mind that he had rushed to his
a masterpiece to forget the horror of the present moment), his _Don
Juan triumphant_ at first appeared to me as nothing but a long, dreadful and magnificent
sobbing, where poor Erik had poured all his cursed misery.

I could see the notebook with the red notes again and easily imagine that
This music had been written with blood. It took me on a journey through
She gave me every detail of the martyrdom; she took me into every corner
of the abyss, the abyss inhabited by _the ugly man_; she was showing me Erik
his poor, hideous head striking the funereal walls of this
hell, and fleeing there, so as not to frighten them, the gazes of
men. I watched, devastated, panting, pitiful and defeated
the emergence of these gigantic agreements where the
_Pain_ and then the sounds rising from the abyss all grouped together
suddenly, in a prodigious and menacing flight, their swirling troop
seemed to climb the sky like an eagle ascends to the sun, and such
The triumphant symphony seemed to set the world ablaze, and I understood that the work
was finally accomplished and Ugliness, lifted on the wings of
Love had dared to look Beauty in the face! I was as if drunk;
The door that separated me from Erik gave way under my efforts. He had stood up
He heard me, but he didn't dare turn around.

"Erik," I cried, "show me your face, without fear. I will..."
swears that you are the most painful and sublime of men, and
If Christine Daaé now shivers when she looks at you, it's because she
will reflect on the splendor of your genius!

Then Erik turned around, for he believed me, and I too, alas!... I had
faith in me... He raised his unleashed hands towards Destiny, and fell
at my knees with words of love...

...With words of love in her deathly mouth... and the music
had fallen silent...

He was kissing the hem of my dress; he didn't see me close the...
eyes.

What more can I tell you, my friend? You now know the
drama... For fifteen days, it was renewed... fifteen days for
which I lied to him about. My lie was as awful as the monster.
who inspired me, and at that price I was able to acquire my freedom. I
I burned his mask. And I did so well that, even when he wasn't singing
Moreover, he dared to seek one of my glances, like a shy dog ​​who
prowls around his master. He was like that, around me, like a
faithful slave, and surrounded me with a thousand cares. Little by little, I...
I inspired such confidence that he dared to take me for a walk along the shores of the lake.
Avernus and take me by boat on its leaden waters; in the
In the last days of my captivity, he made me, at night, cross
gates that close off the underground passages of Rue Scribe. There, a crew
was waiting for us, and carried us away to the solitudes of the Bois.

The night we met you almost turned out to be tragic for me, because it
a terrible jealousy of you, which I only fought by affirming to him
your next departure... Finally, after fifteen days of this abominable
captivity where I was alternately consumed by pity and enthusiasm,
Out of despair and horror, he believed me when I told him: _I
I'll be back!

"And you've come back, Christine," Raoul moaned.

--That's true, friend, and I must say that these are not the
appalling threats which accompanied my release which
helped me to keep my word; but the heart-rending sob he uttered
on the threshold of his tomb!

Yes, that sob, repeated Christine, painfully shaking her
head, chained me to the unfortunate more than I myself could have imagined
In the moment of farewells. Poor Erik! Poor Erik!

"Christine," said Raoul, standing up, "you say you love me, but
Only a few hours had passed since you had
Once you have regained your freedom, you should return to Erik!
Remember the masked ball!

--Things were understood this way... also remember that these
I spent a few hours there with you, Raoul... for our
great danger to both of them...

--During those few hours, I doubted that you loved me.

Do you still doubt it, Raoul?... Then know that each of my
Traveling with Erik increased my horror of him, because each of
These trips, instead of calming him as I had hoped, drove him crazy
Of love!... and I'm scared! And I'm scared!... I'm scared!...

--You're afraid... but do you love me?... If Erik were handsome,
Would you love me, Christine?

—Unfortunate man! Why tempt fate?... Why ask me for
things that I hide deep in my conscience, like one hides sin?

She stood up in turn, and encircled the young man's head with her beautiful
with trembling arms, he said to her:

—Oh my fiancé of a day, if I did not love you, I would not
I wouldn't give my lips. For the first and last time, the
here is.

He took them, but the night surrounding them was so heartbreaking,
that they fled as if from an approaching storm, and their eyes,
where Erik's terror lived, he showed them, before they
disappear into the forest of the attic, high above them,
an immense night bird that watched them with its fiery eyes, and
which seemed to be hanging from the strings of Apollo's lyre!




XIV


A MASTERSTROKE BY THE TRAPPING ENTHUSIAST


Raoul and Christine ran and ran. Now they were fleeing the
roof where there were the ember eyes that one only glimpses in the
deep night; and they only stopped on the eighth floor in
descending towards the earth. That evening there was no performance.
and the corridors of the Opera House were deserted.

Suddenly a strange figure appeared before the young people, their
blocking the way:

--No! Not this way!

And the figure indicated another corridor through which they had to
to gain access to the backstage areas.

Raoul wanted to stop and ask for explanations.

"Go! Go quickly!..." commanded this vague shape, concealed within a
a kind of overcoat and topped with a pointed cap.

Christine was already training Raoul, forcing him to run even more:

"But who is it? Who is this?" asked the young man.

And Christine replied:

--It's _The Persian!_...

--What's he doing here...

--We don't know anything about it!... He's still at the Opera!

"What you're making me do here is cowardly, Christine," said Raoul, who
was very moved. You're making me run away, it's the first time in my
life.

"Bah!" replied Christine, who was beginning to calm down, I think.
that we have fled from the shadow of our imagination!

--If we really did see Erik, I should have nailed him to the lyre
of Apollo, like we nail the owl to the walls in our farmhouses
Breton women, and it would no longer have been a question of it.

--My good Raoul, you should have gone up to the lyre first
of Apollo; it is not an easy climb.

--The eyes of embers were definitely there.

--Hey! Now you're just like me, ready to see it everywhere, but
We reflect afterwards and say to ourselves: what I took for the eyes of
The embers were probably just the golden nails of two stars that
they were looking at the city through the strings of the lyre.

And Christine went down another floor. Raoul followed. He said:

--Since you are quite determined to leave, Christine, I
He still assures you that it would be better to flee immediately. Why?
Wait until tomorrow? He might have heard us tonight!

--No! No! He's working, I repeat, at his Don Juan
triumphant, and he doesn't care about us.

--You're so unsure that you keep looking behind you
YOU.

--Let's go to my dressing room.

--Let's meet outside the Opera House instead.

Never, not even until the moment of our escape! It would bring us bad luck.
to break my word. I promised him we would only meet here.

--I'm still lucky that he allowed you to do that.
"Do you know," Raoul said bitterly, "that you have been completely
bold in allowing us the game of engagement.

"But, my dear fellow, he knows. He told me, 'I trust in
You, Christine. Mr. Raoul de Chagny is in love with you and must leave.
Before he leaves, may he be as unhappy as I am!...»

--And what does that mean, please?

--I should be the one asking you that, my friend. So we are
Unhappy, when one is in love?

--Yes, Christine, when you love and when you're not sure of being
love.

--Are you saying this for Erik's benefit?

"For Erik and for me," said the young man, shaking his head.
thoughtful and sorry expression.

They arrived at Christine's dressing room.

--How do you believe yourself to be safer in this lodge than in the
"Theater?" asked Raoul. "Since you could hear it through the walls,"
He can hear us.

No! He gave me his word that he wouldn't be behind the walls of my
lodge and I believe Erik's word. My lodge and my room, in
The _lake apartment_ belongs to me, exclusively to me, and is sacred.
for him.

How were you able to leave that box to be transported to
The dark corridor, Christine? If we tried to repeat your gestures,
Do you want to?

"It's dangerous, my friend, because the ice could still carry me off and..."
Instead of running away, I would be forced to go to the end of the secret passage
which leads to the shores of the lake and there to call Erik.

--Would he hear you?

Wherever I call Erik, everywhere Erik will hear me... It's him
Whoever told me that is a very curious genius. Don't believe it,
Raoul, that he's simply a man who amused himself by living under the
earth. He does things that no other man could do; he
knows things that the living world doesn't know.

--Be careful, Christine, you're going to turn him into a ghost again.

--No, he's not a ghost; he's a man of heaven and earth,
That's all.

--A man of heaven and earth... that's all!... Just like you
Speak up!... And you're still determined to run away from him?

--Yes, tomorrow.

Do you want me to tell you why I would like to see you flee this
evening?

--Tell me, my friend.

--Because tomorrow, you won't be determined to do anything at all!

--So, Raoul, you will take me away against my will!... is that not understood?

"Here then, tomorrow night! At midnight I will be in your box," said the
young man with a somber expression; whatever happens, I will keep my promise.
You say that after attending the performance, he must go
Are you waiting for me in the lakeside dining room?

--That is indeed where he arranged to meet me.

—And how were you supposed to get to his house, Christine, if you didn't
Don't know how to get out of your dressing room "through the glass"?

--But by going directly to the edge of the lake.

--Through all the underground passages? Via the staircases and corridors where
How would you have done the machinists and service personnel? How would you have
Kept secret about such a scheme? Everyone would have followed
Christine Daaé and she reportedly arrived with a crowd on the banks of the
lake.

Christine took an enormous key out of a box and showed it to Raoul.

"What is this?" he asked.

--This is the key to the gate of the underground passage on Scribe Street.

--I understand, Christine. It leads directly to the lake. Give me
This key, do you want it?

"Never!" she replied emphatically. "That would be treason!"

Suddenly, Raoul saw Christine change color. A deathly pallor...
spread across his features.

"Oh! My God!" she cried... "Erik! Erik! Have mercy on me!"

"Be quiet!" ordered the young man... "Didn't you tell me that he..."
Could you hear me?

But the singer's attitude was becoming increasingly inexplicable.
She slid her fingers over each other, repeating with a
lost air:

Oh my God! Oh my God!

"But what is it? What is it?" implored Raoul.

--The ring.

--What about the ring? Please, Christine, come to your senses!

--The gold ring he had given me...

--Ah? It was Erik who gave you the gold ring!

--You know that perfectly well, Raoul! But what you don't know is this
as he gave it to me, he said: “I am giving you back your freedom,
Christine, but only on the condition that this ring will always be at
your finger. As long as you keep it, you will be protected from everything
Danger, and Erik will remain your friend. But if you ever part with him,
Woe to you, Christine, for Erik will take his revenge!.... My friend, my friend!
The ring is no longer on my finger!... woe betide us!

They searched for the ring around them in vain. They couldn't find it.
They found nothing. The young girl did not calm down.

--It was while I gave you that kiss, up there, under the
"Apollo's lyre," she tried to explain, trembling; "the ring will have
It slipped from my finger and will have slid across the city! How can I find it?
Now? And what misfortune, Raoul, threatens us! Ah! To flee!
Flee! Flee immediately, Raoul insisted once again.

She hesitated. He thought she was going to say yes... And then her clear
Her eyes clouded and she said: No! Tomorrow!

And she left him abruptly, in complete disarray, continuing
to slide their fingers over each other, no doubt in
the hope that the ring would reappear in that way.

As for Raoul, he returned home, very preoccupied with everything he
had heard.

"If I don't save her from the hands of this charlatan," he said aloud.
In her room, when she lies down, she is lost; but I will save her!

He extinguished his lamp, and in the darkness he felt the need
to insult Erik. He shouted three times in a loud voice: "Charlatan!...
Charlatan!... Charlatan!...»

But suddenly, he stood up on one elbow; a cold sweat broke out.
at the temples. Two eyes, burning like embers, had just...
to light up at the foot of his bed. They stared at him, terribly,
in the pitch-black night.

Raoul was brave, and yet he trembled. He extended his hand,
Groping, hesitant, uncertain, on the bedside table. Having found
He lit the matchbox and made a light. The eyes disappeared.

He thought, not at all reassured:

She told me that her eyes could only be seen in the dark. Her
Their eyes disappeared with the light, but _he_, he may still be there
there.

And he got up, searched, cautiously examined everything. He looked
Under his bed, like a child. Then he felt ridiculous. He told everything.
high:

What to believe? What not to believe with such a fairy tale? Where does it end?
Where does reality end and fantasy begin? What did she see? What did she believe?
see?

He added, trembling:

—And what did I myself see? Did I truly see the burning eyes all at
What time is it? Did they only shine in my imagination? Now I don't
I'm not sure of anything anymore! And I wouldn't swear an oath on these
eyes there.

He went back to bed. Once again, he made it dark.

The eyes reappeared.

"Oh!" sighed Raoul.

Standing upright on his haunches, he stared at them in turn, as bravely as he
He could. After a silence he used to gather his courage,
He suddenly shouted:

--Is that you, Erik? Man! Genius or ghost! Is that you?

He thinks:

--If it's him... he's on the balcony!

So he ran, in his shirt, to a small piece of furniture from which he grabbed
He groped, then reached for a revolver. Armed, he opened the French doors. Night had fallen.
then extremely fresh. Raoul only took the time to glance
He glanced at the deserted balcony and went back inside, closing the door. He
he went back to bed shivering, the revolver on the nightstand, at his
scope.

Once again he blew out the candle.

The eyes were still there, at the foot of the bed. Were they between the
bed and the windowpane, or behind the windowpane,
That is to say, on the balcony?

That's what Raoul wanted to know. He also wanted to know if these
Those eyes belonged to a human being... he wanted to know everything...

Then, patiently, coldly, _without disturbing_ the night that surrounded him,
The young man picked up his revolver and aimed.

He aimed at the two golden stars that were still looking at him with such a...
singular, motionless brilliance.

He aimed slightly above the two stars. Indeed! If those stars
were eyes, and if above those eyes there was a forehead, and
If Raoul weren't so clumsy...

The explosion rolled with a terrible crash into the peace of the house
asleep... And while, in the corridors, footsteps...
Raoul rushed forward, sitting on his back, arm outstretched, ready to fire
still, he was looking...

Both stars had disappeared this time.

Light, people, Count Philippe, terribly anxious.

--What is it, Raoul?

"There is something I believe I dreamt," replied the young man.
I shot at two stars that were keeping me awake.

"Are you rambling?... You're unwell!... Please, Raoul, what's wrong?"
past?... and the count seized the revolver.

No, no, I'm not rambling!... besides, we'll soon find out...

He got up, put on a dressing gown, slipped on his slippers, and took
From the hands of a servant, a light, and opening the French window,
returned to the balcony.

The count had noticed that the window had been pierced by a
ball at eye level. Raoul was leaning over the balcony with his
candle.

"Oh! Oh!" he said... "Blood!... Blood!... Here... there... more blood!"
Blood! So much the better!... A bleeding ghost... that's less dangerous!
he sneered.

Raoul! Raoul! Raoul!

The count shook him as if he wanted to rouse a sleepwalker from
his dangerous sleep.

"But, brother, I'm not sleeping!" protested Raoul impatiently. You
You can see this blood like everyone else. I thought I was dreaming and shooting at
Two stars. Those were Erik's eyes... and this is his blood!

He added, suddenly worried:

--After all, perhaps I was wrong to shoot, and Christine is fine
capable of not forgiving me!... All this would not be
arrived if I had been careful enough to let the curtains fall
the window as I went to bed.

--Raoul! Have you suddenly gone mad?! Wake up!

"Again! You'd better help me look for Erik, brother..."
Because, after all, a bleeding ghost should be able to be found...

The count's valet said:

--It's true, sir, there is blood on the balcony.

A servant brought a lamp by the light of which one could examine
everything. The trail of blood followed the balcony railing and went
joined a gutter and the trail of blood ran up the
gutter.

"My friend," said Count Philippe, "you shot a cat."

"Oh no!" said Raoul with another sneer, which rang
Painfully to the count's ears, it is quite possible. With
Erik, you never know! Is it Erik? Is it the cat? Is it the
Ghost? Is it flesh or shadow? No! No! With Erik, one doesn't
You never know!

Raoul began to make these kinds of bizarre remarks which
responded so intimately and logically to the concerns of his
spirit and which followed so well the strange confidences, to the
real times and of supernatural appearances, by Christine Daaé; and these
These remarks contributed significantly to persuading many that the
The young man's mind was disturbed. The count himself was caught in it.
and later the investigating judge, on the report of the commissioner of
The police had no difficulty in concluding.

"Who is Erik?" asked the count, squeezing his brother's hand.

--He's my rival! And if he's not dead, so be it!

With a gesture he dismissed the servants.

The bedroom door closed behind the two Chagnys. But people didn't
they did not move away so quickly as the count's valet
did not hear Raoul pronounce distinctly and forcefully:

--Tonight! I will kidnap Christine Daaé.

This phrase was subsequently repeated to investigating judge Faure.
But we never knew exactly what was said between the two brothers.
during this interview.

The servants recounted that it was not that night
the first quarrel that caused them to lock themselves in.

Through the walls, cries could be heard, and he was still
question from an actress named Christine Daaé.

At lunch—at the morning breakfast, which the count took in his
In his study, Philippe gave the order that they go and pray to his
Raoul's brother came to join him. Raoul arrived, somber and silent. The scene
It was very short.

_The Count_: --Read this!

Philippe hands his brother a newspaper: "L'Époque". With his finger, he points it out to him.
designates the next echo.

_The viscount, half-heartedly reading_:

"Big news in the suburb: there is a promise of marriage between Miss
Christine Daaé, opera singer, and Viscount Raoul de Chagny. If
If the gossip behind the scenes is to be believed, Count Philippe is said to have sworn
that for the first time the Chagnys would not hold their
promise. Like love, at the Opera more than anywhere else, is
Given his all-powerful status, one wonders what resources the Count might have at his disposal.
Philippe to prevent the viscount, his brother, from leading to the altar
The _New Marguerite._ It is said that the two brothers adore each other, but the
The count is strangely mistaken if he hopes that brotherly love will yield to him
"To love, pure and simple!"

_The Count_ (sadly).--You see, Raoul, you're making us look ridiculous!... This
Little girl has completely turned your head with her stories of
returning.

(The viscount had therefore reported Christine's story to his brother.)

_The Viscount._--Farewell, my brother!

_The Count._--Is that clear? You're leaving tonight? (The Viscount doesn't reply)
Not... with her?... You wouldn't do something so stupid, would you? (Silence)
(from the viscount.) I'll know how to stop you!

_The Viscount._--Farewell, my brother!

(He's leaving.)

This scene was recounted to the examining magistrate by the count.
he himself, who was not to see his brother Raoul again until that very evening,
at the Opera, a few minutes before Christine's disappearance.

Indeed, Raoul devoted the entire day to preparations.
of removal.

The horses, the carriage, the coachman, the provisions, the luggage,
the necessary money, the route—we shouldn't have taken the path
iron to confound the ghost—all this occupied him until nine
evening hours.

At nine o'clock, a sort of sedan with its curtains drawn
through the tightly closed doors, he came to join the queue on the side
of the Rotunda. It was harnessed to two sturdy horses and
driven by a coachman whose face was difficult to distinguish,
she was so bundled up in the long folds of a scarf.
In front of the sedan were three cars. The instruction
It was later established that these were the Carlotta coupes, returned
suddenly in Paris, de la Sorelli, and at the head, Count Philippe de
Chagny. No one got out of the carriage. The coachman remained in his seat.
The other three coachmen had also remained on theirs.

A shadow, wrapped in a large black cloak, and wearing a hat
made of soft black felt, he walked along the sidewalk between the Rotunda and the
crews. She seemed to be looking more closely at the sedan.
She approached the horses, then the coachman, then the shadow moved away.
without having uttered a word. The investigation later suggested that this
The shadow was that of Viscount Raoul de Chagny; as for me, I do not
I don't believe it, given that that evening, like other evenings, the Viscount of
Chagny had a top hat, which, incidentally, was found. I
I think rather that this shadow was that of the ghost who was at
current of everything as we will see in a moment.

We were performing _Faust_, as if by chance. The hall was packed.
brilliant. The suburb was magnificently represented. At this
At that time, subscribers did not give in, did not rent, nor did they
they did not sublet, nor did they share their lodges with finance or the
trade or abroad. Today, in the Marquis's lodge, such a man who
always retains this title: lodge of the Marquis such and such, since the Marquis
He is, by contract, the holder, in this lodge, let us say,
such a salt pork merchant and his family lounge about—which is the right
of the pig merchant, since he pays for the marquis's lodge.--Formerly, these
Customs were virtually unknown. Opera boxes were...
salons where one was almost certain to meet or see
worldly people who, sometimes, loved music.

This whole fine group knew each other, without that being
necessarily frequent. But we put all the names on the
The face and physiognomy of the Count of Chagny were not unknown to
person.

The echo that appeared that morning in _L'Époque_ must have already produced its
small effect, because all eyes were turned towards the box where the
Count Philippe, who appeared quite indifferent and had a carefree demeanor,
was all alone. The feminine element of this dazzling
The assembly seemed singularly intrigued by the absence of the viscount
gave rise to a hundred whispers behind the fans. Christine
Daaé received a rather cold reception. This particular audience did not...
did not forgive having looked so high.

The diva realized the poor disposition of some of the
room, and was disturbed by it.

The regulars, who claimed to be aware of the viscount's love affairs, did not
they didn't hesitate to smile at certain passages of the role of
Marguerite. And so they ostentatiously turned towards the
Philippe de Chagny's dressing room when Christine sang the line: "I
I would really like to know who this young man was, if he was a tall man
"Lord, and what is his name?"

With his chin resting on his hand, the count seemed not to notice.
to these demonstrations. He stared at the scene; but was he really looking at it? He
seemed far from everything...

More and more, Christine was losing all her confidence. She was trembling. She
was heading for disaster... Carolus Fonta wondered if she wasn't
not suffering, if she could hold on until the end of
the act that was that of the garden. In the room, people remembered the
misfortune befell Carlotta at the end of this act, and this blunder...
historical figure who had temporarily suspended his career in Paris.

At that very moment, Carlotta made her entrance into a box opposite,
sensational entrance. Poor Christine looked up at this
A new cause for concern. She recognized her rival. She thought she saw her
She snickered. This saved her. She forgot everything, for once again.
triumph.

From that moment on, she sang with all her soul. She tried to
to surpass everything she had done up to that point, and she succeeded.
final act, when she began to invoke the angels and to
lifting her off the ground, she launched the entire...
The room buzzed with excitement, and everyone could believe they had wings.

In response to this superhuman call, a man in the center of the amphitheater had
he got up and remained standing, facing the actress, as if of the same
With that movement, he left the earth... It was Raoul:

Pure angels! Radiant angels! Pure angels! Radiant angels!

And Christine, arms outstretched, throat ablaze, enveloped in the
The glory of her hair, loose over her bare shoulders, cast the
divine outcry:

Carry my soul within both!

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

It was then that, all of a sudden, a sudden darkness fell upon the
theater. It was so quick that the spectators barely had the
There was no time to cry out in astonishment, for the light illuminated the scene.
Again.

But Christine Daaé was no longer there! What had become of her?
What was this miracle?... Everyone looked at each other without understanding and
The emotion was immediately at its peak. The turmoil was no less intense.
on the stage and in the auditorium. From backstage people rushed towards
the place where, at that very moment, Christine was singing. The show
was interrupted amidst the greatest disorder.

Where? Where had Christine gone? What spell had she cast?
delighted by thousands of enthusiastic spectators and in the arms
even those of Carolus Fonta? In truth, one could wonder if,
granting his impassioned prayer, the angels had not
truly carried away "into the heavens" body and soul?...

Raoul, still standing in the amphitheater, had let out a cry.
Count Philippe had risen in his box. The scene was being watched, one
He looked at the count, we looked at Raoul, and we wondered if this
This curious event had nothing to do with the echo that appeared in the morning.
even in a newspaper. But Raoul hastily left his seat, the count
disappeared from his box, and, while the curtain was being lowered, the
Subscribers rushed towards the backstage entrance. The audience
was waiting for an announcement amidst an indescribable hubbub. Everyone
each spoke at the same time. Each claimed to explain how things
things had happened. Some were saying, "She fell into a
trapdoor"; the others: "It was removed from the friezes; the
The unfortunate woman may be the victim of a new trick introduced by the
new direction"; others still: "It's an ambush. The
The coincidence of disappearance and darkness proves it.
enough."

Finally the curtain rose slowly, and Carolus Fonta advancing to the
The conductor's stand announced in a deep, sad voice:

"Ladies and gentlemen, an unprecedented event that leaves us in
A serious concern has just arisen. Our colleague, Christine
Daaé disappeared before our very eyes without us knowing how!




XV


THE UNUSUAL ATTITUDE OF A SAFETY PIN


On set, it's absolute chaos. Artists, stagehands,
dancers, walkers, extras, choir members, subscribers, everyone
He asks, shouts, jostles. --“What happened to her?” --“She has
"He had her taken away!" -- "It was the Viscount of Chagny who took her!" -- "No,
"It's the Count!" -- "Ah! There's Carlotta! It was Carlotta who did the
"Clap!" --No! It's the ghost!"

And some laugh, especially since the careful examination of the trapdoors
and the floors made the idea of ​​an accident seem less likely.

In this noisy crowd, a group of three figures can be seen
who speak to each other in hushed voices, making desperate gestures. It's
Gabriel, the choirmaster; Mercier, the administrator, and the
Secretary Rémy. They withdrew to the corner of a drum which
connects the stage with the wide corridor of the dance foyer.
There, behind enormous props, they are negotiating:

--I knocked! They didn't answer! They might not be in anymore
the office. In any case, it's impossible to know, because they have
took the keys.

This is how Secretary Rémy expressed himself, and there is no doubt that he did not
He refers to the directors with these words. They gave the order
During the final intermission, they were asked not to disturb them under any circumstances.
"They're not there for anyone."

"Still," exclaimed Gabriel, "you don't just remove a singer, in
Full stage, every day!...

"Did you shout that at them?" Mercier asked.

"I'm going back," said Rémy, and, running, he disappeared.

At that point, the stage manager arrives.

Well, Mr. Mercier, are you coming? What are you doing here all the time?
Two? We need you, Mr. Administrator.

--I don't want to do or know anything before the commissioner arrives.
Mercier declares! I sent for Mifroid. We'll see when he
will be there!

--And I tell you that we must go down to the organ loft right away.

--Not before the commissioner arrives...

--I've already gone down to the organ loft.

--Ah! And what did you see?

--Well! I didn't see anyone! Do you hear me, nobody!

--What do you want me to do about it?

"Obviously," replies the stage manager, frantically going through the...
hands in unruly fleece. Obviously! But perhaps if there
had someone at the organ; that someone could explain to us
how darkness suddenly fell on the stage. Now,
Mauclair is nowhere to be seen, do you understand?

Mauclair was the lighting director who dispensed light at will on the
Opera stage, day and night.

"Mauclair is nowhere to be seen," Mercier repeated, shaken. "Well! And his..."
aid?

Neither Mauclair nor his assistants! No one on lighting duty, I tell you! You
"Just think," the stage manager yelled, "that this little girl didn't run away!"
All alone! There was a setup there that you need to know about... And
The directors who aren't here?... I argued against going down to
For the lighting, I put a fireman in front of the organ loft! I have
Not done properly?

--Yes, yes, you did the right thing... And now let's wait for the commissioner.

The stage manager shrugged off, furious, chewing his hands.
insults directed at these "cowards" who remain
quietly huddled in a corner when the whole theater is "meaningful"
"Upside down."

Gabriel and Mercier were anything but tranquil. They
They had received instructions that paralyzed them. They were not to be disturbed.
the directors for no reason in the world. Remy had broken this.
instructions, and it had not worked for him.

And here he is, returning from his latest expedition. His face is
strangely terrified.

"Well! Did you speak to them?" Mercier asked.

Rémy replies:

--Moncharmin finally opened the door for me. His eyes were bulging out of the
head. I thought he was going to hit me. I couldn't get a word in edgewise.
And do you know what he shouted at me? "Do you have a pin?"
"A wet nurse?"—No!—"Well then! Leave me alone!..." I want her
to reply that an extraordinary event is taking place at the theatre... He
exclaims: "A safety pin? Give me a pin right now!"
"From the wet nurse!" An office boy who had heard him shouted like
A deaf man runs up with a safety pin, gives it to him and
Moncharmin immediately slammed the door in my face! And that was that!

--And you couldn't tell her: Christine Daaé...

"Hey! I wish I could have seen you there!... He was foaming at the mouth... He was only thinking about..."
her safety pin... I think that, if we hadn't given it to her
If it had been brought to him immediately, he would have collapsed from a stroke! Certainly.
All of this is unnatural, and our managers are becoming
crazy!...

Secretary Rémy is not happy. He makes it known.

--This can't go on like this! I'm not used to being
treated like this!

Suddenly Gabriel breathes:

--It's another one of _F.'s tricks from the O._

Rémy snickers. Mercier sighs, seems ready to let slip a secret...
But having looked at Gabriel, who gestured for him to be quiet, he remained
mute.

However, Mercier, who feels his responsibility growing with each passing day,
As the minutes tick by and the directors fail to appear
No, I can't stand it anymore:

"Hey! I'll go and revive them myself," he decided.

Gabriel, suddenly very somber and very serious, stops him.

--Think about what you're doing, Mercier!--If they stay in their
office, that's because, perhaps, it's necessary! F. de l'O has more than one
trick up his sleeve!

But Mercier shakes his head.

"Too bad! I'm going! If they'd listened to me, we'd be much better off now."
that we would have told everything to the police!

And he leaves.

"All what?" Remy asked immediately. "What would we have said to the
Police? Ah! You're quiet, Gabriel!... You too are in the
Confidence! Well! You wouldn't do any harm in putting me in there if you want
I'm not going to shout that you're all going mad!... Yes, mad, in
truth!

Gabriel rolls his eyes stupidly and pretends not to understand anything.
this inappropriate "outburst" by the private secretary.

"What confidence?" he murmured. "I don't know what you mean."

Rémy is exasperated.

--This evening Richard and Moncharmin, right here, during the intermissions, had
gestures of a madman.

"I didn't notice," grumbled Gabriel, very annoyed.

--You're the only one!... Do you think I don't have them?
seen?... And that Mr. Parabise, the director of Crédit Central, did not
glimpse of nothing?... And that Mr. Ambassador de la Borderie has eyes
in his pocket?... But, Mr. Singing Master, all the subscribers
Our directors were pointing fingers at each other!

"So what did our directors do?" Gabriel asked from his
the most idiotic air.

--What did they do? But you know better than anyone what they
They did it!... You were there!... And you were watching them, you and
Mercier!... And you were the only ones not laughing...

--I don't understand!

Very cold, very "withdrawn," Gabriel stretches out his arms and lets them
to fall back, a gesture which obviously signifies that he is losing interest in the
Question... Rémy continues.

"What's with this new fad?... They don't want to anymore"
Should we approach them now?

--What? They don't want us to approach them anymore?_

They don't want us to touch them anymore?

--Really, you've noticed that they don't want us to...
Touch? That's certainly strange!

--You agree! It's about time! _And they walk at
Let's go back!

--Backwards! Have you noticed that our directors _walk at
Let's go backwards! I thought only crayfish walked.
backwards.

Don't laugh, Gabriel! Don't laugh!

"I'm not laughing," protests Gabriel, who appears serious "like a
pope".

--Could you please explain this to me, Gabriel, you who are my friend
intimate with the management, why at the intermission of the "garden", in front of the
at home, as I stepped forward with my hand outstretched towards Mr. Richard, I
I heard Mr. Moncharmin tell me hurriedly in a low voice:
"Stand back! Stand back! Above all, don't touch Mr.
Director?... Am I a pariah?

--Amazing!

--And a few moments later, when Mr. Ambassador de La Borderie
then went over to Mr. Richard, didn't you see Mr.
Moncharmin threw himself between them, and didn't you hear him cry out:
"Mr. Ambassador, I implore you, do not touch Mr.
director!"

--Amazing!... And what was Richard doing during all that?

--What was he doing? You saw it yourself! He was turning around, _greeting
in front of him, even though there was no one there! And he withdrew
"Backwards".

--Backwards?

--And Moncharmin, behind Richard, had also turned back,
that is to say, he had accomplished a rapid feat behind Richard
semicircle, and he too was retreating "backwards"!... And they left
went like that all the way to the administration staircase, to
Let's go backwards!... backwards!... Finally! If they're not crazy,
Can you explain to me what that means?

"Perhaps they were rehearsing," Gabriel suggests, without conviction, "a
ballet figure!

Secretary Rémy feels outraged by such a vulgar
a joke in such a dramatic moment. Her eyes narrowed, her
His lips tighten. He leans close to Gabriel's ear.

Don't be a smart aleck, Gabriel. Things are happening here that
Mercier, and you could take your share of responsibility.

"What is it?" Gabriel asked.

--Christine Daaé is not the only one who has suddenly disappeared, this
evening.

--Ah! Well!

--There is no "ah! bah!" Could you tell me why, when
Mother Giry came down to the home a little while ago; Mercier picked her up.
by the hand and took her away quickly with him?

"Hey!" said Gabriel, "I didn't notice."

--You noticed it so well, Gabriel, that you followed Mercier and
Mother Giry, all the way to Mercier's office. From that moment on, you have
We saw you and Mercier, but we haven't seen Mother Giry since...

--Do you think we ate it?

--No! But you locked her in the office, and,
When you pass by the office door, do you know what you hear?
We hear these words: "Ah! the bandits! Ah! the bandits!"

At this point in this unusual conversation, Mercier arrives, all
out of breath.

"There!" he said in a dull voice... "It's stronger than anything!... I
I shouted to them, "This is very serious! Open up! It's me, Mercier." I
He heard footsteps. The door opened and Moncharmin appeared.
He was very pale. He asked me, "What do you want?" I told him
I replied: "We've kidnapped Christine Daaé." Do you know what he told me?
He replied, "Good for her!" And he closed the door behind me.
placing this in the hand.

Mercier opens his hand; Rémy and Gabriel look on. The pin of
"Nanny!" cried Remy.

"Strange! Strange!" Gabriel muttered, unable to contain himself.
to shiver.

Suddenly a voice made all three of them turn around.

--Excuse me gentlemen, could you tell me where Christine Daaé is?

Despite the gravity of the circumstances, such a question would have undoubtedly...
doubt would have made them burst out laughing if they hadn't spotted such a figure
It was so painful that they immediately felt sorry for him. It was the viscount.
Raoul de Chagny.




XVI


"Christine! Christine!"


Raoul's first thought, after the fantastic disappearance of
Christine Daaé had been there to accuse Erik. He no longer doubted the
the almost supernatural power of the Angel of Music, in this domain of
the Opera, where he had diabolically established his empire.

And Raoul had rushed onto the stage, in a frenzy of despair and
of love. "Christine! Christine!" he moaned, distraught, calling her
as she must have called him from the bottom of that dark abyss where the monster
had carried her off like prey, still trembling from her
divine exaltation, all clothed in the white shroud in which she
was already offering itself to the angels of paradise!

"Christine! Christine!" Raoul kept repeating... and it seemed to him
to hear the girl's cries through those fragile planks which
separated him from her! He leaned over, he listened!... he wandered on the
plateau like a madman. Ah! descend! descend! descend! into this
a well of darkness from which all exits are closed!

Ah! that fragile obstacle which usually slides so easily on
himself, to reveal the abyss toward which all his desire tends...
these planks that his step makes creak and that ring under his weight
The prodigious emptiness of the "underside"... these boards are more than just motionless.
Tonight: they seem unchanging... They put on an air of solidity
of never having stirred... and now the stairs that allow
Going down under the stage is forbidden to everyone!

"Christine! Christine!..." They push him away laughing... They make fun of
Him... People think he's got a screw loose, the poor fiancé!

In what frantic race, through the corridors of night and mystery
Known only to him, did Erik train the pure child until this
the dreadful den of the Louis-Philippe room, whose door opens onto
This lake of Hell?... "Christine! Christine!" You're not answering! Are you
Still alive, Christine! Haven't you breathed your last?
breath in a minute of superhuman horror, under the blazing breath
of the monster!

Horrible thoughts flashed through my brain like lightning bolts.
Raoul's congested.

Obviously, Erik must have discovered their secret, knowing that he was
Betrayed by Christine! What revenge will she exact!

What wouldn't the Angel of Music dare, hurled from the heights of his pride?
Christine is lost in the all-powerful arms of the monster!

And Raoul is still thinking about the golden stars that came during the night
Last one wandering on his balcony, why didn't he strike them down with his
A useless weapon!

Indeed! There are extraordinary human eyes that dilate in the
darkness and shine like stars or like the eyes of cats.
(Some albino men, who appear to have rabbit eyes during the day)
(They have cat eyes at night, everyone knows that!)

Yes, yes, it was indeed Erik that Raoul had shot! What a surprise!
Had he killed him? The monster had escaped through the gutter like the
cats or convicts, who everyone still knows this—would climb the
Sheer sky, supported by a gutter.

No doubt Erik was then contemplating some decisive undertaking against the
young man, but he had been wounded, and he had run away to
turn against poor Christine.

This is what poor Raoul cruelly thinks as he runs to the lodge of the
singer...

"Christine!... Christine!..." Bitter tears burn the
the young man's eyelids as he glimpses scattered on the furniture,
clothes intended to dress his beautiful fiancée at the time of their
Escape!... Ah! Why didn't she want to leave sooner! Why so much
Delayed?... Why play with the looming disaster?... with
the heart of the monster?... Why, have the supreme pity! throw it into
final sustenance for this demonic soul, this celestial song:...

Pure angels! Radiant angels! Carry my soul into the embrace of both!...

Raoul, whose throat was filled with sobs, oaths, and insults,
he felt with his clumsy palms the large mirror that had opened one evening
He walked ahead of him to let Christine descend to the gloomy dwelling.
He presses, he squeezes, he fumbles... but the ice, it seems, does not obey.
As for Erik... Perhaps gestures are unnecessary with an ice cream
The same?... Perhaps it would be enough to pronounce certain words?...
When he was very young, he was told that there were
objects that thus obeyed the word!

Suddenly, Raoul remembers... "a gate opening onto the street
Scribe... An underground passage leading directly from the lake to Scribe Street...»
Yes, Christine did talk to him about that!... And after observing,
Alas! The heavy key is no longer in the box; there is no running
less so on Scribe Street.

There he is outside, running his trembling hands over the stones
Cyclopean, he searches for ways out... he encounters bars...
Are these the ones?... or those ones?... or is it not this
A skylight?... He peers helplessly through the bars...
What a profound night in there!... He listens!... What silence!... He
It circles the monument!... Ah! Look, those are vast bars! Grilles!
Amazing!... This is the gate to the administration courtyard!

Raoul runs to the concierge: "Excuse me, madam, could you not
Don't point me to a barred door, yes, a door made of bars, of
iron bars... which open onto Scribe Street... and which lead to
Lake! You know, the Lake? Yes, the Lake, that's it! The lake that's under the
earth... beneath the earth of the Opera.

"Sir, I know there's a lake under the Opera House, but I don't know..."
Which door leads there... I've never been there!

"And Scribe Street, madam? Scribe Street? Have you ever been there?"
in Scribe Street?

She laughs! She bursts out laughing! Raoul runs away roaring, he leaps,
climbs stairs, descends others, crosses all
The administration finds itself in the spotlight of the "plateau".

He stops, his heart pounding in his panting chest: if
Had Christine Daaé been found? Here is a group: they are asking:

--Excuse me, gentlemen, haven't you seen Christine Daaé?

And we laugh.

At the same minute, the set rumbles with a new rumor, and, in
a crowd of black-clad men who surround him with forceful arm movements
explanatory notes, a man appears who seems very calm and shows
a kind, rosy-cheeked, chubby face, framed by hair
curly hair, illuminated by two blue eyes of marvelous serenity.
Administrator Mercier designates the new arrival to the Viscount of
Chagny, saying to him:

--This is the man, sir, to whom you will now have to ask your
Question. I present to you Police Commissioner Mifroid.

--Ah! Viscount de Chagny! Delighted to see you, sir,
said the commissioner. If you'd be so kind as to follow me... And
Now where are the directors?... where are the directors?...

Since the administrator remained silent, the secretary Rémy took it upon himself to...
to inform the Commissioner that the directors are locked up
in their office and that they still know nothing about the event.

--Is it possible!... Let's go to their office!

And Mr. Mifroid, followed by an ever-growing procession, heads towards
the administration. Mercier takes advantage of the commotion to slip a key into
Gabriel's hand:

"This is all going wrong," he whispered to her... "Go and give some air to..."
Mother Giry...

And Gabriel walks away.

Soon we arrived at the director's office door. It was in vain that
Mercier makes his pleas, but the door does not open.

"Open in the name of the law!" commanded the clear, slightly worried voice.
by Mr. Mifroid.

Finally the door opens. We rush into the offices, following the steps
of the commissioner.

Raoul is the last to enter. As he prepares to follow the group
In the apartment, a hand rests on his shoulder and he hears these
words whispered in his ear:

Erik's secrets are nobody's business!

He turned around, stifling a cry. The hand that had been on his
shoulder is now on the lips of a character with a complexion
ebony-skinned, with jade eyes and wearing an astrakhan cap... The
Persian!

The stranger prolongs the gesture, which recommends discretion, and in the
At that moment, the viscount, astonished, was about to ask him the reason for his
A mysterious intervention occurs; he salutes and disappears.




XVII


SURPRISING REVELATIONS FROM MS. GIRY REGARDING HER RELATIONSHIPS
PERSONAL ENCOUNTERS WITH THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA


Before following Police Commissioner Mifroid to the homes of Messrs.
directors, the reader will allow me to discuss certain
extraordinary events had just taken place in this office
where the secretary Rémy and the administrator Mercier had in vain
attempted to enter, and where Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin had so
hermetically sealed within a design that the reader is still unaware of,
but that it is my historical duty—I mean my duty
as a historian, --not to conceal it from him any longer.

I had the opportunity to say how much the mood of the Directors
things had changed unpleasantly recently, and I did
to understand that this transformation should not have had as its sole
causes the chandelier to fall under the conditions we know.

Let us therefore inform the reader—despite all the desire that Messrs.
directors that such an event should remain forever hidden—that the
Fantôme had quietly reached his first twenty
One thousand francs. Ah! There had been tears and gnashing of teeth!
However, the thing was done in the simplest way possible:

One morning, the directors found an envelope that was completely...
prepared on their desk. This envelope bore the following address:
_To Mr. F. of the O._ (personal) and was accompanied by a small
A word from F. de l'O. himself: "The time has come to execute the clauses of the
The specifications have arrived: you will slip in twenty thousand-pound bills
francs in this envelope which you will seal with your own stamp
and you will give it to Mrs. Giry who will take care of it.”

The Directors didn't need to be told twice; without losing any
time to still wonder how these diabolical missions could
to reach a room which they took great care to lock,
they saw it as a good opportunity to get their hands on the mysterious
blackmailer. And after having told everything under the seal of the most
A great secret to Gabriel and Mercier: they put the twenty thousand francs in their pockets.
in the envelope and entrusted it without asking for explanations to
Ms. Giry was reinstated to her position. The usher made no saves.
Astonishment. I don't need to say whether she was watched! From
Staying, she immediately went to the ghost's lodge and placed
the precious envelope on the armrest shelf. The two
directors, as well as Gabriel and Mercier, were hidden in such a way
that this envelope should not be lost from their sight for a second
throughout the entire performance and even afterwards, because, as
The envelope hadn't moved, those guarding it hadn't moved.
no more, and the theater emptied, and Madame Giry left, however
that the Directors, Gabriel and Mercier, were still there. Finally
They grew tired of it, and the envelope was opened after it was noted that
the seals had not been broken.

At first glance, Richard and Moncharmin judged that the tickets
were still there, but on second sight they realized that this
were no longer the same. The twenty real tickets were gone and
had been replaced by twenty tickets to the "Holy Farce"! This
It was rage and then also terror!

"It's even better than Robert Houdin's!" exclaimed Gabriel.

"Yes," replied Richard, "and it costs more!"

Moncharmin wanted them to run and fetch the commissioner; Richard went there
opposed. He undoubtedly had his plan, he said: "Let's not be ridiculous!"
All of Paris would laugh. F. de l'O. won the first round, we
"We'll win the second one." He was obviously thinking about the monthly payment.
next.

Nevertheless, they had been so perfectly acted that they did not
were able, during the weeks that followed, to overcome a certain
Overwhelmed. And it was, indeed, quite understandable. If the
The commissioner was not called in then, because it shouldn't have been.
forgetting that the directors kept everything deep inside themselves, the
the thought that such a bizarre adventure could only be a hateful
a joke concocted, no doubt, by their predecessors and of which he
It was agreed not to divulge anything before knowing "the final word".
This thought, on the other hand, was troubled at times in Moncharmin's mind.
of a suspicion that came to him concerning Richard himself, which
He sometimes had farcical imaginations. And so it was that,
Prepared for all eventualities, they awaited events in
watching over and having Mother Giry watched, to whom Richard
He wanted no one to talk about anything. "If she's an accomplice," he said, "then there's..."
It's all well and good that the tickets are far away. But, for me, it's just a
imbecile!"

"There are a lot of idiots involved in this!" he replied.
Moncharmin, lost in thought.

"Could we have suspected it?" Richard moaned, "but don't worry."
Fear... next time I'll take all the necessary precautions...

And so the next time had come... it fell on
the very day that was to see the disappearance of Christine Daaé.

In the morning, a letter from the Phantom reminded them of the deadline,
"Do it like last time," F. de l'O. kindly instructed. "That
It went very well. Hand in the envelope, in which you will have
"I slipped the twenty thousand francs to that excellent Mrs. Giry."

And the note was accompanied by the usual envelope. There was no
All that's left is to fill it in.

This operation was to be completed that same evening, within half an hour
before the show. So it's about half an hour before the
The curtain rises on this infamous performance of _Faust_ that
We enter the director's office.

Richard shows the envelope to Moncharmin, then he counts the
twenty thousand francs and slips them into the envelope, but without sealing it
this one.

"And now," he said, "call me Mother Giry."

We went to get the old woman. She came in, making a beautiful
curtsy. The lady was still wearing her black taffeta dress, the
The color was turning rust and lilac, and her hat had feathers
soot-colored. She seemed to be in a good mood. She said immediately:

Good evening, gentlemen! Is this about the envelope again?

"Yes, Mrs. Giry," said Richard very kindly... "It's for
The envelope... And for something else too.

--At your service, Mr. Director: At your service!... And
What is this other thing, please?

--First, Mrs. Giry, I have a small question to ask you.

--Go ahead, Mr. Director, Mame Giry is here to answer you.

Are you still on good terms with the ghost?

--It couldn't be better, Mr. Director, it couldn't be better.

--Ah! You see, we are delighted... Tell me, Madame Giry,
Richard said this, adopting the tone of an important confidence... Between
We can tell you this for sure... You are not an animal.

"But, sir!" exclaimed the usherette, stopping the
gentle swaying of the two black feathers on his hat, the color of
soot, please believe me, that there was never any doubt about it.
person!

--We agree and we will come to an agreement. The story of the
Ghost is a good joke, isn't it?... Well! Always between
For us... it's gone on long enough.

Ms. Giry looked at the directors as if they were speaking Chinese to her.
She approached Richard's desk and said, rather worriedly:

--What do you mean?... I don't understand you!

Ah! You understand us very well. In any case, we must
To understand... And, first of all, you're going to tell us what his name is.

--Who then?

--The one you're complicit in, Mame Giry!

--I'm the ghost's accomplice? Me?... An accomplice to what?

--You do whatever he wants.

--Oh!... it's not very bulky, you know.

--And he always gives you tips!

--I'm not complaining!

How much is he paying you to deliver this envelope to him?

--Ten francs.

Wow! That's not expensive?

--Why is that?

--I'll tell you that later, Mame Giry. Right now, we
We would like to know the extraordinary reason why you...
giving body and soul to that particular ghost rather than another... That
It's not for a hundred sous or ten francs that one can have friendship and
Mame Giry's dedication.

--That's true!... And indeed, I can tell you the reason for that,
Mr. Director! Certainly there is no dishonor in
That!... on the contrary.

--We have no doubt about it, Mame Giry!

Well, there you have it... the ghost doesn't like me telling his
stories.

"Ah! ah!" sneered Richard!

"But that one only concerns me!" the old woman continued.
So, it was in lodge number 5... one evening, I found a letter there for
Me... a kind of note written in red ink... That note,
Mr. Director, I wouldn't need to read it to you... I know it.
by heart... and I'll never forget it... even if I lived a hundred years
years!...

And Mrs. Giry, standing perfectly straight, recited the letter with eloquence.
touching:

“Madame.--1825, Miss Ménétrier, coryphée, became marquise of
Cussy.--1832, Miss Marie Taglioni, dancer, is made Countess Gilbert
Neighbors.--1846, Sota, a dancer, marries a brother of the king
of Spain.--1847, Lola Montés, dancer-, morganatically married the
King Ludwig of Bavaria and was created Countess of Landsfeld.--1848, Miss
Maria, a dancer, becomes Baroness of Hermeville.--1870, Thérèse Hessler,
dancer, wife of Don Fernando, brother of the King of Portugal...»

Richard and Moncharmin listen to the old woman, who, as she goes along
that she advances in the curious enumeration of these glorious
Hymens, comes alive, straightens up, gains boldness, and finally,
inspired like a sibyl on her tripod, she calls out in a voice
The last sentence of the prophetic letter is bursting with pride:

--_1885. Meg Giry, Empress!_

Exhausted by this supreme effort, the usherette falls back onto her chair.
saying: "Gentlemen, this was signed: '_The Phantom of the Opera!_'
I had already heard about the ghost, but I only believed in it when
half. From the day he told me that my little Meg, the flesh of my
Flesh, the fruit of my womb, would be empress, I believed it all
did."

In truth, in truth, there was no need to consider
We spent a long time studying Mam' Giry's exalted expression to understand what we
had been able to obtain from this fine intelligence with these two words:
"Ghost and Empress."

But who was pulling the strings of this extravagant model?... Who?

--You've never seen him, he talks to you, and you believe everything he says
"Tell you?" asked Moncharmin.

--Yes; first of all, it's thanks to him that my little Meg passed on
coryphaeus. I had said to the ghost: So that she may be empress in
1885, you have no time to lose, she must be a coryphaeus
Right away. He replied: Agreed. And he only had one word to say.
Telling Mr. Poligny was done...

--You can see that Mr. Poligny saw it!

--No more than me, but he heard it! The ghost said a word to him
His ear, you know! The evening he came out of the dressing room so pale.
No. 5.

Moncharmin sighs.

"What a story!" he groaned.

"Ah!" replied Mame Giry, "I always believed there were secrets."
between the Phantom and Mr. Poligny. Everything the Phantom asked of Mr.
Poligny, Mr. Poligny agreed... Mr. Poligny had nothing to refuse him
Ghost.

--You hear, Richard, Poligny had nothing to refuse the Phantom.

"Yes, yes, I hear you!" declared Richard. "Mr. Poligny is a friend of the
Ghost! And, since Mrs. Giry is a friend of Mr. Poligny, here we are.
"Very well," he added in a very gruff tone. "But Mr. Poligny doesn't concern me."
Not me... The only person whose fate truly interests me, I don't
Don't try to hide it, it's Mrs. Giry!... Mrs. Giry, you know what he
What's in this envelope?

"Oh God, no!" she said.

--Well! Look!

Mrs. Giry slips a troubled glance into the envelope, but one that finds
its brilliance was immediate.

"Thousand-franc notes!" she cried.

Yes, Mrs. Giry!... yes, thousand-franc notes!... And you knew it!
GOOD!

--Me, Mr. Director... Me! I swear...

Don't swear, Madame Giry!... And now, I'm going to tell you this
something else that I brought you here for... Mrs. Giry, I'm going to
to have you arrested.

The two black feathers on the sooty-colored hat, which affected
the ordinary form of two question marks, changed
immediately with an exclamation mark; as for the hat itself, it
It swayed, menacingly perched atop its stormy chignon. The surprise,
indignation, protest, and horror were further expressed by
the mother of little Meg, by a sort of extravagant pirouette
"Thrown slide" of offended virtue that brought it in a bound right up to
right under the nose of the director, who couldn't resist stepping back.
armchair.

--Have me arrested!

The mouth that said this seemed about to spit in Mr.'s face.
Richard, the three teeth she still had.

Mr. Richard was heroic. He didn't back down. His index finger was threatening.
already pointed out to the absent magistrates the usherette of box no. 5.

--I'm going to have you arrested, Mrs. Giry, like a thief!

--Repeated!

And Mrs. Giry slapped Mr. Richard, the director, repeatedly before Mr.
Director Moncharmin wouldn't have had time to intervene. Retaliation
vengeful! It was not the withered hand of the angry old woman
which came crashing down on the director's cheek, but the envelope
herself, the cause of the whole scandal, the magic envelope that
it suddenly opened slightly to let the banknotes escape
They flew away in a fantastic swirl of giant butterflies.

The two directors cried out, and a single thought threw them
both on their knees, feverishly gathering and hurriedly poring over things
the precious paperwork.

--Are they still true?_ Moncharmin.

--Are they still true?_ Richard.

They're still true!!!

Above them, Mrs. Giry's three teeth clash in a
a resounding melee, full of hideous interjections. But we didn't
fully understands this "leitmotif":

Me, a thief!... A thief, me?

She's suffocating.

She exclaimed:

--I'm devastated!

And, all of a sudden, it bounced right under Richard's nose.

"In any case," she squealed, "you, Mr. Richard, you must..."
You know better than me where the twenty thousand francs went!

"Me?" asked Richard, astonished. "And how would I know?"

Immediately, Moncharmin, stern and worried, wants the good woman
explains.

"What does this mean?" he asked. "And why, Mrs. Giry?"
Do you claim that Mr. Richard should know better than you where they are?
Once you've passed twenty thousand francs?

As for Richard, who felt himself blushing under Moncharmin's gaze, he has
He grabbed Mame Giry's hand and shook it violently. His voice imitated
Thunder. It roars, it rolls... it strikes like lightning...

Why should I know better than you where the twenty thousand have gone?
Francs? Why?

"Because they went into your pocket!" the old woman whispered.
looking at him now as if she saw the devil.

It is Mr. Richard's turn to be struck down, first by this
an unexpected reply, followed by an increasingly suspicious look
of Moncharmin. As a result, he loses the strength he would need in this
It's a difficult time to refute such a despicable accusation.

Thus the most innocent, caught in the peace of their hearts
do they appear all of a sudden, because of the blow that strikes them
makes pale, or redden, or stagger, or straighten up, or collapse, or
to protest, or to say nothing when one should speak, or to speak when one should
We shouldn't say anything, or remain dry when we should be mopping ourselves up.
or sweat when they should be staying dry, they suddenly appear,
I said, guilty.

Moncharmin stopped the vengeful impulse with which Richard, who was
Innocent was about to rush towards Mrs. Giry, and he hurried,
encouraging, to question her... gently.

How could you have suspected my colleague Richard of putting
Twenty thousand francs in his pocket?

"I never said that!" declared Mame Giry, since it was
myself personally, who put the twenty thousand francs in my pocket
by Mr. Richard.

And she added in a low voice:

--Too bad! That's it!... May the Phantom forgive me!

And as Richard starts yelling again, Moncharmin authoritatively tells him
orders silence:

Excuse me! Excuse me! Excuse me! Let this woman explain herself! Let me
to question him.

And he adds:

--It's really strange that you're taking it in such a tone!... We
Let's get to the moment when all this mystery will be cleared up! You're furious!
You're wrong... I'm having a lot of fun.

Mame Giry, martyr, raises her head where faith in her own shines forth
innocence.

--You're telling me there were twenty thousand francs in the envelope that I
I put it in Mr. Richard's pocket, but, I repeat, I didn't
knew nothing... Neither did Mr. Richard, for that matter!

"Ah! ah!" said Richard, suddenly affecting an air of bravery which
Moncharmin was displeased. I didn't know anything about it either! You were putting twenty
A thousand francs in my pocket and I didn't even know it! I'm very happy about that.
Mrs. Giry.

"Yes," agreed the terrible lady... "That's true!... We didn't know..."
Neither one nor the other!... But you, you must have ended up doing it yourself.
to catch a glimpse of it.

Richard would certainly devour Mrs. Giry if Moncharmin weren't
There! But Moncharmin protects her. He rushes the interrogation.

--What kind of envelope did you put in Mr.
Richard? That wasn't the one we gave you, the one you
you carried, before us, in lodge no. 5, and yet, that one alone,
contained the twenty thousand francs.

--Excuse me! That was indeed the one the director gave me that I
"I slipped it into the director's pocket," explains Mother Giry.
As for the one I placed in the ghost's dressing room, it was a
another envelope exactly the same, which I had already prepared,
in my sleeve, and which was given to me by the ghost!

With that, Mame Giry took out a fully prepared envelope from her sleeve and
identical in its subscription to that which contains the twenty thousand
francs. The directors seize it. They examine it, they
note that stamps bearing their own directorial stamp,
They close it. They open it... It contains twenty Holy Tickets
A joke, like those that had so astonished them a month earlier.

"How simple!" said Richard.

"How simple it is!" Moncharmin repeated, more solemnly than ever.

"The most famous towers," replied Richard, "have always been the
Simpler. All you need is a partner...

"Or a gossip!" adds Moncharmin in his flat voice.

And he continues, his eyes fixed on Mrs. Giry, as if he wanted to
to hypnotize him:

--It was indeed the ghost who sent you this envelope,
and it was indeed he who told you to substitute it for the one we
Were you referring to him? Wasn't he the one who told you to put that on?
last one in Mr. Richard's pocket?

--Oh! It was definitely him!

--So, madam, could you show us a sample of your
Little talents?... Here's the envelope. Pretend we don't know
Nothing.

--At your service, gentlemen!

Mother Giry took back the envelope containing her twenty banknotes and...
She heads towards the door. She's about to leave.

The two directors are already on her.

--Ah! no! Ah! no! We're not falling for that anymore! We've had enough!
We're not going to do that again!

"Excuse me, gentlemen," the old woman apologized, "excuse me... You tell me to
To act as if you knew nothing!... Well, if you knew nothing,
I'll leave with your envelope!

"So how would you slip it into my pocket?" argued Richard.
Moncharmin never takes his eyes off his left eye, while his eye
The right side is heavily occupied by Mrs. Giry, -- a difficult position for the gaze;
But Moncharmin is determined to do anything to discover the truth.

I need to slip it into your pocket when you least expect it.
The least, Mr. Director. You know I always come, in
during the evening, take a little tour backstage, and
I often accompany my daughter to the home, as is my right as a mother.
of the dance; I bring him his slippers, at the time of the entertainment, and
even his little watering can... Anyway, I come and go as I please...
Gentlemen, subscribers are coming too... You too, sir.
Director... There are a lot of people... I'll go behind you, and I'll slide
the envelope in the back pocket of your coat... That's not
wizard!

"It's not rocket science," Richard grumbled, rolling his eyes like Jupiter's.
Amazing, it's not rocket science! But I caught you red-handed!
Lies, you old witch!

The insult hurts the honorable lady less than the blow one intends to strike.
to her good faith. She straightens up, disheveled, her three teeth bared.

--Because?

--Because that evening I spent in the room watching the
box number 5 and the fake envelope you had placed there. I am not
I didn't go down to the dance floor for a second...

--Also, Mr. Director, it wasn't that evening that I...
I handed in the envelope!... But at the next performance... Here,
It was the evening when the Under-Secretary of State for Fine Arts...

At these words, Mr. Richard abruptly stopped Mrs. Giry...

"Ah! That's right," he said thoughtfully, "I remember... I remember."
Now! The Undersecretary of State has come backstage.
He sent for me. I went down to the dance foyer for a moment.
I was on the steps of the foyer... Mr. Undersecretary of State and
His chief of staff was in the foyer itself... Suddenly I
I went back... It was you who were passing behind me... madam
Giry... I thought you brushed past me... There was only you
behind me... Oh! I can still see you... I can still see you!

"Well, yes, that's it, Mr. Director! That's right! I
I had just finished my little business in your pocket! That pocket,
The director is very convenient!

And Ms. Giry once again puts her words into action. She passes
behind Mr. Richard and so swiftly that Moncharmin himself, who
She looks at him with both eyes this time, remaining impressed.
he places the envelope in the pocket of one of the tails of Mr.
the director.

"Obviously!" exclaimed Richard, looking a little pale... "It's very strong in the..."
F. de l'O.'s part. The problem, for him, was thus: to eliminate
any dangerous intermediary between the one who gives the twenty thousand
francs and whoever takes them! He couldn't have found a better place to come
to take them from my pocket without me noticing, since I don't
I didn't even know they were there... Isn't that admirable?

"Oh! Admirable! No doubt," Moncharmin added... "only, you
Forget, Richard, that I gave ten thousand francs out of those twenty thousand
And that they didn't put anything in my pocket!




XVIII


CONTINUED FROM THE CURIOUS ATTITUDE OF A NURSERY PIN


Moncharmin's last sentence expressed in a way that was too obvious
the suspicion in which he now held his collaborator for
that a stormy explanation did not immediately result, at
at the end of which it was understood that Richard would comply with all
Moncharmin's wishes, with the aim of helping him discover the
wretched man who was playing games with them.

Thus we arrive at the "garden intermission" during which Mr.
Secretary Rémy, to whom nothing escapes, so curiously observed
the strange conduct of its directors, and from then on nothing will be
easier than finding a reason for such attitudes
exceptionally baroque and, above all, so little in keeping with the idea that
one must cultivate directorial dignity.

Richard and Moncharmin's course of action was entirely predetermined by the
The revelation that had just been made to them was: 1° Richard had to
to repeat exactly, that evening, the gestures he had performed during
of the disappearance of the first twenty thousand francs; 2° Moncharmin ne
mustn't lose sight of Richard's back pocket for a second
into which Mrs. Giry allegedly slipped the second twenty thousand.

In the exact spot where he had been standing when he greeted Mr.
Mr. Richard, Under-Secretary of State for Fine Arts, came and took his place with him.
A few steps away, behind him, was Mr. Moncharmin.

Mrs. Giry passes by, brushes past Mr. Richard, gets rid of the twenty thousand in
the pocket of his director's basque and disappears...

Or rather, we make it disappear. Carrying out the order that Moncharmin
he had given it a few moments earlier, before the reconstruction of the
On stage, Mercier is going to lock the good lady in the office of
the administration. Thus, it will be impossible for the old woman to communicate
with her ghost. And she let it happen, because Mame Giry is no more
that a poor, plucked figure, terrified with fear, opening its eyes
of bewildered poultry under a disheveled comb, already hearing in
the sound corridor, the sound of the commissioner's footsteps, of which she is
threatened, and sighing enough to split the columns of the great
stairs.

Meanwhile, Mr. Richard bows, curtsies, and salutes.
he walks backwards as if he had before him this high and all-powerful
civil servant, Mr. Under-Secretary of State for Fine Arts.

However, if such marks of politeness had not aroused any
astonishment in the case where Mr. the director had found himself
Undersecretary of State, they spoke to the spectators about this
A scene so natural, yet so inexplicable, a truly astonishing moment.
This is understandable, given that there was no one in front of the director.

Mr. Richard bowed into the void... bowed before nothingness... and
was retreating--walking backwards--in front of nothing...

...Finally, a few steps away, Mr. Moncharmin was doing the same thing
than him.

...And pushing away Mr. Rémy, he begged Mr. Ambassador de Le Borderie and
Mr. Director of the Central Credit Bank not to "touch Mr.
director".

Moncharmin, who had his own idea, was not keen on the idea that, at all
At the appointed time, Richard came to tell him, the twenty thousand francs had disappeared:
"It might be the ambassador or the director of the Credit Union."
central, or even Mr. Secretary Rémy."

Especially since, during the first scene, by the character's own admission...
Richard, Richard had, after being brushed by Mrs. Giry,
I didn't meet anyone in this part of the theater... Why is that, I
I'm asking you, since we were supposed to repeat exactly the same things
gestures, would he meet someone today?

Having initially walked backwards to greet everyone, Richard continued to
walk this way as a precaution... until you reach the corridor of
the administration... So, he was always being watched from behind
by Moncharmin and he himself was monitoring "his approaches" from the front.

Once again, this entirely new way of walking around the
behind-the-scenes strategies adopted by the directors of the Academy
The national music initiative was obviously not to go unnoticed.

She was noticed.

Fortunately for Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin, at the time of this so
A curious scene unfolded: the "little rats" were almost all there.
in the attics.

Because the directors would have been successful with the young girls.

...But they were only thinking about their twenty thousand francs.

Arriving in the dimly lit corridor of the administration building, Richard said to
In a low voice to Moncharmin:

--I'm sure no one touched me... now you're going to
keep far enough away from me and watch me from the shadows until the door
From my office... we mustn't give anyone the awakening and we'll see.
well what's going to happen.

But Moncharmin replies:

--No, Richard! No!... Walk ahead... I'll walk _immediately_
Behind you! I'm not leaving your side for a second!

"But," cried Richard, "they'll never be able to steal ours like this!"
twenty thousand francs!

"I certainly hope so!" declared Moncharmin.

--So, what we're doing is absurd!

--We're doing exactly what we did last time... The
Last time, I met you as you left the plateau, at the corner of this
hallway... and I followed you _behind your back._

"That's absolutely right!" sighed Richard, shaking his head and
passively obeying Moncharmin.

Two minutes later, the two directors locked themselves in the office
directorial.

It was Moncharmin himself who put the key in his pocket.

--We were both locked in like that last time,
he did, until the moment you left the Opera to go home.

--That's right! And nobody came to bother us?

--Person.

"So," asked Richard, who was trying to gather his thoughts.
memories, so I would surely have been robbed on the way to
Opera at my home...

"No!" Moncharmin said, his tone drier than ever... "no... that's not..."
No way... I'm the one who drove you home in my car.
The twenty thousand francs have disappeared from your place, that's no longer enough for
I have a shadow of a doubt.

That was Moncharmin's idea now.

"That's incredible!" protested Richard... "I'm sure of my..."
servants!... and if one of them had done that, he would have
disappeared.

Moncharmin shrugged, as if to say that he wasn't getting into it.
these details.

At which point Richard begins to think that Moncharmin is taking him with him
in a truly unbearable tone.

--Moncharmin, that's enough!

--Richard, that's too much!

--You dare to suspect me?

--Yes, a deplorable joke!

--You don't joke around with twenty thousand francs!

"That's exactly my opinion!" declared Moncharmin, unfurling a newspaper in
which he ostentatiously immerses himself in reading.

"What are you going to do?" Richard asked. "You're going to read the newspaper."
NOW!

--Yes, Richard, until the time I drive you home.

--Like last time?

--Just like last time.

Richard snatches the newspaper from Moncharmin's hands. Moncharmin...
He stands there, more irritated than ever. He finds himself facing a Richard
exasperated, he said to her, crossing his arms over his chest, --gesture
an insolent challenge since the beginning of the world:

"There," said Richard, "I'm thinking about this." "I'm thinking about what I..."
I might think, if, like last time, after having passed the
An evening alone with you, you would drive me home, and if,
As we were leaving, I noted that the twenty thousand francs
had disappeared from my coat pocket... just like last time.

"And what could you think?" exclaimed Moncharmin, his face turning crimson.

--I might think that, since you haven't left my side for a second,
and that, according to your desire, you were the only one to approach me as
Last time, I could have thought that if those twenty thousand francs didn't
are more in my pocket, they are very likely to be in the
Here!

Moncharmin jumped at the suggestion.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, "a safety pin!"

--What do you want to do with a safety pin?

--Tie you on!... A safety pin!... a safety pin!

--Do you want to tie me up with a safety pin?

--Yes, tie yourself down with the twenty thousand francs!... Like that, that this
either here, or on the way from here to your home or your house, you
You'll feel the hand that pulls your pocket... and you'll see if it's the
Mine, Richard!... Ah! So now you're the one who suspects me... One
safety pin!

And it was at that moment that Moncharmin opened the door to the corridor in
shouting:

--A safety pin! Who will give me a safety pin?

And we also know how, at the same moment, the secretary
Rémy, who did not have a safety pin, was received by the
Director Moncharmin, however, was being supplied by an office boy.
This is the one that so desired.

And this is what happened:

Moncharmin, after closing the door, knelt behind her back
Richard.

"I hope," he said, "that the twenty thousand francs are still there?"

"Me too," said Richard.

"The real ones?" asked Moncharmin, who was quite determined this time to
Don't let yourself be "taken for a ride".

"Look! I don't want to touch them," Richard declared.

Moncharmin removed the envelope from Richard's pocket and pulled out the
tickets trembling because, this time, in order to be able to see
The presence of the tickets was frequent; they had neither sealed nor
the envelope, nor even glued it. He reassured himself by noting that they
They were all there, quite authentic. He gathered them in the pocket of the
Basque and pinned them with great care.

After which he sat down behind the basque, which he never left again.
look, while Richard, sitting at his desk, didn't make a
movement.

"A little patience, Richard," Moncharmin commanded, "we have no more."
just for a few minutes... The clock will soon strike twelve
The stroke of midnight. It was at the stroke of midnight that the last time
We left.

--Oh! I'll have all the patience it takes!

Time passed, slow, heavy, mysterious, stifling. Richard
tried to laugh.

"I'll end up believing," he said, "in the omnipotence of the ghost." And
Right now, in particular, don't you find that there is in
the atmosphere of this room, a certain something that is unsettling, that
Inconvenient, frightening?

"That's true," admitted Moncharmin, who was genuinely impressed.

"The ghost!" Richard resumed in a low voice, as if he were afraid
to be heard by invisible ears... the ghost! If everything
It was even a ghost that used to knock on this table
three sharp knocks that we heard very clearly... who deposits there the
magic envelopes... who is speaking in lodge number 5... who is killing Joseph
Buquet... who takes down the chandelier... and steals from us! For finally! For
Finally! Because finally! It's just you and me here!... and if the tickets
disappear without us having anything to do with it, neither you nor I... he will
We'll have to believe in the ghost... in the ghost...

At that moment, the clock on the mantelpiece chimed its
The alarm was triggered and the first stroke of midnight sounded.

The two directors shuddered. An anxiety gripped them, which
they could not have said the cause and that they were trying in vain to
To fight. Sweat dripped down their foreheads. And the twelfth blow
resonated singularly in their ears.

When the clock had stopped ticking, they sighed and stood up.

"I think we can leave," said Moncharmin.

"I believe it," Richard agreed.

--Before you leave, would you mind if I looked in your pocket?

--But how! Moncharmin! It must be done!

"Well?" asked Richard to Moncharmin, who was feeling around.

--Well! I can still feel the pin.

--Obviously, as you so rightly said, we can no longer be robbed
without me realizing it.

But Moncharmin, whose hands were always busy around the
pocket, yelled:

I can still feel the pin, but I can no longer feel the banknotes.

--No! Don't joke, Moncharmin!... This isn't the time.

--But, feel for yourself.

With a gesture, Richard shed his suit. The two directors
They're tearing at the pocket!... _The pocket is empty._

The strangest thing is that the pin remained stuck in the same place.
place.

Richard and Moncharmin were turning pale. There was no longer any doubt about the
spell.

"The ghost," Moncharmin murmured.

But Richard suddenly jumped on his colleague.

"You're the only one who touched my pocket! Give me back my twenty."
One thousand francs!... Give me back my twenty thousand francs!...

"Upon my soul," sighs Moncharmin, who seems ready to swoon... I
I swear I don't have them...

And as there was still knocking at the door, he went to open it, walking with a
not almost automatic, barely seeming to recognize the administrator
Mercier, exchanging trivial remarks with him, understood nothing
to what the other was telling him; and depositing, with an unconscious gesture, in
the hand of this faithful, completely bewildered servant, the pin of
a nanny who was no longer of any use to him...




XIX


THE POLICE COMMISSIONER, THE VISCOUNT, AND THE PERSIAN


The first words of the police commissioner, upon entering
The director's office was there to ask for news of the singer.

Christine Daaé isn't here?

He was followed, as I said, by a dense crowd.

"Christine Daaé? No," replied Richard, "why?"

As for Moncharmin, he no longer has the strength to utter a word... His
his state of mind is much more serious than Richard's, because Richard
Moncharmin can still be suspected, but Moncharmin himself is in
facing the great mystery... the one that has sent shivers down humanity's spine since
His birth: the Unknown.

Richard resumed, for the crowd around the directors and the commissioner
an impressive silence was observed:

"Why are you asking me, Commissioner, if Christine Daaé"
Isn't he here?

--Because we have to find her, gentlemen directors of
the National Academy of Music, solemnly declares Mr.
police commissioner.

--What! We have to find her! Has she disappeared?

--In the middle of a performance!

--In the middle of the performance! It's extraordinary!

Isn't that right? And, what is just as extraordinary as this
Disappearance, and I'm the one telling you this!

"Indeed..." Richard agreed, putting his head in his hands and
murmur: What's this new story? Oh! There's definitely some
Why not resign?!...

And he plucks a few hairs from his moustache without even thinking about it.
to notice:

"So," he said, as if in a dream..., "she disappeared in the middle of..."
representation.

--Yes, she was taken from the prison cell, at the very moment when
She invoked divine intervention, but I doubt she was abducted.
by the angels.

--And I'm sure of it!

Everyone turns around. A young man, pale and trembling
out of emotion, repeat:

--I'm sure of it!

"What are you sure about?" Mifroid asked.

--That Christine Daaé was abducted by an angel, sir
commissioner, and I could tell you his name...

--Ah! ah! Monsieur le Vicomte de Chagny, you claim that Miss
Christine Daaé was abducted by an angel, by an angel from the Opera
Probably?

Raoul looks around him. Obviously, he's looking for someone. At this
the moment when it seems so necessary for him to call for help from his
fiancée, the police rescue, he wouldn't mind seeing this again
mysterious stranger who, just now, had recommended the
discretion. But he doesn't discover it anywhere. Come on! He must
Speak!... He could not, however, explain himself before this crowd which...
stares with indiscreet curiosity.

"Yes, sir, by an angel from the Opera," he replied to Mr. Mifroid, and
I'll tell you where he lives when we're alone...

--You are right, sir.

And the police commissioner, having Raoul sit down next to him, put
kicks everyone out, except of course the directors, who,
However, they would not have protested, so far above them did they seem.
all contingencies.

So Raoul made up his mind:

"Commissioner, this angel's name is Erik, he lives in the Opera House."
And it's _The Angel of Music!_

--The Angel of Music!_ Truly! That is very curious indeed!...
_The Angel of Music!_

And, turning towards the directors, Mr. Police Commissioner Mifroid
request:

--Gentlemen, do you have that angel in your home?

Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin shook their heads without even smiling.

"Oh!" said the Viscount, "these gentlemen have certainly heard of the Phantom."
of the Opera. Well! I can assure them that the Phantom of the Opera
And the Angel of Music is the same thing. And his real name is Erik.

Mr. Mifroid had stood up and was looking at Raoul attentively.

Excuse me, sir, are you trying to make fun of
Justice?

"Me!" protested Raoul, who thought painfully, "Another one who won't go
"They don't want to hear me."

--So, what are you singing to me with your Phantom of the Opera?

--I'm saying that these gentlemen have heard about it.

--Gentlemen, it seems you are familiar with the Phantom of the Opera?

Richard stood up, the last hairs of his moustache in his hand.

--No! Commissioner, no, we don't know him! but
We would very much like to meet him! Because, just this evening, he
He stole twenty thousand francs from us!

And Richard turned a terrible look towards Moncharmin that seemed to say:
"Give me back the twenty thousand francs or I'll tell everything." Moncharmin
He understood so well that he made a frantic gesture: "Ah! Tell me everything! Tell me everything!..."

As for Mifroid, he looked first at the directors and then at Raoul and
he wondered if he had somehow wandered into a mental asylum.
He ran his hand through his hair:

"A ghost," he said, "who, on the same evening, abducted a singer and stole..."
Twenty thousand francs, that's a busy ghost! If you want it
Okay, let's take the questions one at a time. The singer first, the twenty
A thousand francs next! Come now, Monsieur de Chagny, let's try to talk
Seriously. Do you believe that Miss Christine Daaé was kidnapped by
An individual named Erik. So you know this individual? You
Have you seen it?

--Yes, Commissioner.

--Where?

--In a cemetery.

Mr. Mifroid jumped, resumed his gaze at Raoul, and said:

--Obviously!... that's usually where you meet the
Ghosts. And what were you doing in that cemetery?

"Sir," said Raoul, "I am perfectly aware of the oddity of
my answers and the effect they have on you. But I tell you
I beg you to believe that I am in my right mind. The salvation of the
The person dearest to me in the world, along with my beloved brother
Philippe. I would like to convince you in a few words, because the time
Press and minutes are precious. Unfortunately, if I don't...
It tells not the strangest story ever, but from the beginning.
You won't believe me. I'll tell you, Commissioner,
All I know about the Phantom of the Opera. Alas! Sir
Commissioner, I don't know much...

"Keep saying! Keep saying!" exclaimed Richard and Moncharmin.
suddenly very interested; unfortunately for the hope that they
had conceived for a moment of learning some detail that might...
To track down their trickster, they soon had to surrender
to this sad truth that Mr. Raoul de Chagny had completely
lost his mind. This whole Perros-Guirec story, these heads of
death, of enchanted violin, could only have originated in the
The deranged mind of a lover.

It was evident, moreover, that Commissioner Mifroid shared
increasingly this way of seeing things, and certainly the magistrate would have
put an end to these disorderly remarks, of which we have given an overview
In the first part of this story, if the circumstances,
They themselves had not taken it upon themselves to interrupt them.

The door had just opened and an individual, singularly dressed in a
a large black frock coat and top hat
Ragged and shiny, which reached up to both his ears, made his
entrance. He ran to the commissioner and spoke to him in a low voice. It was
some agent of the Sûreté, no doubt, who came to report on a
urgent mission.

During this conference, Mr. Mifroid never took his eyes off Raoul.

And finally, addressing him, he said:

--Sir, enough about the ghost. We're going to talk a little about
You, if you have no objection, were to remove it this evening.
Miss Christine Daaé?

--Yes, Commissioner.

--At the exit of the theatre?

--Yes, Commissioner.

--Were all your arrangements made for this?

--Yes, Commissioner.

The car that brought you was supposed to take both of you.
The coachman had been warned... his route had been planned in advance...
Even better! He had to find fresh horses at each stage...

--That's right, Commissioner.

—And yet, your car is still there, waiting for your orders, from
On the Rotunda side, isn't it?

--Yes, Commissioner.

Did you know that there were three others next to yours?
cars?

--I didn't pay the slightest attention to it...

--These were Miss Sorelli's, who had not found any
place in the courtyard of the administration; of the Carlotta and of your
Brother, Count de Chagny...

--It's possible...

--What is certain, however... is that, if your own
crew, those of the Sorelli and the Carlotta are still at
their place, along the sidewalk of the Rotonde... that of Count de
Chagny is no longer there...

--This has nothing to do with it, Commissioner...

Excuse me! Wasn't the Count opposed to your marriage to Miss
Daaé?

--This is a matter for the family only.

--You answered me... he was against it... and that's why you
Remove Christine Daaé, away from Mr.'s possible schemes.
Your brother... Well, Monsieur de Chagny, allow me to...
To learn that your brother was quicker than you!... It's him
Who kidnapped Christine Daaé?

"Oh!" groaned Raoul, putting his hand to his heart, "it's not
It's possible... Are you sure about that?

--Immediately after the artist's disappearance, which was organized
with accomplices whose involvement remains to be established, he threw himself
in his car which provided a furious ride through Paris.

"Through Paris?" grumbled poor Raoul... "What do you mean by 'through'?"
across Paris?

--And outside of Paris...

--Outside of Paris... which route?

--The road to Brussels.

A hoarse cry escaped from the mouth of the unfortunate young man.

"Oh!" he cried, "I swear I'll catch up with them."

And, in two bounds, he was out of the office.

"And bring us back here!" the commissioner shouted cheerfully. "Huh? There you go!"
a tip that's just as good as the one from the Angel of Music!

At which point, Mr. Mifroid turned to his astonished audience and...
administers this short, honest but by no means childish, police training course:

--I have absolutely no idea if it really is Count de Chagny
who kidnapped Christine Daaé... but I need to know, and I don't
I do not believe that at this hour anyone better than the viscount, his brother
He wants to find out more... Right now, he's running, he's flying! He is my
principal assistant! Such, gentlemen, is the art that is believed so
complicated, police-related, and yet appears so simple as soon as
It was discovered that it must consist of having this police force do its job.
especially by people who aren't part of it!

But perhaps Mr. Commissioner of Police Mifroid would not have
He would have been so pleased with himself, if he had known that the race of his fast
the messenger had been arrested as soon as he entered the
first corridor, empty however of the crowd of curious onlookers that one had
scattered. The corridor seemed deserted.

However, Raoul found his path blocked by a large shadow.

"Where are you going so fast, Monsieur de Chagny?" the shadow had asked.

Raoul, growing impatient, had raised his head and recognized the astrakhan hat
from earlier. He stopped.

"It's you again!" he cried feverishly, "you who
You know Erik's secrets and you didn't want me to talk about them. And
So who are you?

"You know that very well!... I am the Persian!" said the shadow.




XX


THE VISCOUNT AND THE PERSIAN


Raoul then remembered that his brother, one evening during a performance, had
showed this vague character about whom we knew nothing, once we had
said of him that he was a Persian, and that he lived in a small old house
apartment on the Rue de Rivoli.

The man with the ebony complexion, jade eyes, and astrakhan cap,
leaned over Raoul.

"I hope, Monsieur de Chagny, that you have not betrayed the secret."
Erik's?

--And why would I have hesitated to betray this monster, sir?
Raoul haughtily departed, trying to rid himself of the nuisance.
Is he your friend then?

"I hope you didn't say anything about Erik, sir, because the..."
Erik's secret is Christine Daaé's secret! And talking about one is...
Talk about the other person!

"Oh, sir!" said Raoul, growing increasingly impatient, "you seem to be..."
I am aware of many things that interest me, and yet I do not have
Time to hear from you!

--Once again, Mr. de Chagny, where are you going so fast?

--Can't you guess? Help Christine Daaé...

--So, sir, stay here!... because Christine Daaé is here!...

--With Erik?

--With Erik!

How do you know?

--I was at the performance, and there's only one Erik in the world for
To plot such an abduction!... Oh! he said with a deep sigh,
I recognized the monster's hand!

--So you know him?

The Persian did not reply, but Raoul heard another sigh.

"Sir!" said Raoul, "I don't know what your intentions are... but
Can you do anything for me?... I mean for Christine
Daaé?

--I believe it, Monsieur de Chagny, and that is why I have
addressed.

--What can you do?

--Try to lead yourself to her... and to him!

"Sir! This is an undertaking I have already attempted in vain this..."
evening... but if you do me such a favor, my life will be yours
belongs!... Sir, one more word: the police commissioner is coming
to inform me that Christine Daaé had been kidnapped by my brother,
Count Philippe...

--Oh! Mr. de Chagny, I don't believe a word of it...

--That's not possible, is it?

--I don't know if that's possible, but there are ways to remove and
Count Philippe, as far as I know, has never worked in the
Enchantment.

"Your arguments are striking, sir, and I am nothing but a madman!"
Oh, sir! Let's run! Let's run! I'm putting my trust in you entirely!...
How could I not believe you when no one else believes me?
When you're the only one who doesn't smile when the name is said
Erik!

Saying this, the young man, whose hands were burning with fever,
had, in a spontaneous gesture, taken the Persian's hands. They were
frozen.

"Silence!" said the Persian, stopping and listening to the sounds.
distant from the theatre and the slightest creaks that occurred
within the walls and in the neighboring corridors. Let us no longer utter this
That word here. Let's say: _He_; we'll be less likely to attract his
attention...

--So you believe he is very close to us?

"Anything is possible, sir... if he isn't with his right now."
victim, _in the Lake House._

--Ah! You know this house too?

If he is not in this house, he may be in this wall, in
This floor, in this ceiling! What do I know?... The eye in this this
Lock!... Ear in that beam!... And the Persian, praying
to muffle the sound of his footsteps, led Raoul into corridors that
the young man had never seen them, not even back when Christine...
was walking through this labyrinth.

"If only," said the Persian, "if only Darius had arrived!"

"Who is it, Darius?" the young man asked again as he ran.

--Darius! He's my servant...

They were at that moment in the center of a completely deserted square,
The immense room was poorly lit by a single lamp. The Persian stopped Raoul.
and, very quietly, so quietly that Raoul could hardly hear him, he
asked:

--What did you say to the commissioner?

--I told him that Christine Daaé's thief was the angel of the
music, said the Phantom of the Opera, and that his real name was...

--Pshutt!... And the commissioner believed you?

--No.

--He didn't attach any importance to what you said?

--None!

--Did he think you were a bit crazy?

--Yes.

"So much the better!" sighed the Persian.

And the race began again.

After going up and down several staircases unfamiliar to Raoul,
The two men found themselves in front of a door which the Persian opened
with a small master key that he pulled from a pocket of his vest.
Persan, like Raoul, was naturally dressed in formal attire. However, if Raoul
He had a top hat, the Persian had an astrakhan cap.
as I've already pointed out. He was a code freak
of elegance that governed the wings where the top hat is
required, but it is understood that in France everything is allowed for foreigners:
The English wear a travel cap, the Persians an astrakhan hat.

"Sir," said the Persian, "your top hat will get in your way..."
the expedition we're planning... You'd better leave it in
the lodge...

"Which lodge?" asked Raoul.

--But Christine Daaé's!

And the Persian, having led Raoul through the gate he had just
to open, he showed her, opposite, the actress's dressing room.

Raoul was unaware that one could reach Christine's house by any other route than
the one he usually followed. He was then at the end
of the corridor he used to walk the entire length of before
knock on the door of the lodge.

--Oh! sir, you know the Opera well!

"Not as good as him!" said the Persian modestly.

And he pushed the young man into Christine's dressing room.

She was exactly as Raoul had left her a few moments ago.
previously.

--The Persian, after closing the door, headed towards the panel
a very thin partition separated the lodge from a large storage room which
followed. He listened, then coughed loudly.

Immediately a commotion was heard in the storage room and, a few
Seconds later, there was a knock at the door of the lodge.

"Come in!" said the Persian.

A man entered, also wearing an astrakhan cap and dressed in
long cloak.

He bowed and pulled a richly carved box from under his coat.
he placed it on the vanity, bowed again and headed towards the
door.

--Did no one see you come in, Darius?

--No, master.

--Don't let anyone see you leave.

The servant risked a glance down the corridor, and, swiftly,
disappeared.

"Sir," said Raoul, "I'm thinking of something, which is that we can very
We could easily be surprised here, and that would obviously bother us.
The commissioner will soon come to search this lodge.

--Bah! It's not the commissioner we should be afraid of.

The Persian had opened the box. Inside was a pair of long
pistols, of magnificent design and ornamentation.

--Immediately after Christine Daaé's abduction, I sent word
My servant is not required to bring me these weapons, sir. I know them.
For a long time, there have been none more reliable.

"You want to fight a duel!" asked the young man, surprised by
the arrival of this arsenal.

"It is indeed a duel we are going to, sir," replied
The other was examining the primers of his pistols. And what a duel!

Whereupon he handed Raoul a pistol and said to him again:

--In this duel, we will be two against one: but be prepared for anything,
sir, because I won't hide from you that we are going to be dealing with the most
a terrible adversary imaginable. But you like
Christine Daaé, isn't she?

"Yes, I love her, sir! But you, who do not love her,"
Can you explain to me why I find you willing to risk your life?
For her!... You must hate Erik!

"No, sir," said the Persian sadly, "I do not hate him. If I..."
I hated him; he wouldn't have done any more harm a long time ago.

--Did he hurt you?...

--The harm he did to me, I have forgiven him.

"It's quite extraordinary," the young man continued, "that you..."
To hear about this man! You call him a monster, you talk about
His crimes have hurt you, and I see that pity in you.
Unheard of, which drove me to despair even in Christine herself!...

The Persian did not reply. He had gone to get a stool and
had brought it against the wall opposite the large mirror that held
The entire opposite wall. Then he climbed onto the stool and, nose
on the paper that covered the wall, he seemed to be searching for something
thing.

"Well, sir!" said Raoul, who was seething with impatience. "I will..."
Wait. Come on!

"Where are we going?" asked the other without turning his head.

--But face the monster! Let's get down! Didn't you tell me that
Did you have the means to do so?

--I'm looking for it.

And the Persian's nose wandered along the wall again.

"Ah!" exclaimed the man in the cap suddenly, "it's there!" And his finger,
above his head, he pressed on a corner of the drawing on the paper.

Then he turned around and threw himself down from the stool.

"In half a minute," he said, "we'll be on his path!"

And, crossing the entire box, he went to feel the large mirror.

"No! She's not giving in yet..." he murmured.

"Oh! We'll go out through the ice," said Raoul!... Just like Christine!...

--So you knew that Christine Daaé had gone out through that ice?

"Right in front of me, sir!... I was hiding there under the curtain of the cabinet."
of the toilet and I saw her disappear, not through the mirror, but
in the ice!

--And what did you do?

--I believed, sir, in an aberration of my senses! in madness! in a
dream!

"At some new fantasy of the ghost," sneered the Persian... Ah!
Monsieur de Chagny, he continued, still holding his hand on the
Ice... would to heaven we were dealing with a ghost! We
We could leave our pair of pistols in their box!... Drop them
Your hat, please... there... and now close your coat
as much as you can on your chest protector... like me... lower it
Turn up your collars... we must also make ourselves invisible
as possible...

He added, after a short silence, and pressing down on the ice:

--The counterweight is triggered when the spring is activated
The interior of the lodge is somewhat slow to produce its effect. It doesn't
It's not the same when you're behind the wall and can act.
directly onto the counterweight. Then, the ice spins, instantly.
and is swept away with incredible speed...

"What counterweight?" asked Raoul.

--Well! But, the one who makes this whole section of wall lift up on his
pivot! You can be sure it doesn't move by itself, by
enchantment!

And the Persian, pulling Raoul close with one hand, pressed
always on the other side (the one holding the gun) against the ice.

--You'll see, in a little while, if you pay close attention, the
ice will lift a few millimeters and then move from
a few more millimeters from left to right. It will then be on a
pivot, and it will turn. We'll never know what we can do with a
counterweight! A child can, with their little finger, make a
house... when a section of wall, however heavy, is brought by the
counterweighted on its pivot, perfectly balanced, it weighs no more
than a spinning top on its point.

"It's not turning!" said Raoul, impatiently.

--Hey! Just wait! You have plenty of time to get impatient, sir!
The mechanism is obviously rusted or the spring no longer works.

The Persian's forehead became worried.

"And then," he said, "there could be something else."

--What is it, sir!

--Perhaps he simply cut the counterweight rope and
immobilized the entire system...

Why? Doesn't he know we're going down that way?

He may suspect as much, since he knows that I know the
system.

--Did he show it to you?

No! I searched behind him, and behind his disappearances.
mysterious, and I found it. Oh! It's the simplest system of
Secret doors! It's a mechanism as old as sacred palaces.
of Thebes with its hundred gates, like the throne room of Ecbatana, like the
Tripod room at Delphi.

"It's not working!... And Christine, sir!... Christine!..."

The Persian said coldly:

--We will do everything humanly possible!... but
He can stop us right from our first steps!

--So he is the master of these walls?

--He commands the walls, the doors, the trapdoors. In our house, we
He called him by a name that means: _the trap enthusiast_

--That's exactly how Christine had told me about it... with the same
mystery and by granting it the same formidable power?... But everything
This seems quite extraordinary to me!... Why these walls?
Do they obey him alone? Didn't he build them?

Yes, sir!

And as Raoul stared at him, bewildered, the Persian gestured for him to
He was silent, then his gesture showed her the mirror... It was like a trembling
reflection. Their double image blurred as if in a shimmering wave,
And then everything became still again.

--You can see, sir, that it's not working! Let's take another one
path!

"There are no others tonight!" declared the Persian, in a voice
singularly gloomy... And now, watch out! And be prepared
to shoot!

He himself raised his pistol in front of the mirror. Raoul imitated his
gesture. The Persian pulled the young man along with his free arm until
on his chest, and suddenly the ice spun in a dazzling flash, a
Blinding crossfire; she turned, like one of those doors
rolling compartments that now open onto the halls
public... she turned, carrying Raoul and the Persian along in her
irresistible movement and abruptly throwing them out of the full light
to the deepest darkness.




21st


BEHIND THE SCENES AT THE OPERA HOUSE


"Hand up, ready to fire!" the companion of
Raoul. Behind them, the wall, continuing to make a complete turn on
He himself had closed off.

The two men remained motionless for a few moments, holding their breath.
breathing.

In that darkness reigned a silence that nothing disturbed.

Finally, the Persian decided to make a move, and Raoul heard him.
who was sliding on his knees, searching for something in the night, from his
groping hands.

Suddenly, before the young man, the darkness was illuminated.
cautiously by the light of a small, dim lantern, and Raoul recoiled
instinctive, as if to escape the investigation of an enemy secret.
But he immediately understood that this fire belonged to the Persian, from whom he
followed every movement. The small red disc moved about on the
walls, above, below, all around them, meticulously. These walls
were formed, to the right of a wall, to the left of a partition in
planks, above and below the floors. And Raoul was thinking that
Christine had passed by there the day she had followed the voice of
The Angel of Music. This must have been Erik's usual path.
when he came through the walls to surprise good faith and intrigue
Christine's innocence. And Raoul, who remembered the words of
Persian, thought that this path had been mysteriously established by the
care from the Phantom himself. However, he was later to learn that Erik
had found there, all prepared for him, a secret corridor which
For a long time, he had remained the only one to know of its existence.
The corridor had been created during the Paris Commune to allow
to the jailers to lead their prisoners directly to the dungeons that
They had built in the cellars, because the federates had occupied them.
the building immediately after March 18th and had made it right at the top
a starting point for hot air balloons loaded with supplies to go and carry
in the departments their inflammatory proclamations, and, while
down, a state prison.

The Persian had knelt down and placed his
lantern. He seemed busy with a quick task in the floor and,
Suddenly, there was his light.

Then Raoul heard a slight click and glimpsed in the floor of the
The corridor was a very pale, bright square. It was as if a window
had just opened onto the still-lit underbelly of the Opera House. Raoul
He could no longer see the Persian, but he suddenly felt him at his side and he
heard his breath.

--Follow me, and do everything I do.

Raoul was led towards the bright skylight. Then he saw the Persian who
was still kneeling and, hanging by his hands from the skylight,
he let himself slip into the undergarments. The Persian then held his
pistol between the teeth.

Curiously, the viscount had complete confidence in the Persian.
Despite the fact that he knew nothing about him, and that most of his remarks
would only have increased the obscurity of this adventure, he
did not hesitate to believe that, in this decisive hour, the Persian
was with him against Erik. His emotion had seemed sincere to him when
He had told her about the "monster"; the interest he had shown her
did not seem suspicious to him. Finally, if the Persian had nurtured something
sinister plot against Raoul, he would not have armed him with his
with one's own hands. And then, to tell the truth, shouldn't one have arrived
At what cost, what cost, to Christine? Raoul had no choice.
means. If he had hesitated, even with doubts about the intentions of
Persian, the young man would have considered himself the worst of cowards.

Raoul, in turn, knelt and hung from the trapdoor, with both
hands. "Let go of everything!" he heard, and he fell into the arms of
Persian, who immediately ordered him to throw himself flat on his stomach, closed
above their heads was the trapdoor, without Raoul being able to see through which
a stratagem, and came to lie down beside the viscount. The latter wanted
to ask him a question, but the Persian's hand pressed against his mouth and
He immediately heard a voice that he recognized as being that of the
police commissioner who had questioned him earlier.

Raoul and the Persian were both then behind a
partitions that concealed them perfectly. Nearby, a narrow
The staircase led up to a small room, in which the commissioner
must have been walking around asking questions, because the noise of
her steps in sync with the sound of her voice.

The light surrounding the objects was very dim, but, in
emerging from the thick darkness that reigned in the secret corridor
From above, Raoul had no difficulty distinguishing the shape of things.

And he could not suppress a muffled exclamation, for there were three
corpses.

The first one was lying on the narrow landing of the small staircase which
went up to the door behind which one could hear the
commissioner; the other two had rolled down the stairs, the
Arms outstretched. Raoul, passing his fingers through the partition
who was hiding it could have touched the hand of one of these unfortunate people.

"Silence!" the Persian whispered again.

He too had seen the bodies lying there and he had a word for everything
explain:

--_Him!_

The commissioner's voice was then heard more clearly.
demanded explanations about the lighting system, which the
The steward gave it to him. The commissioner must therefore have been in the
"Organ organ" or its dependencies. Contrary to what one
one might believe, especially when it comes to an opera house, the
"Organ organ" is in no way intended to make music.

At that time, electricity was only used for certain
Very limited stage effects and for the ringing. The immense
the building and the stage itself were still lit by gaslight and
It was always with hydrogen gas that we adjusted and modified
lighting a set, and this by means of a special device to which
The sheer number of its pipes led to it being called a "game"
organ_”.

A niche was reserved next to the blower's hole, for the chief
lighting, which, from there, gave orders to its employees and in
oversaw the execution. It was in this niche that, at all times
performances, Mauclair was present.

However, Mauclair was not in his element and his employees were
point in their place.

--Mauclair! Mauclair!

The stage manager's voice now echoed in the basement as in
a drum. But Mauclair did not answer:

We said that a door opened onto a small staircase that led up from the
second below. The commissioner pushed her, but she resisted:
"Well! Well!" he said... "You see, Mr. Stage Manager, I cannot
"Not opening that door... is it still this difficult?"

The stage manager, with a vigorous shove of his shoulder, pushed open the door. He
realized that he was simultaneously pushing a human body and could not
He held back an exclamation: this body, he recognized it immediately:

--Mauclair!

All the characters who had accompanied the commissioner on this visit
They approached the organ player, looking worried.

"The poor fellow! He's dead," groaned the steward.

But Commissioner Mifroid, who is never surprised by anything, was already
leaning over this large body.

"No," he said, "he's dead drunk! It's not the same thing."

"That would be the first time," declared the stage manager.

--So, they gave him a narcotic... That's quite possible.

Mifroid got up, went down a few more steps and cried out:

--Look!

By the light of a small red lantern, at the bottom of the stairs, two others
Their bodies were lying down. The foreman recognized Mauclair's assistants...
Mifroid came down and examined them.

"They're fast asleep," he said. "A very curious case! We don't
we can no longer doubt the intervention of a stranger in the service of
the lighting... and this stranger obviously worked for the
Abductor!... But what a strange idea to abduct an artist in
Scene!... That's playing hard to get, or I don't know what I'm talking about!
Get me the doctor from the theatre.

And Mr. Mifroid repeated:

--Curious! A very curious affair!

Then he turned into the small room, addressing
people that, from where they were, neither Raoul nor the
Persians could not see.

"What do you say to all this, gentlemen?" he asked. "There is only
You who do not give your opinion. You must, however, have a
just a small opinion...

Then, above the landing, Raoul and the Persian saw the two men approaching.
the astonished faces of the directors—one could see nothing but their faces
above the landing—and they heard Moncharmin's emotional voice:

"There are things happening here, Commissioner, that we don't know about."
can we explain?

And the two figures disappeared.

"Thank you for the information, gentlemen," said Mifroid, mockingly.

--But the stage manager, whose chin was then resting in the hollow of the
right hand, which is the gesture of deep reflection, says:

--This is not the first time Mauclair has fallen asleep at the theatre.
I remember finding him one evening, snoring in his little kennel,
next to his snuffbox.

"A long time ago?" asked Mr. Mifroid, carefully wiping the area.
meticulously cleaned the lenses of his lorgnette, for, Mr. Commissioner was
Myopic, just as happens to the most beautiful eyes in the world.

"My God!..." said the stage manager... "no, it wasn't that long ago..."
Look!... It was evening... Indeed, yes... it was the evening when the
Carlotta, as you well know, Commissioner, launched her famous
Oops!...

--Really, the night Carlotta launched her famous blunder?

And Mr. Mifroid, having put his spectacles back on his nose,
transparent, the stage manager stared intently, as if he wanted
to understand his thoughts.

"So, Mauclair was taken then?" he asked casually.

"Yes, Commissioner... Look, here it is right here on this..."
planchette sa tabatière... Oh! he's a great snuff-taker.

"Me too!" said Mr. Mifroid, and he put the snuffbox in his pocket.

Raoul and the Persian were present, without anyone suspecting their
present, during the transport of the three bodies, were the machinists who came
Remove. The commissioner followed them, and everyone else followed behind him.
went back up. For a few moments longer, their footsteps could be heard.
echoed across the stage.

When they were alone, the Persian signaled to Raoul to rise up.
He obeyed; but since, at the same time, he had not replaced
his hand raised before his eyes, ready to fire, just as the Persian did not
He never failed to do so, and he recommended that he take it again
this position and not to depart from it, whatever happens.

"But that tires the hand unnecessarily!" murmured Raoul, "and if I pull,
I won't be sure of myself anymore!

"Then switch your weapon to the other hand!" conceded the Persian.

--I can't shoot with my left hand!

To which the Persian replied with this bizarre statement, which was
point made obviously to clarify the situation in the brain
The young man was deeply moved:

--_It is not a question of pulling with the left hand or the right hand;
It involves having one of your hands positioned as if it were going to...
to pull the trigger of a pistol, with the arm half-bent; as
to the gun itself, after all, you can put it in your
poached._

And he added:

Let this be understood, or I'm no longer responsible for anything! It's a
It's a matter of life or death. Now, silence and follow me!

They were then in the second basement level; Raoul was not
what to glimpse by the light of a few motionless votive candles, here and there,
in their glass prisons, a tiny part of this abyss
extravagant, sublime and childlike, amusing like a Punch and Judy show,
terrifying as an abyss, what lies beneath the surface of the scene?
The Opera.

They are fantastic, and there are five of them. They reproduce all the
Stage plans, its trapdoors and hatches. The eaves
Only the rails are replaced there. Transverse frameworks
support trapdoors and hatches. Posts, resting on blocks of
cast iron or stone, sandpits or "shaped caps", form
series of farms that allow free passage to
"Glories" and other combinations or tricks. These devices are given
a certain stability by connecting them with iron hooks and
depending on the needs of the moment. The winches, the drums, the
Counterweights are generously distributed in the underside.
are used to maneuver the large sets, to operate the changes to
sight, to cause the sudden disappearance of the fairytale characters.
These are the underbelly, said Messrs. X., Y., and Z., who dedicated themselves to the work
Garnier's study is so interesting, it's about the underside that we
transforms the sickly into handsome horsemen, the hideous witches into
radiant fairies of youth. Satan comes from below, just as he...
sinks in. The lights of hell escape from it, the choirs of
demons take their place there.

...And the ghosts wander around as if they own the place...

Raoul followed the Persian, obeying his recommendations to the letter.
making no attempt to understand the gestures he was ordering her to make...
saying that he had no hope left but in himself.

What would he have done without his companion in this terrifying maze?

Had he not been stopped at every step by the intersection
prodigious beams and ropes? Could he not have been caught, at
To be unable to extricate oneself from this gigantic spider web?

And if he had been able to pass through this network of wires and counterweights
constantly reborn before him, did he not run the risk of
to fall into one of those holes that opened up at times beneath his feet
and whose eye could not perceive the depths of darkness!

They were going down... They were going down some more...

Now they were in the third level.

And their journey was always lit by some distant lamp.

The further down one went, the more the Persian seemed to take on
precautions... He kept turning back to Raoul and to him
recommending that he stand properly, showing him how
from which he himself held his fist, now disarmed, but still
ready to shoot as if he had a pistol.

Suddenly, a booming voice rooted them to the spot. Someone,
above them, it was screaming.

--On set, all the "door-slammers!" The commissioner of
The police are asking for them.

...Footsteps were heard, and shadows glided into the darkness. The
Persan had lured Raoul behind a clothes rack... They saw them pass by
Near them, above them, old men bent by years and the
an old burden of opera sets. Some could barely...
dragging their feet...; others, out of habit, with their backs down and their hands in
Previously, they were looking for doors to close.

Because they were the door closers... the exhausted former stagehands
and for whom a charitable management had taken pity... They had made them
door closers in the basements, in the upper floors. They went and
they kept coming up and down the stage to close the
doors—and they were also called in those days, for ever since, I
I believe they are all dead: "the draft chasers".

Drafts, wherever they come from, are very bad for the
voice[3].

The Persian and Raoul congratulated each other privately on this incident which
rid them of inconvenient witnesses, because some of the gatekeepers
doors, having nothing left to do and hardly any home,
stayed, out of laziness or necessity, at the Opera, where they spent the
night. You could bump into them, wake them up, attract a request
no explanations. Mr. Mifroid's investigation was momentarily keeping our two
companions in these unfortunate encounters.

But they did not enjoy their solitude for long... Others
shadows, now, were descending the same path by which the "farmers"
"Doors" had risen. These shadows each had before them a
little lantern... which they waved vigorously, carrying it up and down,
examining everything around them and seemingly, obviously, searching
something or someone.

"Damn it!" murmured the Persian... "I don't know what they're looking for, but
They might find us... let's run!... quickly!... Hand in
Guard, sir, always ready to fire!... Let's bend our arms,
Even more, there!... your hand at eye level, as if you were
were dueling and you were waiting for the commander of "fire!..."
Leave your gun in your pocket!... Quick, let's get out! (He
was dragging Raoul down to the fourth level)... at eye level
A matter of life or death!... There, this way, that staircase! (they
reached the fifth level)... Ah! What a duel, sir, what
duel!...

The Persian, having reached the bottom of the fifth level, sighed... He
seemed to enjoy a little more security than he had shown
earlier when they had both stopped at the third one, but
However, he did not abandon the hand gesture!

Raoul had time to be astonished once again—without, moreover, making
no new observations, none at all! for in truth, it was not the
a moment—a moment of wonder, I said, silently, at this extraordinary
the concept of self-defense which consisted of keeping his
pistol in his pocket while his hand remained ready to shoot
serve as if the pistol were still in your hand, at the height of
the eye; the waiting position of the commander of "fire!" in the duel of
that era.

And, on this subject, Raoul believed he could still think this: "I
I remember very well that he told me: "These are pistols that I am
on".

Hence, it seemed logical to him to draw this interrogative conclusion:
"What does it matter to him to be sure of a gun that
He finds it pointless to use it?

But the Persian stopped him in his vague attempts at thinking. He
gesturing for everyone to stand in place, he moved up a few degrees.
the staircase they had just left. Then, quickly, he returned
with Raoul.

"We're stupid," he whispered to him, "we'll soon be..."
freed from the shadows by lanterns... It's the firefighters who do it
their round[4].

The two men then remained on the defensive for at least five
For several long minutes, then the Persian led Raoul back towards
the stairs they had just descended; but, suddenly, his gesture
he ordered him to remain still again.

...Before them, the night stirred.

"Lie flat on your stomach!" the Persian breathed!

--The two men lay down on the ground.

It was about time.

...A shadow that this time carried no lantern, ...a shadow
simply passed in the shadows.

She passed close to them, touching them.

They felt the warm breath of his coat on their faces...

For they could distinguish it sufficiently to see that the shadow had a
A coat that enveloped him from head to toe. On his head, a
soft felt hat.

...She walked away, skimming the walls with her feet and sometimes, giving,
In the corners, kicks against the walls.

"Phew!" said the Persian... "We had a narrow escape... This shadow..."
knows him and has already brought me back to the director's office twice.

"Is this someone from the theatre police?" asked Raoul.

"He's someone much worse!" replied the
Persian[5].

--It's not... _him?_

--Him?_... if he doesn't come from behind, we'll still see his
Golden eyes!... That's one of our strengths in the night. But he can
to arrive from behind... stealthily... and we're dead if we
let's not always hold our hands as if they were going to pull, at
Eye level, from the front!

The Persian had not finished formulating this "line" again
"attitude" that, in front of the two men, a fantastic figure
appeared.

...A whole figure... a face; not just two eyes
gold.

...But a whole luminous face... a whole figure on fire!

Yes, a figure on fire advancing at eye level, but without
body!_

This figure was emanating fire.

In the night, it appeared like a flame in the shape of a figure
of a man.

"Oh!" the Persian muttered through gritted teeth, "this is the first time I've..."
Look!... The fire lieutenant wasn't crazy! He had it right.
Hey, look!... What's that flame? It's not
_Him!_ But maybe it's _him_ who sent it to us!... Watch out!...
Attention!... Your hand at eye level, for heaven's sake!... at
Eye level!

The figure in flames, which looked like a figure from hell—a demon
ablaze—always advancing at eye level, saris body,
in front of the two terrified men...

He may be sending us this figure from the front, to better
They might surprise us from behind... or from the sides... you never know
With him!... I know a lot of his tricks!... but that one!...
That one!... I don't know him yet!... Let's run away!... by
Caution!... isn't that right?... out of caution!... hand at the height of
the eye...

And they both ran away, all the way down the long corridor
underground passage that opened up before them.

After a few seconds of this race, which seemed like a long time to them,
They stopped for several long minutes.

"Yet," said the Persian, "he rarely comes this way! This side doesn't
Don't look at him!... This side doesn't lead to the lake or the house
of the lake!... But perhaps he knows we're on his trail!
although I promised him I would leave him alone from now on and not
I no longer want to deal with his problems.

Having said this, he turned his head, and Raoul also turned his head.

But then they saw the burning head behind their two heads.
She had followed them... And she had had to run too, and perhaps
faster than them, because it seemed to them that she had moved closer.

At the same time, they began to distinguish a certain noise which he
It was impossible for them to guess the nature; they simply surrendered
I noticed that this noise seemed to be moving and getting closer with the
flame-figure of a man. They were creaking sounds, or rather
squeaking, as if thousands of fingernails had been frayed at
blackboard, a terrifyingly unbearable noise that is still being produced
sometimes by a small stone inside the stick of chalk which
it creaks against the blackboard.

They retreated again, but the flame-like figure advanced, advanced.
Always winning against them. You could see his features very clearly.
Now, his eyes were all round and fixed, his nose a little...
sideways and with a large mouth and a semicircular lower lip,
drooping; much like the eyes, nose, and lip of the moon,
when the moon is all red, the color of blood.

How did that red moon glide into the darkness, at height
of a man without a point of support, without a body to bear it, at least
Apparently? And how was she going so fast, straight ahead, with her eyes
fixed, so fixed? And all that creaking, crackling, squeaking that she
He was hanging out with her, where did he come from?

At one point, the Persian and Raoul could no longer retreat and they
They flattened themselves against the wall, not knowing what would happen next.
of them because of this incomprehensible figure of fire and above all,
Now, more noise, more intense, more teeming, more alive, very
"Numerous," because certainly this noise was made up of hundreds of
small noises that stirred in the darkness, beneath the flame-head.

It advances, the flame-head... there it is!... with its noise!... the
There it is, at the right height!

And the two companions, flattened against the wall, feel their
Their hair stood on end in horror, for they now knew
Where do the thousand noises come from? They come in a flock, rolled in
the shadow by countless small, hurried waves, faster than the
waves that trot on the sand, at the rising tide, little waves
of night that billow under the moon, under the moon-head-flame.

And the little waves pass through their legs, rise in their
legs, irresistibly. So, Raoul and the Persian can no longer
to stifle their cries of horror, terror, and pain.

They can no longer, either, continue to hold their hands at height
of the eye,--holding of the pistol duel at that time, before the
The command was: "Fire!" -- Their hands moved down to their legs to
push back the small, shining islets, and they roll little things
sharp, waves that are full of legs, and claws, and
claws, and teeth.

Yes, yes, Raoul and the Persian are ready to faint like the
Fire Lieutenant Papin. But the fire head turned back towards
They, to their howling. And she speaks to them:

--Don't move! Don't move!... Above all, don't follow me!... It's
Me, the rat killer!... Let me through with my rats!...

And suddenly, the fiery head disappears, vanishing into the darkness.
Meanwhile, in front of her, the corridor lights up in the distance, simple
result of the maneuver that the rat killer has just subjected to
his dim lantern. Just now, so as not to frighten the rats
In front of him, he had turned his dim lantern on itself,
illuminating his own head; now, to hasten his escape, he shines
the black space in front of her... Then he leaped, dragging everyone with him
the swarms of rats, climbing, squeaking, all the thousand noises...

The Persian and Raoul, freed, breathe a sigh of relief, although still trembling.

"I should have remembered that Erik told me about the rat killer," he said.
the Persian, but he hadn't told me he was presenting himself under that name.
aspect... and it's strange that I've never met him[6].

Ah! I really thought that was one of the monster's tricks again!...
he sighed... But no! He never comes to these parts!

"So we're quite far from the lake?" asked Raoul. "When?"
Shall we arrive, sir?... Let's go to the lake! Let's go to the lake!... When
we will be at the lake we will call, we will shake the walls, we
We will shout!... Christine will hear us!... And _He_ will hear us too
He will hear!... And since you know him, we will speak to him!

"Child!" said the Persian... "We will never enter the dwelling of the
Lake by lake!

--Why is that?

--Because that's where he amassed all his defense... Myself
I was never able to reach the other side!... on the side of the
Home!... We have to cross the lake first... and it's well guarded!...
I fear that more than one of these—former machinists, old gatekeepers of
doors—which were never seen again—did not simply attempt to
Crossing the lake... It's terrible... I almost died there myself...
If the monster hadn't recognized me in time!.... A word of advice, sir,
Never go near the lake... And above all, cover your ears if
you hear singing _the Voice under the Calf_, the voice of the Siren.

"But then," Raoul resumed, in a fit of feverish impatience and
Out of rage, what are we doing here?... If you can't do anything for Christine,
At least let me die for her.

The Persian tried to calm the young man.

--We only have one way to save Christine Daaé, believe me, it is
to enter this dwelling without the monster noticing.

--Can we hope for that, sir?

"Hey! If I didn't have that hope, I wouldn't have come to you."
seek!

--And how can one enter the dwelling of the Lake, without passing through the
Lake?

--Through the third below, from where we have been so
unfortunately chased away... sir, and where we are going to return from
This step... I'll tell you, sir, said the Persian, his voice suddenly
altered... I'll tell you the exact location... It's between
an abandoned farm and set from _The King of Lahore_, to be precise,
exactly where Joseph Buquet died...

--Ah! That chief machinist who was found hanged?

"Yes, sir," added the Persian in a peculiar tone, "and one of which we have not..."
I found the rope!... Come on! Courage... and let's go!... and
Put your hand back on guard, sir... But where are we?

The Persian had to relight his dim lantern. He directed the
a beam of light on two vast corridors that intersected at right angles
and whose vaults stretched into infinity.

"We need to be," he said, "in the reserved section."
particularly in the water department... I don't see any fire coming
radiators.

He preceded Raoul, searching for his way, stopping abruptly when
He dreaded the arrival of some hydraulic engineer, then they had to
parked in the glow of a kind of underground forge that was being finished
to extinguish, and before which Raoul recognized the demons he had glimpsed.
by Christine during her first trip on the day of her first
captivity.

Thus, they gradually returned, even beneath the prodigious underpinnings of
the scene.

They must have been at the very bottom of the tank, at a very high
depth, if we consider that we have dug the earth to a depth of fifteen meters
below the layers of water that existed throughout this part of
the capital; and all the water had to be drained... So much was drawn off that,
To get an idea of ​​the mass of water expelled by the pumps, it
One would have to imagine the Louvre courtyard on the surface and, from a height, a
one and a half times the height of Notre-Dame's towers. Nevertheless, it was necessary to keep
a lake.

At that moment, the Persian touched a wall and said:

--If I'm not mistaken, this is a wall that could well belong to the
Lakeside residence!

He then struck it against the side of the vat. And perhaps he
It is unnecessary for the reader to know how the
bottom and walls of the tank.

In order to prevent the water surrounding the building from remaining
in immediate contact with the walls supporting any restoration of the
theatrical machinery including all the framework, carpentry, and
locksmithing, of tempera-painted canvases must be all
specially protected from humidity, the architect saw himself in the
The need to establish a double layer of protection everywhere.

The work on this double envelope took a whole year. It's
against the wall of the first inner envelope that was struck by the
Persian, speaking to Raoul about the lake dwelling. For someone who had
Given the architecture of the monument, the Persian's gesture seemed to indicate
that Erik's mysterious house had been built in the double
envelope, formed of a large wall built as a cofferdam, then by a
brick wall, a huge layer of cement and another wall of
several meters thick.

At the Persian's words, Raoul had thrown himself against the wall, and
had listened avidly.

...But he heard nothing... nothing but distant footsteps that
echoed on the floor in the upper parts of the theatre.

The Persian had extinguished his lantern again.

"Watch out!" he said... "Watch out! And now silence! For we
Let's try again to break into his house.

And he led her to the small staircase that they had just been on
had gone down.

...They went back up, stopping at each step, watching the shadows and
Silence...

And so they found themselves in the third level of despair...

The Persian then signaled to Raoul to kneel, and that was
thus, dragging himself along on his knees and on one hand—the other hand
being still in the indicated position—that they arrived against the
back wall.

Against this wall was a vast, abandoned canvas from the set design of the
_King of Lahore._

...And, very close to this scene, a clothes rack...

Between this decoration and this clothes rack, there was just enough room for one
body.

...A body, which one day was found hanging... the body of Joseph
Buquet.

The Persian, still on his knees, had stopped. He was listening.

For a moment, he seemed to hesitate and looked at Raoul, then his eyes...
fixed their gaze above, towards the second below, which was sending them the
faint glow of a lantern, in the space between two planks.

Obviously, this glare bothered the Persian.

Finally, he nodded and made up his mind.

He slipped between the clothes rack and the set of _The King of Lahore_.

Raoul was right behind him.

The Persian's free hand felt along the wall. Raoul saw him for a moment.
press hard against the wall as he had pressed against the wall of the
Christine's lodgings...

...And a stone toppled...

There was now a hole in the wall...

The Persian this time took his pistol out of his pocket and pointed at Raoul
that he should imitate him. He cocked the pistol.

And resolutely, still on his knees, he entered the hole that the
The stone, as it toppled over, had hit the wall.

Raoul, who had wanted to go first, had to be content with following him.

The hole was very narrow. The Persian stopped almost immediately.
Raoul could hear him feeling the stone around him. And then he went out
with his lantern still dim, he leaned forward and examined something.
beneath him, he immediately extinguished the lantern. Raoul heard him, who...
he said in a whisper:

--We'll have to drop a few meters, without making a sound;
Take off your boots.

The Persian was already performing this operation himself. He spent his
Raoul's shoes.

"Leave them," he said, "beyond the wall... We'll find them in
outgoing[7].

With that, the Persian advanced a little. Then, he turned around completely,
still on his knees, he found himself face to face with Raoul. He told him
said:

--I'm going to hang by my hands from the end of the stone and
drop it _in his house._ Then you will do exactly as
Me. Don't be afraid: I will receive you in my arms.

--The Persian did as he said; and, below him, Raoul
soon heard a dull thud which was obviously produced by the
The Persian's fall. The young man shuddered in fear that this noise
did not reveal their presence.

However, more than this noise, the absence of any other noise was for
Raoul, a terrible source of anguish. How could he! According to the Persian, they
had just entered the very walls of the Lake House, and
Christine was nowhere to be heard! Not a cry! Not a call! Not
A groan!... Good heavens! Could they be arriving too late?...

Scraping the wall with his knees, clinging to the stone of his
With nervous fingers, Raoul, in turn, let himself fall.

And immediately he felt an embrace.

"It's me!" said the Persian. "Silence!"

And they remained motionless, listening...

Never before had the night been so opaque around them...

Never has silence been heavier or more terrible...

Raoul dug his nails into his lips to keep from screaming:
"Christine! It's me!... Answer me if you're not dead,
Christine?

Finally, the game of the dark lantern began again. The Persian led it
the beams above their heads, against the wall, searching for the
the hole through which they had come and not finding it anymore...

"Oh!" he said... "the stone closed by itself."

And the lantern's beam of light descended along the wall, then
all the way to the prosecutor's office.

The Persian bent down and picked something up, a kind of thread that he
examined a second one and rejected it in horror.

"The thread of Punjab!" he murmured.

"What is it?" asked Raoul.

"That," replied the Persian, shivering, "could very well be the
The hangman's rope that we've been searching for so long!...

And, suddenly seized by a new anxiety, he moved the small disc around.
The red glow of his lantern on the walls... Thus he illuminated, event
bizarre, a tree trunk that still seemed completely alive with its
leaves... and the branches of this tree stretched all the way up the
wall and were about to get lost in the ceiling.

Because of the small size of the luminous disc, it was difficult at first
to realize things... we could see a corner of branches... and
Then a leaf... and another... and next to it, nothing could be seen.
Everything... nothing but the luminous jet that seemed to reflect itself...
Raoul slid his hand over this nothingness, over this reflection...

"Hey!" he said... "the wall is a mirror!"

"Yes! An ice cream!" said the Persian, in a tone of the most emotion.
deep. And he added, passing his hand that held the pistol over
his forehead sweating:

--We have fallen into the torture chamber!

[Note 3: Mr. Pedro Gailhard himself told me that he still had
he created jobs as door closers for old machinists, which he
did not want to be evicted himself.]

[Note 4: At that time, firefighters still had a mission, in
outside of performances, to ensure the security of the Opera;
But this service has since been discontinued. As I requested...
When asked about Mr. Pedro Gailhard's reasoning, he replied that "it was because we
had feared that in their complete inexperience of the inner workings of the
theatre, _they didn't set it on fire_.]

[Note 5: The author, like the Persian, will not give any other
An explanation for this shadow's appearance. While everything in this
Historical events will normally occur during certain times.
seemingly abnormal, explained, the author will not make understand
expressly to the reader what the Persian meant by these words:
He's someone much worse! (than someone from the theatre police).
The reader will have to guess, because the author promised the former director of
The Opera, Mr. Pedro Gailhard, to keep the secret about the
extremely interesting and useful personality of the wandering shadow to
coat which, while condemning itself to live in the underbelly of
theatre, has rendered such prodigious services to those who, on evenings of
Gala, for example, dare to venture _into the uppers_. I'm talking here about
State services, and I can't say any more, I swear.]

[Note 6: The former director of the Opera, Mr. Pedro Gailhard, told me
told one day at Cap d'Ail, at Mme Pierre Wolff's, the whole immense
underground depredation due to rat infestations, until the day when
the administration dealt, for a rather high price at that, with a
an individual who boasted that he could eliminate the scourge by coming to do a
tour of the cellars every two weeks.

Since then, there are no more rats at the Opera, except those who are admitted to the
dance hall. Mr. Gailhard thought that this man had discovered a
secret perfume that attracted rats to it like the "windcatcher" whose
Some fishermen adorn their legs to attract fish.
led, in his footsteps, into some cellar, where the rats, intoxicated,
were letting themselves drown. We saw the horror that the appearance of
This figure had already caused the fire lieutenant terror.
which had gone so far as to cause her to faint--conversation with Mr.
Gailhard—and, for me, there is no doubt that the flame-head
encountered by this firefighter was the same one who caused such a cruel commotion
The Persian and the Viscount of Chagny (papers of the Persian).

[Note 7: These two pairs of boots were never found.]
had been deposited, according to the Persian's papers, right between the
bearing and the decor of the _King of Lahore_, in the place where one had
Joseph Briquet was found hanged. They must have been taken by someone
machinist or "door closer".]




XXII


INTERESTING AND INSTRUCTIVE TRIBULATIONS OF A PERSIAN IN THE UNDERGROUND
OF THE OPERA


_Tale of the Persian._


The Persian himself recounted how he had tried in vain,
until that night, to enter the Lake's dwelling by the
lake; how he had discovered the entrance to the third level below, and
how, finally, the Viscount of Chagny and he found themselves at
caught up with the infernal imagination of the ghost in the _room of
tortures._ Here is the written account he left us (in some
conditions which will be specified later) and to which I have not
I changed one word. I'm giving it as is, because I didn't think I should
to remain silent about the personal adventures of the daroga around the
House by the lake, before he fell in there with Raoul. Yes,
For a few moments, this very interesting beginning seems a little
Moving us away from the torture chamber is only so that we may better
to bring you there right away, after having explained some things to you
important and certain attitudes and ways of doing things of the Persian, which
may have seemed quite extraordinary.

"It was the first time I had entered the house by the lake,
wrote the Persian. In vain I had prayed to the trap-lover—it is
as well as, in our country, in Persia, we called Erik—to open the
mysterious doors. He had always refused. I, who was
paid to know many of his secrets and tricks, I had
I tried in vain, by trickery, to force the hand over the order. Ever since I had
Erik was found at the Opera House, where he seemed to have taken up residence.
I often spied on him, sometimes in the corridors upstairs, sometimes
in those below, sometimes on the very shore of the lake, while he
he believed he was alone, that he was getting into the small boat and that he was landing
directly to the opposite wall. But the shadow surrounding it was
still too opaque to allow me to see exactly where it
was playing with his door in the wall. Curiosity, and also an idea
formidable thought that came to me while reflecting on some remarks that
The monster had me, pushed me, one day when I thought I was alone
then it was my turn to jump into the small boat and steer it towards
that part of the wall where I had seen Erik disappear. It was then that
I had encountered the Siren who guarded the area around these places, and
whose charm had almost been fatal to me, under the precise circumstances
Here it is. I had scarcely left the shore when silence fell among
which I was sailing was imperceptibly disturbed by a kind of breath
singing that surrounded me. It was both a breath and a
music; it rose gently from the waters of the lake and I was part of it
It was wrapped up without my being able to discover by what artifice. This...
followed, moved with me, and it was so sweet, that it didn't
It didn't scare me. On the contrary, in my desire to get closer to the
I leaned over, drawn to the source of this sweet and captivating harmony.
from my little boat, towards the waters, for there was no doubt
For me, that song came from the waters themselves. I was already at
middle of the lake and there was no one else in the boat but me;
the voice—for it was now clearly a voice—was
next to me, on the water. I leaned over... I leaned over again...
The lake was perfectly calm, and the moonbeam that, after having
passed through the basement window on Rue Scribe, came to illuminate it, don't me
showed absolutely nothing on its smooth, ink-black surface.
I shook my ears a little in an attempt to get rid of them
of a possible buzzing, but I had to face the facts.
that there is no ringing in the ears as harmonious as the
singing breath that followed me and that now attracted me.

If I had been a superstitious person or easily susceptible to
weak, I would not have failed to think that I was dealing with
some siren charged with disturbing the traveler bold enough to
traveling on the waters of the Lake House, but, thank God! I am from one
countries where people love fantasy too much not to know it
fundamentally, and I myself had studied it too much in the past, with the most...
Simply put, someone who knows their job can make the
poor human imagination.

I therefore had no doubt that I was grappling with a new
Erik's invention, but again this invention was so
perfect that, leaning over the small boat, I was
less driven by the desire to uncover the deception than by the desire to enjoy it
of its charm.

And I leaned over, I leaned over... until I capsized.

Suddenly, two monstrous arms emerged from the depths of the waters and
They grabbed my neck, dragging me into the abyss with force
Irresistible. I would certainly have been lost if I hadn't had the time to
I let out a cry which Erik recognized as my own.

Because it was him, and instead of drowning me like he had
Certainly with that intention, he swam and gently set me down on the shore.

"See how reckless you are," he said, standing up in front of me.
dripping with this hellish water. Why try to enter my
Stay! I didn't invite you. I don't want you or anyone else here.
World! Did you save my life only to make it unbearable? If
However great the service rendered, Erik may eventually forget it and
You know that nothing can hold Erik back, not even Erik himself.

He spoke, but now I had no other desire than to know
what I was already calling _the mermaid thing_. He was willing
to satisfy my curiosity, because Erik, who is a real monster—to me,
That is how I judge him, having had, alas! in Persia, the opportunity to
seeing it at work—is still, in some ways, a true child.
presumptuous and vain, and he loves nothing so much, after having astonished
his world, than to prove all the truly miraculous ingenuity of
his mind.

He started laughing and showed me a long reed stalk.

"It's as easy as pie!" he told me, "but it's very convenient for
Breathing and singing in the water! It's something I learned at
Tonkin pirates, who can thus remain hidden for hours on end
at the bottom of rivers[8].

I spoke to him sternly.

"That's something that almost killed me!" I said... and it was perhaps
fatal to others!

He didn't answer me, but he stood up in front of me with that look of
a childish threat that I know well from him.

I wasn't going to let myself be intimidated. I told him very clearly:

--You know what you promised me, Erik! No more crimes!

"Do I really," he asked, adopting a friendly tone, "have
committed crimes?

"Wretched man!" I cried. "So you've forgotten the rosy hours of..."
Mazenderan?_

"Yes," he replied, suddenly sad, "I prefer to have them."
They were forgotten, but I made the little sultana laugh.

"All that," I declared, "is in the past... but there is the present..."
and you owe me an account of the present, since, if I had wished, he
wouldn't exist for you!... Remember that, Erik: I saved you
the life!

And I took advantage of the turn the conversation had taken to speak to him.
of something that had been frequently on my mind for some time.

"Erik," I asked... "Erik, swear to me..."

"What?" he said. "You know very well that I don't keep my promises."
Oaths are made to catch fools.

--Tell me... You can tell me that, can't you?

--Well?

--Well!... The chandelier... the chandelier? Erik...

--What, the chandelier?

--You know what I can say?

"Ah!" he sneered, "that chandelier... I'll tell you what!"
Chandelier, that wasn't me!... The chandelier was very worn...

When he laughed, Erik was even more frightening. He jumped into the
boat, sneering in such a sinister way that I couldn't help but
tremble.

"Very worn, dear _Daroga!_[9] Very worn, the chandelier!... It has fallen"
All by himself... He went boom! And now, a word of advice, Daroga, go...
Dry yourself, if you don't want to catch a head cold!... and don't
Never get back in my boat... and above all, don't try to get into
My house... I'm not always there... Daroga! And I should have
It pains me to dedicate my requiem mass to you!

Saying this and sneering, he stood at the back of his boat and
He was scuttling with a monkey-like sway. He certainly looked like he was then.
fatal rock, with its golden eyes to boot. And then, I soon didn't live
more than his eyes and finally he disappeared into the night of the lake.

It was from that day on that I gave up trying to enter his
stay by the lake! Obviously, that entrance was too good
kept it, especially since he knew I knew her. But I
I was pretty sure he'd find another one, because more than once
I had seen Erik disappear down the third level, while I
I was watching, and without being able to imagine how. I cannot overstate it.
I've been repeating myself ever since I found Erik again, who was living at the Opera, I
I lived in perpetual terror of his horrible fantasies, no
that was certainly the case for me, but I dreaded everything about
him for others[10]. And when some accident happened, some
In the face of this fatal event, I couldn't help but think to myself: "Perhaps it's
Erik!...» as others around me were saying: «It's the
"Ghost!..." How many times have I heard that phrase uttered
by people who were smiling! The poor things! If they had known that this
the ghost existed in flesh and blood and was far more terrifying than
the vain shadow they evoked, I swear they would have ceased to
To mock them!... If only they knew what Erik was capable of,
especially in a venue like the Opera House!... And if they had
I knew the very depths of my formidable thoughts!...

As for me, I was no longer alive!... Although Erik had strongly told me
solemnly declared that he had changed a great deal and had become the most
virtuous of men, _since he was loved for himself_, phrase
which left me terribly perplexed at the time; I couldn't
to stop me from shuddering at the thought of the monster. Its horrible, unique and
His repulsive ugliness placed him outside the bounds of humanity, and he was
It often appeared that he no longer believed himself to be, by that very fact, any
duty towards the human race. The way he had spoken to me
His love affairs had only intensified my anxieties, for I foresaw
in this event to which he had alluded in a tone of
the boasting I knew him for, the cause of new and more dramas
awful compared to everything else. I knew to what degree of sublime and
Disastrous despair could have accompanied Erik's pain, and the words
that he had held for me—vaguely harbingers of the most horrible
catastrophe--never ceased to inhabit my dreadful thoughts.

On the other hand, I had discovered the bizarre moral trade that had
established between the monster and Christine Daaé. Hidden in the room of
storage room adjoining the young diva's dressing room, I had attended
to admirable musical sessions, which obviously immersed
Christine in a wonderful ecstasy, but still I had
I had no idea that Erik's voice—which was as resounding as the
thunderous or as gentle as that of angels, at will—could make one forget
its ugliness. I understood everything when I discovered that Christine hadn't
Not seen yet! I had the opportunity to enter the box and, me
Remembering the lessons he had once given me, I had no
struggling to find the thing that rotated the wall that supported the
ice, and I observed by what means of hollow bricks, of
using megaphone bricks, he made himself heard by Christine as if he had
I was by his side. That's also how I discovered the path that leads
at the fountain and in the dungeon—in the Communards' dungeon—and also the
trapdoor that was supposed to allow Erik to enter directly into the
behind the scenes.

A few days later, imagine my astonishment!
to learn, with my own eyes and ears, that Erik and
Christine Daaé could see themselves, and to surprise the monster, leaning over the
small weeping fountain, in the path of the Communards (at the very end,
underground) and refreshing Christine Daaé's forehead
She had fainted. A white horse, the Prophet's horse, had disappeared.
from the stables beneath the Opera, stood quietly beside
of them. I showed myself. It was terrible. I saw sparks fly from
two golden eyes and I was, before I could say a word, struck, in
full in the forehead, a blow that stunned me. When I came to, Erik,
Christine and the white horse had disappeared. I had no doubt that the
She was unfortunate enough to be imprisoned in the dwelling by the Lake.
After hesitation, I resolved to return to the shore, despite the danger.
certain of such an undertaking. For twenty-four hours I
I lay in wait, hidden near the dark bank, for the monster to appear, because I
I thought he had to go out, forced as he was to go and do his
provisions. And on that subject, I must say that, when he went out in
In Paris, or wherever he dared to show himself in public, he would put in place of his
horrible nostril, a papier-mâché nose adorned with a mustache, this
which did not entirely remove its macabre air, since,
When he passed by, people would say behind him, "Look, there's Father!"
"Death-defying passerby," but what made him more or less—I say
more or less --bearable to watch.

So I was watching for him on the shore of the lake—Lake Avernus, as he
had called, several times, in front of me, sneering, his lake--and
Tired of my long wait, I kept telling myself: He went through
another door, the one on the "third floor below", when I heard a
A soft lapping in the dark, I saw the two golden eyes shining like
lanterns, and soon the boat was approaching. Erik jumped onto the shore and
came to me.

"You've been here for twenty-four hours," he said to me; "you're bothering me!"
I'm telling you this is going to end very badly! And you'll be the one who gets it.
You wish! For my patience with you is prodigious!... You think you can follow me,
You huge fool, --(textual)--and it's me who follows you, and I know everything
that you know about me, here. I spared you yesterday, on my path of
Communards; but I tell you truly, I will never see you there again!
This is all very reckless, I swear! And I wonder if you know
That's what speaking means!

He was so angry that I had no idea, at that moment, of
interrupt him. After puffing like a seal, he clarified his
horrible thought--which corresponded to my dreadful thought.

--Yes, you need to know once and for all--once and for all, it's
Tell me what speaking means! I'm telling you that with your recklessness—because you
You've already been stopped twice by the shadow in the felt hat.
who didn't know what you were doing downstairs and who led you
to the directors, who took you for a whimsical Persian amateur of
fairy tales and backstage theatre stuff (I was there... yes,
I was there in the office; you know very well that I'm everywhere)--I'll tell you
With your recklessness, we'll end up wondering what you
Look here... and we'll eventually find out you're looking for Erik... and we'll
will want, like you, to look for Erik... and we will discover the house of
Lake... Well, too bad, old man! Too bad!... I'm no longer responsible for
Nothing!

He puffed again like a seal.

--You're welcome!... If Erik's secrets don't remain Erik's secrets,
Too bad for _many of those of the human race!_ That's all
I had something to tell you, and unless you're a huge
naive--(textual)--that should be enough for you; unless you know what
What does speaking mean?...

He sat on the back of his boat and was hitting the wood
from the small boat with her heels, while waiting for what I had to
I simply replied to him:

--It's not Erik I'm here looking for!...

--And who then?

--You know it well: it's Christine Daaé!

He replied:

--I have every right to invite him to my place. I am loved
for myself.

"That's not true," I said; "you took her away and you're holding onto her."
prisoner!

"Listen," he said to me, "do you promise not to interfere in my affairs anymore?"
If I prove to you that I am loved for myself?

"Yes, I promise," I replied without hesitation, because I thought
although for such a monster, such proof was impossible to obtain.

Well, there you have it! It's quite simple!... Christine Daaé will be released
He'll come back from here as he pleases, and he'll return!... Yes, he'll return! because
She'll like it... she'll come back on her own, because she loves me for
myself!...

"Oh! I doubt she'll come back!... But it's your duty to let her go."
leave.

--My duty, you immense fool! (verbatim)--It's my will... my will
I'll let her go, and she'll come back... because she loves me!... Everything
This, I tell you, will end in a wedding... a wedding at the Madeleine church.
You huge fool! (verbatim). Do you believe me, in the end? When I tell you that my
The wedding mass is already written... you'll see this _Kyrie_...

He tapped his heels again on the wood of the boat, in a sort of
of rhythm which he accompanied in a low voice while singing: _Kyrie!...
Kyrie!... Kyrie Eleison!_... You'll see, you'll see this mass!

"Listen," I concluded, "I'll believe you if I see Christine Daaé come out."
from the house by the lake and return there freely!

--And you won't take care of my affairs anymore?

Well! You'll see tonight... Come to the masked ball. Christine and
We'll go for a little stroll there... Then you'll go hide in the
storage room and you'll see that Christine, who will have returned to her
lodge, would ask for nothing better than to take up the path of the communards again.

--Agreed!

If I saw that, indeed, I would have no choice but to bow down, for a very
A beautiful person always has the right to love the most horrible monster.
especially when, like this one, it has the allure of music and when
This person is, in fact, a very distinguished opera singer.

--And now, go away! For I must leave to go and do my
walk!...

So I left, still worried about Christine Daaé, but
having above all, deep down inside, a formidable thought, since
that he had woken her up so wonderfully about my
imprudent actions.

I kept thinking, "How will all this end?" And, although I was
Being rather fatalistic by temperament, I couldn't rid myself of a
indescribable anguish because of the incredible responsibility that
I had taken a day, letting the monster that threatened live
today _many of those of the human race._

To my astonishment, things happened exactly as I had expected.
She had announced it. Christine Daaé left the house by the lake and returned there.
several times without her apparently being forced. My mind
he then wanted to detach himself from this mysterious love affair, but he was strong
difficult, especially for me—because of the dreadful thought—of not
I didn't think about Erik at all. However, resigned to extreme caution, I
did not make the mistake of returning to the shores of the lake nor of
To return to the path of the Communards. But the haunting presence of the gate
The secret of the third level pursuing me, I realized more than one
times directly in this place that I knew was mostly deserted
during the day. I would make endless stops there, turning around
the thumbs and hidden by a backdrop of _The King of Lahore_, which we had
left there, I don't know why, because we didn't play the
_King of Lahore._ So much patience had to be rewarded. One day,
I saw the monster coming towards me, on his knees. I was certain that he
He didn't see me. He passed between the scenery that was there and a
carrying, went to the wall and acted, at a place that I
I pointed out from a distance, on a spring that caused a stone to tip over, him
opening a passage. He disappeared through this passage and the stone closed again.
behind him. I had the monster's secret, a secret that could, to my
hour, deliver me the dwelling by the Lake.

To be sure, I waited at least half an hour and did, at my
Turn, play the spring. Everything happened just like it did for Erik. But I didn't have
I'm careful not to go into the hole myself, knowing Erik is at home.
On the other hand, the idea that I could be surprised here by Erik...
suddenly recalled the death of Joseph Buquet and, not wanting to
compromising such a discovery, which could be useful to
many people, _to many of those of the human race_, I left
the underside of the theatre, after carefully replacing the stone
place, following a system that had not varied since Persia.

You can imagine that I was still very interested in the plot.
of Erik and Christine Daaé, not that I obey in the
circumstance to a morbid curiosity, but rather because of, as
I've already said it, about that dreadful thought that never left me
not: "If, I thought, Erik discovers that he is not loved for
"With him, we can expect anything." And, without ceasing
Wandering—cautiously—through the Opera, I soon learned the truth about
the monster's sad loves. He occupied Christine's mind by the
terror, but the sweet child's heart belonged entirely to the
Viscount Raoul de Chagny. While they were both playing, like
two innocent fiancés, in the upper reaches of the Opera—fleeing the
monster--they had no idea that someone was watching over them.
I was determined to do anything: to kill the monster if necessary and to
to then give explanations to the justice system. But Erik did not show up
Not—and I wasn't any more reassured by that.

I need to explain my entire calculation. I thought the monster, hunted down
from his home by jealousy, would thus allow me to enter without
Danger in the house by the lake, through the passage of the third below.
It was in everyone's best interest for me to know exactly what
What could possibly be in there! One day, tired of waiting for a
On that occasion, I made the stone move and immediately I heard music
formidable; the monster was working, with all doors open in his home, at
his _Don Juan triumphant_. I knew that this was the work of his
life. I was careful not to move and I stayed prudently in my hole
dark. He stopped playing for a moment and began to walk through
his home, like a madman. And he said aloud, in a resounding voice:
"All of this must be finished—before!—completely finished!" These words
was not yet reassuring, and as the music started again, I
I closed the stone very gently. However, despite this closed stone,
I could still hear a faint, distant, distant song rising from the
deep in the earth, as I had heard the siren's song rising from the
bottom of the water. And I remembered the words of some machinists
which we smiled at the time of Joseph Buquet's death: "There was
around the body of the hanged man there was a noise that resembled the singing of
dead.

On the day of Christine Daaé's abduction, I didn't arrive at the theatre
quite late in the evening and trembling with the news of bad
news. I had had a terrible day, because I hadn't stopped,
since reading a morning newspaper announcing the marriage of
Christine and the Viscount of Chagny, to ask me if, after all, I
I would do no better to denounce the monster. But reason returned to me.
and I remained convinced that such an attitude could only hasten
the possible catastrophe.

When my car dropped me off in front of the Opera House, I looked at this monument
as if I were truly astonished to see him still standing!

But I am, like any good Oriental, a bit fatalistic, and I entered,
_expecting anything!_

The abduction of Christine Daaé from prison, which surprised
Naturally, everyone thought I was prepared. It was certain that Erik
he had made it disappear, like the king of magicians that he is, in
truth. And I really thought that this time it was the end for
Christine – and perhaps for everyone.

So much so that for a moment I wondered if I shouldn't advise...
All those people who lingered at the theater, to escape. But still
I was stopped in my tracks in this thought of denunciation, by the certainty
I knew where I was that people would think I was crazy. Anyway, I wasn't unaware
that if, for example, I shouted to get all these people to leave: "At
"Fire!" I could be the cause of a catastrophe, suffocation in
The flight, the trampling, the savage struggles—worse than a catastrophe
herself.

However, I resolved to act without further delay, personally.
The moment seemed, moreover, opportune. I had a great deal of luck for
that Erik should, at that moment, think only of his captive. It was necessary
I took the opportunity to enter his home through the third level below and I
I thought, for this undertaking, of enlisting the help of this poor little one
The desperate viscount, who, at the first word, accepted with confidence
within me, which touched me deeply; I had sent for my
pistols by my servant. Darius joined us with the box in
Christine's lodge. I gave the viscount a pistol and advised him
to be ready to shoot like myself, because, after all, Erik could
We were waiting behind the wall. We had to go through the path of
Communards and through the trapdoor.

The little viscount had asked me, upon noticing my pistols, if we
Were we going to fight a duel? Certainly! And I said: What a duel! But I had no
of course, there was no time to explain anything to him. The little viscount is
brave, but still he knew almost nothing about his
An opponent! And that was all for the best!

What is a duel with the most fearsome swordsman compared to a
A fight with the most brilliant magician? Me, I'm...
I was finding it hard to accept the thought that I was going to enter into a struggle with
a man who is only truly visible when he wants to be, and who, in
In contrast, he sees everything around him, while everything remains for you
obscure!... With a man whose bizarre science, subtlety,
Imagination and skill allow him to have all the
natural forces, combined to create for your eyes or ears
The illusion that destroys you!... And this, in the shadows of the Opera,
That is to say, in the very land of fantasy! Can one imagine that?
Without flinching? Can we even begin to imagine what might happen?
to reach the eyes or ears of an inhabitant of the Opera, if one had
locked inside the Opera House—in its five undergarments and its twenty-five
above—a fierce and “funny” Robert-Houdin, sometimes mocking and
Sometimes he hates! Sometimes he empties pockets, and sometimes he kills!...
Do you think about this: "Fighting the trap-hunting enthusiast?"—My God!
Did he create these amazing things in our country, in all our palaces?
Swinging traps are the best traps! --Fight
The trap enthusiast in the land of traps!...

If my hope was that he had not left Christine Daaé in
this lakeside residence where he had had to transport her, once again,
Having fainted, my terror was that he was already somewhere around
we, preparing _the Punjab loop_

No one knows how to throw the Punjabi shoelace better than he does, and he is the
Prince of stranglers, just as he is king of magicians. When
He had finished making the little sultana laugh, in the time of the hours
roses of Mazenderan_, she herself asked that he
He amused himself by making her shiver. And he hadn't thought of anything better.
than the Punjabi lace game. Erik, who had stayed in India,
He had returned with an incredible skill at strangulation. He
would have someone locked up in a courtyard where a warrior was brought—the most
often, a condemned man—armed with a long pike and a wide
sword. Erik, on the other hand, only had his shoelace, and it was still in the
at the moment the warrior thought he had struck Erik down with a formidable blow, that
The shoelace could be heard whistling. With a flick of his wrist, Erik had tightened
he looped the thin lasso around his enemy's neck and immediately dragged him in front
the little sultana and her ladies who were looking out of a window and
They applauded. The little sultana, too, learned to throw the
lace of Punjab and thus killed several of his wives and even of his
Friends are visiting. But I prefer to leave this terrible subject of the Hours
Roses of Mazenderan. If I mentioned them, it's because I had to, being
arrived with the Viscount of Chagny in the cellars of the Opera, put
warn my partner against a constantly threatening possibility
Around us, a feeling of suffocation. Indeed! Once underneath, my
Pistols were no longer of any use to us, because I was of course sure
that since he had not opposed our at first
Having joined the path of the Communards, Erik would no longer allow himself to be seen.
But he could still strangle us. I didn't have time.
to explain all this to the viscount and even I don't know if, having disposed
At that time, I would have used it to tell him that there was something
Partly, in the shadows, a Punjabi switchback ready to whistle. It was good
There was no need to complicate the situation, and I simply advised Mr.
de Chagny always kept his hand at eye level, his arm
folded into the position of a pistol shooter waiting for the
Fire command. In this position, it is impossible, even at
more skillful strangler, to usefully throw the Punjabi noose. In
At the same time as the neck, he takes your arm or hand and so this
The shoelace, which can be easily untied, becomes harmless.

After avoiding the police commissioner and some gatekeepers
doors, then the firefighters, and met the killer for the first time
of rats and went unnoticed by the man in the felt hat, the
The viscount and I reached the third level below without incident.
between the clothes rack and the backdrop of the _King of Lahore_. I made the stone move
and we jumped into the house that Erik had built for himself in the
double envelope of the foundation walls of the Opera House (and this, the most
quietly from the world, since Erik was one of the first
masonry contractors of Philippe Garnier, the architect of
the Opera, and that he had continued to work, mysteriously, all
alone, when the work was officially suspended, during the
war, the siege of Paris and the Commune).

I knew my Erik well enough to entertain the presumption that I could succeed in
discover all the things he had made during all this
at that time: so I was by no means reassured when I jumped into his
house. I knew what he had done to a certain palace in Mazenderan.
From the most honest construction in the world, he had soon made the
devil's house, where one could no longer utter a word without
Whether it was spied upon or reported by echo. What dramas!
Family! What bloody tragedies the monster dragged behind him!
with its trapdoors! Not to mention that one could never, in the
palaces that he had "rigged", to know exactly where one was.
He had some amazing inventions. Certainly, the most curious one was...
the most horrible and dangerous of all was the chamber of
tortures._ Except in exceptional cases where the little sultana
He amused himself by making the bourgeois suffer; hardly anyone was allowed in.
than those condemned to death. It was, in my opinion, the most atrocious
Imagination of the _pink hours of Mazenderan._ Also, when the visitor
who had entered the torture chamber "had had enough", he
He was always allowed to finish with a Punjabi shoelace that one
left at his disposal at the foot of the iron tree!

Now, how utterly was my emotion, immediately after entering the
the monster's abode, upon realizing that the room in which we
We had just jumped, Viscount de Chagny and I, it was precisely the
exact reconstruction of the torture chamber of the _rose hours of
Mazenderan._

At our feet, I found the Punjab loop that I had so dreaded.
all evening. I was convinced that this thread had already been used for
Joseph Buquet. The chief engineer must have been surprised, just like me.
One evening, Erik, while he was playing the third stone...
underneath. Curious, he too had tried to cross before the
The stone did not close and he had fallen into the chamber of
tortures, and he only emerged hanged. I could easily picture Erik
dragging the body he wanted to get rid of to the set of the
_King of Lahore_ and suspending him there, to make an example or to enlarge
_the superstitious terror that was supposed to help him guard the approaches to the
cave!_

But, after reflection, Erik went back to retrieve the Punjab lace, which
is very peculiarly made of cat intestines and which could have
to arouse the curiosity of an investigating judge. This explained the
disappearance of the hangman's rope.

And there it was, at our feet, the shoelace, in the bedroom
Torture!... I am not cowardly, but I'm sweating profusely.
flooded my face.

The lantern whose small red disc I was moving along the walls of the
The infamous room trembled in my hand.

Mr. de Chagny noticed this and said to me:

--So what's going on, sir?

I violently signaled him to be quiet, because I could still have
this supreme hope that we were in the chamber of
tortures, without the monster knowing anything about it!

And even that hope was not salvation, for I could
I can still very well imagine that, on the side of the third level below, the
The torture chamber was responsible for guarding the _Lake House_, and,
It can be, automatically.

Yes, the tortures might begin automatically.

Who could have said what actions they were waiting for from us to achieve this?

I recommended absolute immobility to my companion.

An overwhelming silence hung over us.

And my red lantern continued to circle the room of
Torture... I recognized her... I recognized her...

[Note 8: An administrative report, originating from Tonkin and arriving at
Paris, late July 1900, tells the story of how the famous gang leader, the De
Tham, hunted with his pirates by our soldiers, managed to escape them.
as well as all his family, thanks to the play of the reeds.]

[Note 9: Daroga, in Persia, commander general of the police of the
government.]

[Note 10: Here the Persian could have admitted that Erik's fate
He was also interested for himself, because he was well aware that if
The Tehran government had learned that Erik was still alive,
That was the end of the old man's modest pension, _Daroga_. He is
It is only fair, moreover, to add that the Persian had a noble heart and
generous and we have no doubt that the catastrophes he feared
for others had not strongly occupied his mind. His conduct, of the
The rest, in this whole affair, proves it sufficiently and is above
of all praise.]




XXIII


IN THE CHAMBER OF TORTURE


_Continuation of the Persian's story._


We were in the center of a small, perfectly shaped room
hexagonal... whose six wall sections were internally lined
of ice... from top to bottom... In the corners, you could see very well
the "additions" of ice... the small sections intended to rotate
on their drums... yes, yes, I recognize them... and I recognize
the iron tree in a corner, at the back of one of those small sectors...
the iron tree, with its iron branch... for the hanged.

I had seized my companion's arm. The Viscount of Chagny was completely
trembling, ready to shout to his fiancée for help.
brought... I feared he wouldn't be able to contain himself.

Suddenly, we heard a noise to our left.

At first, it was like a door opening and closing, in the
In the next room, there was a muffled groan. I couldn't hold it in any longer.
Mr. de Chagny's arm was still strongly grasped, then we heard
distinctly these words:

--It's a take-it-or-leave-it offer! _The wedding mass_ or _the mass of
dead.

I recognized the monster's voice.

There was another moan.

Following this, a long silence.

I was now convinced that the monster was unaware of our presence.
in his home, for if it had been otherwise, he would have been well
arranged so that we couldn't hear him. It would have been enough for him to
this involves hermetically sealing the small, invisible window through which
Those who enjoy torture look into the torture chamber.

And then, I was sure that if he had known we were there, the
the tortures would have begun immediately.

We therefore had a major advantage over Erik: we were at
his sides and he knew nothing about it.

The important thing was not to let him know, and I wasn't afraid
nothing so much as the impetus of the Viscount of Chagny who wanted to rush to
through the walls to reach Christine Daaé, whom we believed
to hear, at intervals, the moaning.

"The Mass for the Dead is no fun at all!" Erik's voice resumed, while
The wedding mass, tell me about it! It's magnificent! It must be
Make a resolution and know what you want! For me, it's...
It's impossible to continue living like this, deep in the earth, in a
hole, like a mole! _Don Juan Triumphant is over_, now I
I want to live like everyone else. I want to have a wife like everyone else.
world and we'll go for a walk on Sunday. I invented a mask
who looks like just anyone. We won't even turn around.
You will be the happiest of women. And we will sing for ourselves.
Alone, to the point of dying. You're crying! You're afraid of me! Yet I'm not
Not bad at heart! Love me and you'll see! _All I lacked was
To be loved in order to be good! If you loved me, I would be as gentle as a
lamb, and you would do with me whatever you wanted.

Soon the moaning that accompanied this sort of litany
Love grows, grows. I've never heard anything more
Desperate, Mr. de Chagny and I acknowledged that this frightening
The lamentation belonged to Erik himself. As for Christine, she
must have been somewhere, perhaps on the other side of the wall that we
before us stood people, speechless with horror, no longer having the strength to
scream, with the monster at his knees.

This lamentation was loud and rumbling and rattling like the
The lament of an ocean. Three times Erik drew this lament from the rock
from his throat.

--You don't love me! You don't love me! You don't love me!

And then, he softened:

--Why are you crying? You know you're making me sad.

Silence.

Every silence was a hope for us, we told ourselves: "He has
"Maybe Christine left behind the wall."

And we were only thinking about the possibility of warning Christine Daaé of
our presence without the monster suspecting a thing.

We could only leave the torture chamber now if
Christine opened the door for us; and it was on this condition
the first thing we could do to help him, because we didn't even know
where the door could be located around us.

Suddenly, the silence next door was broken by the sound of a
Electric bell.

There was a leap from the other side of the wall and a thunderous voice
Erik's:

--The doorbell's ringing! Please take the trouble to come in!

A mournful sneer.

Who's bothering us again? Wait here for me...
I'm going to tell the siren to open the door.

And footsteps faded into the distance, a door closed. I didn't have time
to think of the new horror that was being prepared; I forgot that the
The monster only came out for a new crime, perhaps; I didn't understand.
One thing was certain: Christine was alone behind the wall!

The Viscount of Chagny was already calling him.

--Christine! Christine!

As long as we could hear what was being said in the next room,
there was no reason why my partner should not be heard at
his turn. And, however, the viscount had to repeat his
call.

Finally, a faint voice reached us.

"I'm dreaming," she said!

--Christine! Christine! It's me, Raoul.

Silence.

"But answer me, Christine!... if you're alone, for heaven's sake!"
Answer me.

Then Christine's voice whispered Raoul's name.

Yes! Yes! It's me! This isn't a dream!... Christine, have
Trust!... We're here to save you... but not one
Recklessness!... When you hear the monster, warn us.

Raoul! Raoul!

She was told several times that she wasn't dreaming and that Raoul
de Chagny had been able to reach her, guided by a companion
devoted man who knew the secret of Erik's home.

But immediately the all-too-brief joy we brought him was followed by
a greater terror. She wanted Raoul to leave.
immediately. She trembled lest Erik discover her hiding place, because, in
In that case, he wouldn't have hesitated to kill the young man. She told us
in a few hurried words that Erik had gone completely mad
of love and that he was determined to kill everyone, including himself
with the world, if she did not consent to become his wife before the
The mayor and the priest, the priest of La Madeleine. He had given him
until eleven o'clock the following evening to think it over. It was the
last deadline. He would then have to choose, as he said, between the
wedding mass and the mass for the dead!

And Erik had uttered that phrase that Christine didn't have everything to
The fact is understood: "Yes or no; if it's no, everyone is dead and
_buried!_"

But I understood that sentence perfectly, because she answered
in a terrible way, to my dreadful mind.

"Could you tell us where Erik is?" I asked.

She replied that he must have left the house.

Could you please verify this?

--No!... I'm tied up... I can't move.

Upon learning this, Mr. de Chagny and I could not suppress a cry of rage.
Our salvation, all three of us, depended on freedom of movement
of the young girl.

--Oh! To free her! To reach her!

"But where are you?" Christine asked again... There's only
two doors in my room: the Louis-Philippe room, which I told you
Spoken, Raoul!... a door through which Erik enters and exits, and another
that he never opened in front of me and that he forbade me to cross
Never, because it is, he said, the most dangerous of doors... the
door of torture!...

--Christine, we're behind that door!...

--Are you in the torture chamber?

--Yes, but we can't see the door.

Ah! If only I could drag myself over there!... I would knock
against the door and you would clearly see where the door is.

"Is it a door with a lock?" I asked.

--Yes, with a lock.

I thought: It opens from the other side with a key, like all of them
the doors, but on our side, it opens with the spring
and the counterweight, and that's not going to be easy to discover.

"Mademoiselle!" I said, "you absolutely must open this for us."
door.

"But how?" replied the sorrowful voice of the unfortunate woman... We
we heard a body rustling, clearly trying
to free himself from the bonds that imprisoned him...

"We'll only get out of this through cunning," I said. "We must have the
key to this door...

"I know where she is," replied Christine, who seemed exhausted by
the effort she had just made... But I'm securely tied up!... The
miserable!...

And there was a sob...

"Where is the key?" I asked, ordering Mr. de Chagny to be quiet.
and to let me handle the matter because we didn't have a moment to
lose.

--In the room, next to the organ, with another small key in
bronze, which he also forbade me to touch. They are
both in a small leather bag which he calls: _The little bag of the
life and death... Raoul! Raoul!... flee!... everything here is
Mysterious and terrible... and Erik is going to go completely mad... And
You are in the torture chamber!... Go away either way!
You came! This room must have some reason for being called
With a name like that!

"Christine!" said the young man, "we'll leave here together or we'll leave together."
Let's die together!

--It is entirely up to us to get out of here safe and sound.
I sighed, but we must keep our cool. Why did he...
Attached, miss? You can't escape from here, can you?
Him! He knows it perfectly well!

"I wanted to kill myself! The monster, tonight, after having transported me..."
She had fainted, half-chloroformed, and had disappeared. He was...
Apparently—he told me so himself—he went to his banker! When
He came back, he found my face covered in blood... I had wanted to
Kill! I had hit my forehead against the walls.

"Christine!" moaned Raoul, and he began to sob.

--So, he tied me up... I'm only allowed to die tomorrow night
At eleven o'clock!...

This whole conversation across the wall was much more
"chopped" and much more cautious than I could give
the impression by transcribing it here. Often we stopped at
in the middle of a sentence, because we thought we heard a
A crackling sound, a step, an unusual movement... She was telling us: No! No!
It's not him!... He's out! He's definitely out! I recognized him
noise made by the wall of the lake as it closes.

"Miss!" I declared, "it was the monster himself who..."
Attached... he's the one who will untie you... It's just a game
The comedy that's needed for this!... Don't forget that he loves you!

"Unhappy woman!" we heard, "how could I ever forget her?"
Never!

--Remember this so you can smile at him... beg him... tell him that these
Relationships hurt you.

But Christine Daaé told us:

"Shh!... I hear something in the lake wall!... It's him!..."
Go away!... Go away!... Go away!...

"We wouldn't leave even if we wanted to!" I affirmed.
in order to impress the young girl. We can't leave now! And
We are in the torture chamber!

"Silence!" Christine whispered again.

The three of us fell silent.

Heavy footsteps dragged slowly behind the wall, then
They would stop and then the floorboards would groan again.

Then there was a tremendous sigh followed by a cry of horror from Christine
and we heard Erik's voice.

--I apologize for showing you such a face! I'm in a
Nice condition, isn't it? Is it the other person's fault? Why did he
Sounded? Do I ask passersby what time it is?
will no longer ask anyone for the time. It's the fault of the
siren...

Another sigh, deeper, more formidable, coming from the very depths of
the abyss of a soul.

--Why did you shout, Christine?

--Because I'm suffering, Erik.

--I thought I had scared you...

--Erik, loosen my bonds... am I not your prisoner?

--You'll still want to die...

--You gave me until tomorrow evening, eleven o'clock, Erik...

Footsteps still dragged on the floor.

--After all, since we must die together... and I am
As rushed as you are... yes, me too, I'm fed up with this life.
You understand!... Wait, don't move, I'll free you... You don't have
Just one word to say: _no!_ and it will be over right away, _for everyone
world_... You're right... you're right! Why wait until
Tomorrow at eleven o'clock? Ah! Yes, because that would have been more
Beautiful!... I've always had a penchant for decorum... for grandeur...
That's childish!... You should only think of yourself in life!... of your
My own death... the rest is superfluous... _Look at how I am
Wet?... Ah! My dear, I was wrong to go out... It
The weather is awful, not fit for a dog!... Apart from that,
Christine, I think I'm hallucinating... You know, that one
that was ringing at the siren's place just now, --go see at the bottom of the
lake, if it rings—well, it sounded like... There, turn around... are you
Happy? There you are, free... My God! Your wrists, Christine! I
Did I hurt them, tell me?... That alone deserves death... About
Dead, I must sing him his mass!

Upon hearing these terrible words, I couldn't help but have a
A terrible premonition... I, too, had once rung the doorbell.
of the monster... and without knowing it, of course!... I must have set it in motion
some warning current... And I remembered the two arms sticking out
Waters as black as ink... Who was the unfortunate man again?
Lost on these shores?

The thought of that unfortunate man almost prevented me from rejoicing in the
Christine's stratagem, and yet, the Viscount of Chagny murmured
In my ear, that magic word: delivered!... Who? Who was it?
_the other one?_ The one for whom we were hearing the mass at that moment
dead?

Ah! The sublime and furious song! The whole house by the lake roared with it...
The very bowels of the earth shuddered... We had put
our ears against the ice wall to better hear the game
Christine Daaé, the game she played for our deliverance, but we
We could hear nothing but the music of the Requiem Mass. That was
more like a mass for the damned... Deep down, it was a
demon parade.

I remember that the _Dies irae_ he sang enveloped us like
of a storm. Yes, we had lightning all around us and
Lightning... Indeed! I had heard him sing once... He was going
even to the point of making the stone mouths of my bulls sing
Androcephalic figures, on the walls of Mazenderan's palace... But to sing
Like that, never! Never! He sang like the god of thunder...

Suddenly, the organ and the voice stopped so abruptly that Mr. de
Chagny and I retreated behind the wall, so overcome were we by the shock... And
the voice suddenly changed, transformed, distinctly grating all
these metallic syllables.

What kind of shelter have you made out of my bag?




XXIV


THE TORROW BEGINS


(Continuation of the Persian's story)


The voice repeated furiously:

"What did you do with my bag?" Christine Daaé shouldn't have
tremble more than we do.

--You wanted me to free you so you could take my bag,
say?...

We heard hurried footsteps, Christine running back
in the Louis-Philippe room, as if seeking shelter from our
wall.

"Why are you running away?" said the angry voice that had followed... Do you want to
Give me back my bag! Don't you know it's the bag of life?
And of death?

"Listen to me, Erik," the young woman sighed, "...since now he is
Given that we have to live together... what does that mean to you?
Done?... Everything that's yours belongs to me!...

It was said in such a shaky way that it was pitiful.
The unfortunate woman had to use what little energy she had left to overcome
his terror... But it wasn't with such childish things
tricks, told through chattering teeth, that one could catch the
monster.

--You know perfectly well there are only two keys in there... What
"What do you want to do?" he asked.

"I would like," she said, "to visit this room that I don't know and"
that you've always hidden from me... It's a woman's curiosity!
she added, in a tone that was meant to sound cheerful but which should not
He only succeeded in increasing Erik's distrust because he sounded so fake...

"I don't like nosy women!" Erik retorted, "and you should."
Be wary of me ever since the Bluebeard story... Come on! Give me back my
Bag!... Give me back my bag!... Will you leave the key!... Little one
curious!

And he chuckled while Christine cried out in pain... Erik
had just taken the bag back from him.

It was at this moment that the viscount, unable to restrain himself any longer, threw a
a cry of rage and helplessness, which I managed with great difficulty to
to smother on her lips...

"Ah, but!" said the monster... "What is this?... You don't have..."
Understood, Christine?

"No! No!" replied the unfortunate woman; "I didn't hear anything!"

--It seemed to me that someone had shouted!

A scream!... Are you going mad, Erik?... Who do you want?
Who is shouting, deep inside this house?... It was I who shouted, because
You were hurting me!... I didn't hear a thing!...

"How can you tell me that!... You're trembling!... You seem quite moved!... You
Lies!... We shouted! We shouted!... There's someone in the room of
Torture!... Ah! I understand now!...

--There's nobody here, Erik!...

--I understand!...

--Person!...

--Your fiancé... maybe!...

--Hey! I don't have a fiancé!... You know that perfectly well!...

Another nasty sneer.

—Besides, it's so easy to know... My little Christine, my
Love... you don't need to open the door to see what's going on
In the torture chamber... Do you want to see? Do you want to see?...
Hey!... If there's someone... if there really is someone, you'll see
to light up up there, near the ceiling, the invisible window... It
Just draw back the black curtain and then turn it off here... There, it's
Done... Let's turn off! You're not afraid of the night, in the company of your
little husband!...

Then, we heard Christine's dying voice.

No!... I'm scared!... I'm telling you I'm scared in the night!... This
The room doesn't interest me at all anymore!... You're the one who does everything for me
Time is frightening, like for a child, with this room of tortures!...
So, I was curious, it's true!... But she doesn't interest me
Not at all... not at all!...

And what I feared most of all began _automatically_...
We were suddenly flooded with light!... Yes, behind our
The wall, it was like a blaze. The Viscount of Chagny, who didn't go there
He wasn't expecting it, he was so surprised he staggered. And the voice of
Anger erupted nearby.

--I told you there was someone there!... Now you see, the
window?... the bright window!... way up there!... the one who is
Behind that wall, he can't see her!... But you, you're going to climb up
The double ladder. That's what it's there for!... You've asked me about it often
What it was used for... Well! Now you know!
It is used to look out of the window of the torture chamber...
little curious one!...

--What tortures?... what tortures are there in there?... Erik!
Erik! Tell me you're trying to scare me!... Tell me, if you
Love me, Erik!... Isn't it true that there are no tortures? These are
Stories for children!...

--Go and look, my dear, at the little window!...

I don't know if the viscount, beside me, could now hear the voice
the young woman was failing, so preoccupied was he with the show
an incredible thought that had just dawned on her bewildered gaze... As for me, who
I had already seen that spectacle far too often, through the small window
In the _Pink Hours of Mazenderan_, I was only occupied with what was happening
he was saying to the side, looking for a reason to act, a resolution to
take.

Go and look, go and look at the little window!... You'll tell me!...
You'll tell me afterwards what his nose looks like!

We heard the ladder being rolled as it was placed against the wall...

"Come on in!... No!... No, I'll come in... me, darling!"

--Well! yes... I'll go see... leave me alone!

--Ah! My little darling!... My little darling!... how you are
Cute... It's very kind of you to spare me this trouble.
age!... You'll tell me what his nose is like!... If people
They doubted the happiness of having a nose... a nose of one's own...
They would never come wandering around the torture chamber!

At that moment, we distinctly heard above our heads,
these words:

"My friend, there's nobody here!"

"Nobody?... Are you sure there's nobody here?"

Well, no... there's nobody here...

--Well, that's great!... What's wrong, Christine?... Well, what!
You won't feel bad!... Since there's nobody here!...
There!... get down!... there!... Get yourself together! since there's no one there...
_But what do you think of the scenery?_...

--Oh! Very good!...

--Come on! It's getting better!... Isn't it, it's getting better!... So much the better,
It's better now!... No emotion!... And what a strange house, isn't it?
Where else can you see landscapes like these?...

--Yes, it's like being at Madame Tussauds!... But, tell me, Erik... he
There's no torture involved!... Do you know that you made me
A fear!...

"Why, since there's nobody here!..."

"Did you design this room yourself, Erik?... Do you know that..."
It's very beautiful! You are definitely a great artist, Erik...

--Yes, a great artist "in my style".

"But tell me, Erik, why did you call this room the..."
Torture chamber?...

--Oh! It's quite simple. First, what did you see?

--I saw a forest!...

--And what is in a forest?

--Trees!...

--And what's inside a tree?

--Birds...

--You saw some birds...

--No, I didn't see any birds.

--So, what did you see! Look!... You saw branches! And what is it?
"What's in a branch?" said the terrible voice... "There's a gallows!"
That's why I call my forest the chamber of tortures!... You
Look, it's just a figure of speech! It's all a joke!... Me,
I never express myself like others!... I don't do anything like the
Others!... But I'm so tired of it!... so tired!... I have
Enough, you see? To have a forest in my house, and a bedroom of
Torture!... And to be housed like a charlatan at the bottom of a box
A false bottom!... I've had enough! I've had enough!... I want to have a
quiet apartment, with ordinary doors and windows and
An honest woman inside, like everyone else!... You should understand
That's it, Christine, and I shouldn't need to repeat it to you.
At every turn!... A woman like any other!... A woman who
I would like to take him for a walk on Sundays, and make him laugh
All week long! Ah! You wouldn't get bored with me! I have more than one
trick up my sleeve, not to mention the card tricks!... Here! Do you want to
Shall I do some card tricks for you? That'll always make us pass the time.
Just a few minutes, until tomorrow evening at eleven o'clock!... My little one
Christine!... My little Christine!... Are you listening to me?... You're not...
Push it away!... Tell me? You love me!... No! You don't love me!... But
It doesn't matter! You'll love me! Before, you couldn't look
My mask because you knew what was behind it... And
Now you just want to watch it and you forget what's there.
behind, and you won't push me away anymore!... We get used to
Anything, if you want to... if you have the will!... So many
Young people who didn't love each other before marriage became devoted to each other.
Afterwards! Ah! I don't know what I'm saying anymore... But you'd have a lot of fun
With me!... There's no one like me, for example, I swear!
before the good Lord who will marry us—if you are reasonable—there is no
No one like me to be a ventriloquist! I'm the first
Ventriloquist of the world!... You're laughing!... You might not believe me!...
Listen!

The wretch (who was, in fact, the world's first ventriloquist)
was stunning the little girl (I was perfectly aware of that) to
to divert his attention from the torture chamber!... Calculation
Stupid!... Christine was only thinking of us!... She kept repeating to
several times, in the gentlest tone she could find and of the
most ardent supplication:

"Turn off the little window!... Erik! Turn off the little window!"
window!...

Because she was convinced that this light, which had suddenly appeared to the little girl
window, and about which the monster had spoken in such a threatening way,
had its terrible reason for being... Only one thing had to
To reassure her momentarily, she had seen both of us.
behind the wall, in the center of the magnificent blaze, standing and well
clothes racks!... But she would have been more reassured, certainly!... if the
The light had gone out...

The other one had already started doing the ventriloquist act. He was saying:

Hey! I'm lifting my mask a little! Oh! Just a little... You see
My lips? What lips do I have? They don't move!... My mouth
is closed... my kind of mouth... and yet you hear my
voice!... I speak from my gut... it's completely natural... we call
That's a ventriloquist's trick!... It's well known: listen to my voice... where
Do you want it to go? Into your left ear? Into your ear
right?... in the table?... in the small ebony boxes of the
Fireplace?... Ah! That surprises you... My voice is in the little boxes
From the chimney! Do you want it far away?... Do you want it close?...
Loud?... High-pitched?... Nasal?... My voice wanders
Everywhere!... everywhere!... Listen, my darling... in the little box of
to the right of the fireplace, and listen to what she says: _Should we turn the
Scorpion?... And now, crack! Listen to what she says in the little
Left box: _Should we turn the grasshopper?_... And now,
Crack!... Here she is in the little leather bag... What is she saying?
"I am the little bag of life and death!" And now,
crack!... there she is in the Carlotta gorge, at the very bottom of the gorge
golden, from Carlotta's crystal throat, I swear!... What is it
What did she say? She said, "It's me, Mr. Toad! It's me who..."
sings: _I listen to that lonely voice... quack!... singing in my
"Quack!..." And now, crack, she's arrived on a chair of the
the ghost's lodge... and she said: "Madame Carlotta sings tonight _at
"Take down the chandelier!"... And now, crack!... Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha!...
Where is Erik's voice?... Listen, Christine, my darling!... Listen...
She is behind the door of the torture chamber!
Listen to me!... It is I who am in the torture chamber!... And
What am I saying? I'm saying, "Woe to those who have happiness."
to have a nose, a real nose of their own, and who come to stroll in the
"Court of torture!... Ha! Ha! Ha!"

Damn voice of the formidable ventriloquist! It was everywhere, everywhere!...
She passed through the small, invisible window... through the walls...
She was running around us... between us... Erik was there!... He was there
He was speaking!... We made a gesture as if to throw ourselves at him... but,
already, faster, more elusive than the sonorous voice of the Echo,
Erik's voice had bounced off the wall!

Soon we could no longer hear anything at all, for this is what
what happened:

Christine's voice:

--Erik! Erik!... You're tiring me out with your voice... Be quiet!
Erik! Don't you think it's hot in here?

"Oh! Yes!" replied Erik's voice, "the heat is becoming unbearable!"

And again, Christine's voice, hoarse with anguish:

"What is this?!... The wall is all hot!... The wall is"
burning!...

--I'll tell you, Christine, my dear, it's because of "the
forest next door!... ».

--Well!... what do you mean!... the forest?...

--So you didn't see that it was a forest in the Congo?_

And the monster's laughter rose so terrible that we could no longer distinguish
Christine's pleading cries!... The Viscount of Chagny shouted and
He was banging on the walls like a madman... I couldn't take it anymore
to remember... But all we could hear was the monster's laughter... and the monster
He himself must have heard nothing but her laughter... And then there was the noise
of a quick struggle, of a body falling to the floor and that one
lingers... and the sound of a door slamming shut... and then,
Nothing, nothing around us but the blazing silence of midday...
in the heart of an African forest!...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




XXV


"Barrels, barrels! Do you have any barrels for sale?"


(Continuation of the Persian's story)


I said that this room in which we were, Mr.
Viscount de Chagny and I, was regularly hexagonal and garnished
entirely made of ice. We have since seen, particularly in some
exhibitions, of these kinds of rooms arranged in this way and
called: "house of mirages" or "palace of illusions". But
The invention is entirely Erik's doing, who built, under my
eyes, the first room of its kind during the _Pink Hours of
Mazenderan._ It was enough to place some pattern in the corners
decorative, like a column, for example, to have instant
a palace with a thousand columns, for, by the effect of the mirrors, the hall
the actual number increased by six hexagonal rooms, each of which
multiplied infinitely. Long ago, to amuse "the little sultana," he
had thus arranged a setting which became the "innumerable temple";
But the little sultana quickly grew tired of such a childish illusion,
And so Erik transformed his invention into a torture chamber. Instead
of the architectural motif placed in the corners, he put in the first painting
An iron tree. Why this tree, which perfectly imitated life,
With its painted leaves, was it made of iron? Because it must have been
strong enough to withstand all attacks from the "patient" that
They were locked in the torture chamber. We will see how, by
Twice, the resulting scenery instantly transformed into
two other successive sets, thanks to the automatic rotation of the
drums that were in the corners and had been divided
in thirds, following the angles of the mirrors and each supporting a motif
decorative elements that appeared one after another.

The walls of this strange room offered the patient no purchase.
since, apart from the decorative motif of a solidity to all
As a test, they were only filled with ice cream and quite a lot of ice cream
thick so that they would have nothing to fear from the rage of the
wretched people were thrown there, moreover, with their bare hands and feet.

No furniture. The ceiling was bright. An ingenious system of
electric heating, which has since been imitated, made it possible to increase
the temperature of the walls at will and thus give the room
the desired atmosphere...

I strive to list all the precise details of an invention
all natural giving this supernatural illusion, with some
painted branches, from an equatorial forest ablaze with the sun
midday, so that no one can question the current tranquility
from my brain, so that no one has the right to say:

"This man has gone mad," or "this man is lying," or "this man is telling us..."
take them for fools"[11].

If I had simply told the story like this: "Having gone down to
At the bottom of a cellar, we encountered a blazing equatorial forest
"By the midday sun," I would have achieved a beautiful effect of astonishment.
stupid, but I'm not looking for any effect, my goal being, in writing
these lines, to recount exactly what happened to Mr.
Viscount of Chagny and I during a terrible adventure which, one
At the moment, it occupied the justice system of this country.

I will now pick up the facts where I left off.

When the ceiling lit up and the forest around us was illuminated,
The viscount's astonishment exceeded anything one could imagine.
The appearance of this impenetrable forest, whose trunks and
Countless branches embraced us _to infinity_, the plunge
in a terrifying state of consternation. He ran his hands over his forehead
as if to chase away a dreamlike vision, and her eyes blinked
like eyes that struggle upon waking, to regain awareness of the
The reality of things. For a moment, he forgot to listen!

I said that the appearance of the forest did not surprise me at all. Also
I listened to what was happening in the next room to the two of us.
Finally, my attention was drawn less to the decor,
which my thoughts were rid of, only by the ice itself which
produced. This ice, in places, was broken.

Yes, she had scratches; we had managed to "star" her.
despite its solidity, and this proved to me beyond any doubt that the
the torture chamber in which we found ourselves, had already
Served!

A wretch, whose feet and hands were less bare than the
condemned from the _Pink Hours of Mazenderan_ had certainly fallen
in this "Deadly Illusion," and, mad with rage, had struck these
mirrors which, despite their minor injuries, were no less
continued to reflect his agony! And the branch of the tree where he had
Having finished her torture, she was arranged in such a way that before
To die, he had been able to see a thousand people wriggling with him—supreme consolation.
Hanged!

Yes! Yes! Joseph Buquet had been here!...

Were we going to die like him?

I didn't think so, because I knew we had a few hours
before us and that I could use them more usefully than Joseph
Buquet had not been able to do it.

Didn't I have a thorough knowledge of most of the "tricks"?
Erik's? It was now or never to use it.

First, I completely abandoned the idea of ​​returning through the passage that we
had led into that cursed room, I paid no attention to the
possibility of re-activating the inner stone that closed this
passage. The reason was simple: I couldn't afford it!... We
planes jumped from too high into the torture chamber and there was no furniture
no longer allowed us to reach this passage, not even the
branch of the iron tree, not even the shoulders of one of us in
as a step stool.

There was only one possible way out left, the one that opened onto the
Louis-Philippe room, and in which Erik and Christine were staying
Daaé. But if this exit were in the ordinary state of a door of the
As for Christine, she was completely invisible to us... He
So they had to try to open it without even knowing where she was getting her
place, which was no ordinary task.

When I was quite sure that there was no hope left for us, from
Christine Daaé's side, when I heard the monster training or
rather drag the unfortunate young girl out of the room
Louis-Philippe, so that she would not disturb our torment, I
resolved to get straight to work, that is to say, to the
searching for the door trick.

But first I had to calm Mr. de Chagny, who was already strolling around
in the clearing like a madman, shouting
incoherent. The snippets of conversation he had managed to overhear,
Despite her distress, there was little distance between Christine and the monster.
contributed to driving him out of his mind; if you add to that the blow of
the magical forest and the intense heat that was beginning to
sweat will trickle down his temples, you will have no trouble
to understand that Mr. de Chagny's mood was beginning to suffer a
A certain exhilaration. Despite all my recommendations, my companion
no longer showed any caution.

He was going back and forth for no reason, rushing towards a space
non-existent, believing he was entering an alley that led him to
the horizon and, after a few steps, bumping his forehead against the very reflection.
of its illusion of a forest!

As he did so, he shouted: Christine! Christine!... and he waved his
pistol, still calling with all its might to the monster, defying
a duel to the death with the Angel of Music, and he also insulted his
illusory forest. It was the torture that produced its effect on a
unprejudiced mind. I tried as much as possible to fight it, by
reasoning as calmly as could be, this poor viscount: in him
bringing the ice and the iron tree close to the branches on
the drums and explaining to him, according to the laws of optics, everything
the luminous imagery that enveloped us and of which we did not
we could, like common ignorant people, be the victims!

--We are in a room, a small room, that's what it takes
keep repeating to you... and we'll leave this room when
We will have found the door. Well then! Let's look for it!

And I promised him that, if he let me do it, without overwhelming me with his
screams and his crazy walks, I would have found the trick to the door
before one o'clock.

So he lay down on the floor, as one does in the woods, and
he declared that he would wait until I had found the forest gate,
since he had nothing better to do! And he felt he should add that
From where he stood, "the view was splendid." (The
The torture, despite everything I had said, was still taking effect.

As for me, forgetting the forest, I began making a panel of ice cream and
I began to feel it from every angle, searching for its weak point, on
which one had to press to rotate the doors according to the
Erik's system of pivoting doors and hatches. Sometimes this point
faint could be a simple stain on the ice, as big as a
little pea, and underneath which was the spring to be operated. I
I searched! I searched! I felt so high that my hands could
reach. Erik was about the same height as me and I
I thought he hadn't positioned the spring any higher than he had
It was necessary because of its size—this was, moreover, only a hypothesis, but my
my only hope.--I had decided to do it this way, without weakness, and
meticulously examine all six glass panels and then
the prosecutor's office also paid very close attention.

While I was feeling the panels with the utmost care, I
I tried not to waste a minute because the heat was overcoming me.
More and more, and we were literally baking in that forest.
inflamed.

I had been working like that for half an hour and I was already finished
with three panels when our bad luck would have it that I
returned to a muffled exclamation uttered by the viscount.

"I'm suffocating!" he said... All these ice creams are reflecting heat back and forth
Hellish!... Will you soon find your spring?...
If you're even a little too late, we'll be roasting here!

I was not at all displeased to hear him speak like that. He had not
he said a word about the forest and I hoped that my companion's reason
could fight against the torment for quite some time longer. But he
he added:

What consoles me is that the monster has given until tomorrow evening.
Eleven o'clock to Christine: if we can't get out of here and bring her
Help! At least we'll be dead before her! Erik's mass will be able to
to serve everyone!

And he inhaled a breath of hot air that almost made him faint...

Since I did not have the same desperate reasons as Mr.
Viscount of Chagny, to accept death, I turned around, after
a few words of encouragement, towards my sign, but I had
wrong, when speaking of taking a few steps; so that in
the incredible tangle of the illusory forest, I could no longer find,
Definitely my sign! I saw myself having to start all over again, at
by chance... So I couldn't help but express my disappointment and the
The viscount understood that everything had to be redone. This gave him a new
cut.

"We'll never get out of this forest!" he moaned.

And his despair only grew. And, as it grew, his
Despair made him increasingly forget that he was dealing with
than ice cream and increasingly believing that he was struggling with
a real forest.

I, for one, had gone back to searching... to feeling around... The fever, to my
In turn, it was winning me over... because I couldn't find anything... absolutely nothing... In
The next room was just as silent. We were
completely lost in the forest... with no way out... without a compass... without
guide... without anything. Oh! I knew what awaited us if no one
came to our rescue... or if I couldn't find the spring... But
I searched high and low for the spring, but all I could find were branches...
admirable, beautiful branches that stood perfectly straight before me
or rounded off preciously above my head... But they
cast no shadow! That was quite natural, moreover, since
we were in an equatorial forest with the sun directly overhead
out of our heads... a forest in the Congo...

On several occasions. Mr. de Chagny and I had withdrawn and reinstated
our clothing, sometimes finding that it gave us more warmth and
at times he guaranteed us, on the contrary, this warmth.

I was still resisting morally, but M. de Chagny seemed to me completely
was "part of". He claimed that there were indeed three days and three
nights he walked without stopping in that forest, searching
by Christine Daaé. From time to time, he thought he glimpsed her behind
a tree trunk or sliding through the branches, and he called it
with pleading words that brought tears to my eyes.
"Christine! Christine!" he would say, "why are you running away from me? Don't you love me?"
No?... Aren't we engaged?... Christine, stop!... You
You can see I'm exhausted!... Christine, have mercy!... I'm going to
"To die in the forest... far from you!..."

"Oh! I'm thirsty!" he finally said with a delirious accent.

I was thirsty too... my throat was on fire...

And yet, now crouching on the parquet floor, that did not prevent me
Don't look... look... look for the door spring
invisible... especially since the stay in the forest was becoming
Dangerous as evening approached... Already the shadow of night was beginning
to envelop us... it had come very quickly, like night falls
in equatorial countries... suddenly, with barely any
dusk...

But nighttime in the forests of Ecuador is always dangerous.
especially when, like us, we don't have anything to light a fire with
to keep the ferocious beasts away. I had tried, neglecting a
instantly searching for my spring, to break branches that
I would have lit them with my dim lantern, but I had stumbled,
Me too, at the famous ice cream parlor, and that reminded me in time that
we were only dealing with images of branches...

With the daylight, the heat hadn't gone away, on the contrary... It was
Now even warmer under the blue glow of the moon. I
I recommended to the viscount that we keep our weapons ready to fire and that we not
not to stray from the site of our encampment, while I was searching
always my spring.

Suddenly the roar of the lion could be heard, a few steps away.
Our ears were torn from it.

"Oh!" said the viscount in a low voice, "he's not far!... You don't know him
Can't you see?... there... through the trees! In that thicket... If
roars again, I fire!...

And the roar began again, more tremendous than ever. And the viscount fired, but
I don't think he reached the lion; he only broke an ice cream cone;
I noticed it the next morning at dawn. During the night, we
we must have come a long way, because we suddenly found ourselves at the edge
of the desert, an immense desert of sand, stones, and rocks. This
It really wasn't worth leaving the forest only to fall into
The desert. Weary of the struggle, I lay down beside the viscount,
Personally, I'm tired of looking for springs that I can't find.
not.

I was quite astonished (and I told this to the Viscount) that we
We did not have any other bad encounters during the night.
Usually, after the lion, there was the leopard, and then
sometimes the buzzing of the tsetse fly. These were...
very easy effects to obtain, and I explained to Mr. de Chagny, during
that we rest before crossing the desert, that Erik obtained
the lion's roar with a long tambourine, ending in a skin
donkey at one end only. On this skin is bandaged a
gut string attached at its center to another string of the same
a type that runs the entire height of the drum. Erik then
than to rub this rope with a glove coated in rosin and, by the
The way he rubs, he perfectly imitates the voice of the lion or the
leopard, or even the buzzing of the tsetse fly.

This idea that Erik could be in the next room, with his
things, suddenly threw me into the resolve to enter into negotiations with
him, because, obviously, the idea of ​​surprising him had to be abandoned.
And now he needed to know what to expect from the inhabitants of
the torture chamber. I called out to him: Erik! Erik!... I screamed the loudest
I tried as hard as I could across the desert, but no one answered my
voices... All around us, silence and the naked immensity of this
desert _petré_... What would become of us in the middle of this dreadful
solitude?...

Literally, we were starting to die from the heat, hunger, and
Thirst... especially thirst... Finally, I saw Monsieur de Chagny rise up on
he moved his elbow and pointed to a point on the horizon... He had just
Discover the oasis!...

Yes, way over there, over there, the desert gave way to the oasis... a
oasis with water... water as clear as ice... water that
reflected the iron tree!... Ah, that... that was the painting of the
_mirage_... I recognized it immediately... the most terrible... None
I couldn't resist... none... I was trying my best to hold back all my
reason... _and not to expect water_... because I knew that if
We hoped for water, water that reflected the iron tree, and that if,
After hoping for water, we encountered ice; there was nothing.
There's only one thing left to do: hang yourself from the iron tree!

So I shouted to M. de Chagny: "It's a mirage!... it's the
Mirage!... Don't believe in water!... It's just another one of those things...
"Ice cream!"... Then he told me, as they say, to get lost, with
my ice cream thing, my springs, my revolving doors and my palace
Illusions!... He furiously claimed that I was either mad or blind.
to imagine all that water flowing there, between such beautiful
Countless trees, but there was no real water!... And the desert
It was true! And the forest too!... It wasn't him who needed it
"To make them believe"... he had traveled enough... and in all the
country...

And he dragged himself along, saying:

--Water! Water!...

And his mouth was open as if he were drinking...

And I, too, had my mouth open as if I were drinking...

For not only did we see it, the water, but also...
We could hear it! We could hear it flowing... lapping!
Do you understand the word "clapoter"?... It's a word we hear with the
tongue!... The tongue sticks out of the mouth to better
Listen to him!...

Finally, a torture more unbearable than anything, we heard the rain and
It wasn't raining! That was the devil's invention... Oh! I
I also knew very well how Erik got it! He filled it with
small stones a very narrow and very long box, cut by
intervals of wooden and metal valves. The small stones, in
falling, they encountered these sluice gates and ricocheted from one to the other, and
This was followed by staccato sounds that were strikingly reminiscent of the
the sizzling of a thunderstorm.

...Also, you should have seen how we were sticking our tongues out, Mr. de Chagny and
me, as we dragged ourselves towards the lapping shore... _our eyes and our
Our ears were full of water, but our tongues remained dry as
horn!

When he got to the ice cream, Mr. de Chagny licked it... and so did I...
I licked the ice...

She was passionate!...

Then we rolled on the ground, with a desperate groan. Mr. de Chagny
he brought the last pistol, which had remained loaded, close to his temple and
I looked down at the Punjab's lacework.

I knew why, in this third setting, the tree of
iron!...

The iron tree was waiting for me!...

But as I was looking at the Punjab loop, I saw something that made me
to startle so violently that M. de Chagny was arrested in his
a suicidal impulse. He was already whispering, "Goodbye, Christine!..."

I grabbed his arm. And then I took the gun from him... and then I
I dragged myself on my knees until I had seen.

I had just discovered, near the Punjab loop, in the groove of the
parquet flooring, a black-headed nail whose use I was well aware of...

Finally! I'd found the spring!... the spring that was going to do
to play the door!... who was going to give us freedom!... who was going to
Erik will deliver it to us.

I felt the nail... I showed Mr. de Chagny a figure
Radiant!... The black-headed nail gave way under my pressure...

And then...

...And then it wasn't a door that opened in the wall, but
a trapdoor that was triggered in the floor.

Immediately, fresh air reached us from this black hole. We
We leaned over this square of shadow as if over a clear spring. The chin
In the cool shade, we drank it.

And we were bending over the trapdoor more and more.
Could there possibly be anything in that hole, in that cellar that came
to mysteriously open his door in the floor?...

Perhaps there was water in there?...

Water to drink...

I stretched out my arm into the darkness and met a stone, and
then another... a staircase... a dark staircase that led down to the
cellar.

The viscount was already ready to throw himself into the hole!

Even if no water could be found there, one could escape.
to the radiant embrace of these abominable mirrors...

But I stopped the viscount, for I feared another trick from the monster.
And, with my dim lantern lit, I went down first...

The staircase plunged into the deepest darkness and turned
on himself. Ah! the adorable freshness of the staircase and the
darkness!...

This coolness was less likely to come from the established ventilation system
necessarily by Erik than the very freshness of the earth which
It must have been completely saturated with water at the level where we were...
And besides, the lake couldn't be far away!...

We were soon at the bottom of the stairs... Our eyes began to
to settle in the shade, to distinguish shapes around us...
round shapes... onto which I directed the beam of light from my
lantern...

Barrels!...

We were in Erik's cellar!

That's where he must have kept his wine and perhaps his drinking water...

I knew Erik was a big fan of fine wines...

Ah! There was plenty to drink there!...

Mr. de Chagny caressed the round shapes and repeated tirelessly:

Barrels! Barrels!... So many barrels!...

In fact, there were quite a few of them lined up tightly
symmetrically on two lines between which we found ourselves...

They were small barrels, and I imagined Erik had chosen them.
This size makes it easy to transport to the house by the lake!

We examined them one after the other, looking to see if any of them
they had no such chantepleure indicating to us by that very fact
that one would have drawn from it from time to time.

But all the barrels were very tightly sealed.

So, after lifting one halfway to find that it was
full, we knelt down and with the blade of a small knife that
I had it on me, I was able to blow the "plug".

At that moment, I thought I heard, as if coming from very far away, a
a kind of monotonous chant whose rhythm was familiar to me, because I had
Heard very often in the streets of Paris:

"Barrels!... Barrels!... Do you have any barrels... for sale?"

My hand was immobilized on the drain plug... Mr. de Chagny had also
Understood. He told me:

--That's funny!... it sounds like the barrel is singing!...

The singing resumed further away...

"Barrels!... Barrels!... Do you have any barrels for sale?"

"Oh! Oh! I swear," said the viscount, "that the song is fading away."
the barrel!...

We got up and went to look behind the barrel...

"It's in!" said Mr. de Chagny; "it's in!"

But we couldn't hear anything anymore... and we were reduced to
to blame the poor condition, the real disturbance of our senses...

And we returned to the drain. Mr. de Chagny put his two hands together
underneath and with a final effort, I popped the plug.

"What is this?" exclaimed the viscount immediately... This
It's not water!

The viscount had brought his two full hands close to my lantern... I
I leaned over the viscount's hands... and, at once, I threw back my
the lantern suddenly flew so far away from us that it shattered and went out...
and was lost to us...

What I had just seen in Mr. de Chagny's hands... was...
The powder!

[Note 11: At the time the Persian was writing, one understands very
although he had taken so many precautions against the spirit
of disbelief; today when everyone has been able to see these kinds
of rooms, they would be superfluous.




XXVI


SHOULD WE TURN THE SCORPION? SHOULD WE TURN THE GRASSHOPPER?


(_End of the Persian's story._)


Thus, by descending to the bottom of the vault, I had reached the very bottom of
My thought, dreadful! The wretch had not deceived me with his
Vague threats directed at many members of the human race! Outside
far from humanity, he had built himself a beast's lair
underground, determined to blow everything up with him in a
a spectacular catastrophe if those from above the earth were to hunt him down
in the lair where he had taken refuge with his monstrous ugliness.

The discovery we had just made threw us into a state of excitement which
It made us forget all our past sorrows, all our suffering.
present... Our exceptional situation, even though everything at
At the time we found ourselves on the very brink of suicide, let us not
had not yet appeared with more precise horror. We
now we understand everything he had meant and everything he had
said the monster to Christine Daaé and all that the abominable meant
phrase: "_Yes or no!... If it's no, everyone is dead and
buried!_...» Yes, buried under the debris of what had been the
The Grand Opera of Paris!... Could one imagine a more appalling crime for
To leave the world in an apotheosis of horror? Prepared for the
From the tranquility of his retirement, the catastrophe would serve to avenge the
loves of the most horrible monster who had ever walked beneath the
Two!... "Tomorrow evening, at eleven o'clock, final deadline!..." Ah! He
had chosen his time well!... There would be a lot of people at the
party!... many of those of the human race... up there... in the
The flamboyant decorations of the music house!... What a beautiful procession!
Could he dream as he died?... He was about to descend into the grave
with the most beautiful shoulders in the world, adorned with every jewel...
Tomorrow night, eleven o'clock!... We were supposed to jump in the middle of
performance... if Christine Daaé were to say: No!... Tomorrow evening, eleven
hours!... And how could Christine Daaé not say: No? Is it
that she would rather not marry death itself than this
A living corpse? Wasn't she unaware that her refusal
Did the sudden fate of many members of the human race depend on it?...
Tomorrow evening, eleven o'clock!...

And, as we dragged ourselves through the darkness, fleeing the gunpowder, in
trying to find the stone steps... because way up there,
above our heads... the trapdoor that leads into the chamber of
Mirrors, in turn, went dark... we repeat to ourselves: Tomorrow
eleven o'clock tonight!...

...Finally, I find the stairs again... but suddenly, I straighten up
straight onto the first step, for a terrible thought inflames me
Suddenly the brain:

What time is it?

Ah! What time is it? What time!... for tomorrow evening, eleven
hours, it could be today, it could be right now!...
Who could tell us what time it is?!... It seems to me that we
We've been trapped in this hell for days and days... since
Years... since the beginning of the world... All of this will
Maybe jump right now!... Ah! A noise!... A crackling sound!...
Did you hear, sir?... There!... there, in that corner... big
Gods!... like a mechanical noise!... Again!... Ah! of the
Light!... maybe it's the mechanics that are going to blow everything up!...
I'm telling you: a crackling sound... are you deaf?

Mr. de Chagny and I started shouting like madmen... the
Fear is nipping at our heels... we climb the stairs, rolling on the
Steps... The trapdoor might be closed up there! Maybe
This closed door that makes all this darkness... Ah! To escape the darkness! To escape! To escape!
Darkness!... To rediscover the deadly clarity of the Hall of Mirrors!...

...But we reached the top of the stairs... no, the trapdoor
It's not closed, but it's also dark in the room now.
mirrors only in the cellar we're leaving!... We're going out all the way to
made from the cellar... we dragged ourselves across the floor of the bedroom
tortures... the floor that separates us from this powder keg... what
What time is it?... We shout, we call out!... Mr. de Chagny cries out, from
With all her renewed strength: "Christine!... Christine!..." And I,
I'm calling Erik!... I'm reminding him that I saved his life!... But
Nothing answers us!... nothing but our own despair... than our
My own madness... what time is it?... "Tomorrow evening, eleven o'clock!"
We discuss... we strive to measure the time we
We've been here... but we're incapable of reasoning... If we
could only see the face of a watch, with hands that
They work!... My watch has stopped for a long time... but the one from
Mr. de Chagny is still walking... He told me he brought it back up in
preparing for her evening toilette before coming to the Opera... We
let us try to draw some conclusion from this fact that gives us hope
that we have not yet reached the fatal moment...

...The slightest noise that comes through the hatch I have in
Our futile attempts to close it only plunge us back into the most atrocious anguish...
What time is it?... We don't have a single match left on us... And
However, we need to know... Mr. de Chagny imagines breaking the glass
he looked at his watch and felt the two hands... A silence followed
which he feels, he questions the hands with his fingertips. The ring
He uses his watch as a reference point!... He estimates the distance by the
hands that it could be exactly eleven o'clock...

But the eleven o'clock hour that makes us shudder, are perhaps
Past, isn't it?... It's perhaps eleven and ten
minutes... and we would still have at least twelve hours ahead of us.

And suddenly, I shout:

--Silence!

I thought I heard footsteps in the house next door.

I wasn't mistaken! I hear the sound of doors, followed by footsteps
Rushing. They bang on the wall. The voice of Christine Daaé:

Raoul! Raoul!

Ah! we are all shouting at once now, about both of them
against the wall. Christine sobbed; she didn't know if she
would find Mr. de Chagny alive!... The monster was terrible,
Apparently... He just raved while waiting for her to finally agree.
to pronounce the "yes" that she refused him... And yet, she
promised this "yes" if he would agree to lead her into the bedroom
Torture!... But he had stubbornly opposed it, with threats
atrocious acts against all members of the human race... Finally, after
After hours and hours of that hell, he had just escaped to
the moment... leaving her alone to think one last time...

...Hours and hours!... What time is it? What time
Is it, Christine?...

--It's eleven o'clock!... five minutes to eleven!...

--But what eleven o'clock?...

--The eleven hours that will decide life or death!... He
he just repeated it to me as he was leaving, resumes the grating voice of
Christine... He's awful!... He's delirious and he's torn out his
His mask and golden eyes shoot flames!... And he only does that
Laughing!... He said to me, laughing like a drunken demon: "Five minutes! I
I don't want you to be left alone because of your well-known modesty!... I don't want that
You blush in front of me when you say "yes," like shy people.
"Fiancées!... Good heavens! We know his world!" I told you he
was like a drunken demon!... "Here!" (and he dipped into the small
(bag of life and death) Here! he said to me, here's the little key
bronze box that opens the ebony caskets that are on the mantelpiece of
Louis-Philippe's bedroom... In one of these boxes, you will find
One in a scorpion and in the other a grasshopper, very good animals
These are bronze imitations from Japan; they are animals that say yes and no!
That is to say, you will only have to rotate the scorpion on its pivot,
in the opposite position to the one in which you found it... that
will mean to me, when I return to the room
Louis-Philippe, in the betrothal room: _Yes!_... The
The grasshopper, if you turn it, will mean: _no!_ in my eyes,
when I return to the Louis-Philippe room, to the room of
Death!... And he laughed like a drunken demon! Me, I was just doing him
to demand on her knees the key to the torture chamber, promising him
to be his wife forever if he granted me that... But he told me
that we would never need that key again and that he was going to throw it away
to the bottom of the lake!... And then, laughing like a drunken demon, he told me
he left me, telling me he wouldn't be back for another five minutes, at
because he knew everything one should do when one is a gentleman,
To the modesty of women!... Ah! yes, he shouted at me again: The
Grasshopper!... Watch out for the grasshopper!... It doesn't turn
Just a grasshopper, it jumps!... it jumps!... _it jumps
Very nice indeed!

I am trying here to reproduce, with phrases, broken words,
exclamations, the meaning of Christine's delirious words!... For she
Also, during those twenty-four hours, he must have hit rock bottom.
Human suffering... and perhaps she had suffered more than we did!
At every moment, Christine would stop herself and interrupt us to
to exclaim: "Raoul! Are you suffering?... " And she felt the walls, which
were cold now, and she wondered why they
had been so hot!... And the five minutes passed and, in
my poor brain, the scorpion and the
grasshopper!

However, I had retained enough lucidity to understand that if
The grasshopper was turned, the grasshopper jumped... and with it
many of those of the human race! No doubt that the grasshopper
ordered some electric current intended to blow the
powder keg!... Hastily, M. de Chagny, who now seemed,
since he had heard Christine's voice again, having recovered
with all his moral strength, he explained to the young girl in what
We found ourselves in a formidable situation, we and the entire Opera... _He
We should have turned the scorpion_ right away...

This scorpion, which responded to the _yes_ so desired by Erik, must
to be something that might prevent the catastrophe from happening
produce.

"Go!... go then, Christine, my beloved wife!..." commanded Raoul.

There was a silence.

"Christine," I cried, "where are you?"

--Near the scorpion!

--Don't touch it!

The idea had come to me—because I knew my Erik—that the monster
had deceived the young woman again. Perhaps it was the scorpion that
He was going to blow everything up. Because, after all, why wasn't he there?
The weather was fine now that the five minutes were over.
Time had passed... and he hadn't returned... And he had probably started
Safe!... And perhaps he was waiting for the tremendous explosion... He
He was just waiting for that!... He couldn't have hoped for anything, in truth,
that Christine would ever consent to be his willing prey!...
Why hadn't he come back?... Don't touch the scorpion!...

"Him!..." cried Christine. "I hear him!... There he is!"

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

He was indeed arriving. We heard his footsteps approaching
the Louis-Philippe room. He had joined Christine. He hadn't
uttered a word...

So I raised my voice:

--Erik! It's me! Do you recognize me?

To this call, he responded immediately in an extraordinarily
peaceful:

"So you didn't die in there?... Well, try to..."
keep quiet.

I wanted to interrupt him, but he spoke so coldly that I remained silent.
Frozen behind my wall: "Not another word, _daroga_, or I'll do everything
jump!"

And immediately he added:

--The honor must go to Mademoiselle!... Mademoiselle has not
touched the scorpion (how calmly he spoke!), the young lady did not
touched the grasshopper (with what frightening composure!), but he
It's not too late to do the right thing. Look, I'll open it without a key, because
I'm a trapdoor enthusiast, and I open and close whatever I want.
As I wish... I open the small ebony boxes: look inside,
Mademoiselle, in the little ebony boxes... the pretty little
silly things... Are they imitated well enough... and how they look
Harmless... But clothes don't make the man! (All this in one voice)
white, uniform...) If you turn the grasshopper, we all jump,
Miss... There's enough powder under our feet to make it explode
a district of Paris... if you turn the scorpion, all that powder
is drowned!... Mademoiselle, on the occasion of our wedding, you will
to give a very nice gift to a few hundred Parisians who
are currently applauding a rather poor masterpiece by Meyerbeer...
You are going to give them the gift of life... because you are going to, miss,
from your pretty hands—what a weary voice that voice was—you will
Turn the scorpion!... And gay, gay, we will get married!

A silence, and then:

--If, in two minutes, miss, you haven't turned the
Scorpion—"I have a watch," added Erik's voice, "a working watch."
nicely well...--I, I turn the grasshopper... and the grasshopper, _that
jumps beautifully!

The silence returned, more terrifying in itself than all the others.
terrifying silences. I knew that when Erik had adopted that voice
Peaceful, tranquil, and weary, because he was at the end of his rope.
capable of the most titanic feat or the most frenzied devotion and
that a single syllable unpleasant to his ear could unleash
the hurricane. Mr. de Chagny, for his part, had understood that there was nothing left to do but
to pray, and, on his knees, he prayed... As for me, my blood was beating so fast
so strong that I had to grasp my heart in my hand, out of great fear that it
It didn't erupt... It's because we had a terrible premonition of what was to come.
passed in those final seconds through Christine's frantic thoughts
Daaé... it's that we understand his hesitation to turn the
Scorpio... Once again, if it was the scorpion that was going to do everything
Blow it up!... If Erik had decided to swallow us all up with him!

Finally, Erik's voice, soft this time, angelically soft...

--Two minutes have passed... goodbye, miss!... jump,
grasshopper!...

"Erik!" cried Christine, who had to rush to grab the hand of the
Monster, do you swear to me, monster, do you swear to me on your infernal love, that
It's the scorpion that needs to be turned...

--Yes, to jump at our wedding...

--Ah! You see! We're going to jump!

--To our wedding!... innocent child!... The scorpion opens the ball!...
That's enough!... You don't want the scorpion? I'll have the...
grasshopper!

--Erik!...

--Enough!...

I had joined my cries to Christine's. Mr. de Chagny, still at
knees, continued to pray...

--Erik! I've turned the scorpion!!...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ah! The second we experienced there!

Wait!

Waiting until we are nothing but crumbs, in the middle of the
Thunder and ruins...

...To feel the crunch beneath our feet, in the open abyss... of
things... things that could have been the beginning of the apotheosis
of horror... for, through the trapdoor opened in the darkness, a maw
black in the black night, an ominous hiss—like the first
the sound of a rocket—it was coming...

...First very thin... and then thicker... then very strong...

But listen! Listen! And hold with both hands your heart ready to
jump with many of those of the human race.

That is not the hissing of fire.

Doesn't it look like a water rocket?...

Out with it! Out with it!

Listen! Listen!

It's now making a gurgling sound... gurgling...

Out with it!... out with it!... out with it!...

How refreshing!

Cool! Cool! All our thirst that had disappeared when
The trying one had come, and returns stronger with the sound of water.

Water! Water! The rising water!...

Who goes up into the cellar, over the barrels, all the barrels of
Powder (barrels! barrels!... do you have barrels for sale?)
Water!... the water towards which we descend through gorges
ablaze... the water rising up to our chins, up to our
mouths...

And we drink... Deep in the cellar, we drink, right from the cellar...

And we climb back up the stairs, step by step, in the pitch-black night.
the staircase that we had descended in front of the water and that we
Let's go back up with the water.

Truly, that's a lot of wasted and completely wasted powder!
Water!... That's fine work! We don't look at the water, in the
Lakeside residence! If this keeps up, the whole lake will end up in the cellar...

Because, in truth, we no longer know where it will stop...

We've left the cellar and the water is still rising...

And the water also comes out of the cellar, spreading across the floor... If that
continues, and the entire lake house will be flooded. The floor of
the hall of mirrors is itself a veritable little lake in which our
Feet are splashing. That's enough water already! Erik needs to close the
Tap: Erik! Erik! There's enough water for the powder! Turn it
Tap! Close the scorpion!

But Erik doesn't answer... All that can be heard is the rising water...
We now have it up to our mid-legs!

--Christine! Christine! The water is rising! It's rising up to our knees, shouts Mr.
from Chagny.

But Christine doesn't answer... all we can hear is the sound of the water.
mounted.

Nothing! Nothing! In the next room... No one left! No one to
Turn on the tap! No one to shut off the scorpion!

We are all alone, in the dark, with the black water that surrounds us
embrace, climbing, chilling us to the bone! Erik! Erik! Christine! Christine!

Now we've lost our footing and we're spinning in the water, swept away.
in an irresistible rotational movement, because the water rotates with us
and we run up against the black mirrors that repel us... and our
throats heaved above the whirlpool, they howl...

Are we going to die here? Drowned in the chamber of
Torture?... I've never seen anything like it? Erik, in the time of the _Pink Hours of
Mazenderan_, never showed me that through the small window
Invisible!... Erik! Erik! I saved your life! Remember!... You
You were doomed!... You were going to die!... I opened the doors of
Life!... Erik!...

Ah! We're spinning in the water like shipwrecks!...

But suddenly, with my wild hands, I grasped the trunk of the tree.
of iron!... and I call Mr. de Chagny... and here we are, the two of us
hanging from the branch of the iron tree...

And the water keeps rising!

Ah! Ah! Remember! How much space is there between the branch of
The iron tree and the domed ceiling of the hall of mirrors?...
Try to remember!... After all, the water might
Stop... she'll surely find her level... Look! It seems to me
She should stop!... No! No! Horror!... Swim! Swim!...
Our swimming arms intertwine; we're suffocating!... we fight
In the black water!... we're already having trouble breathing the black air
above the dark water... the air that escapes, that we hear escaping
above our heads, by some kind of ventilation device...
Ah! Let's turn! Let's turn! Let's turn until we find the
air vent... we'll press our mouths against the air vent... But
My strength is failing me, I'm trying to cling to the walls! Ah! How
The ice walls are slippery to my searching fingers... We
Let's turn again!... We're sinking... One last effort!... One last
Shout!... Erik!... Christine!... glug, glug, glug!... in the
Ears!... glug, glug, glug!... at the bottom of the dark water, our ears
go glug-glug!... And it still seems to me, before losing everything
knowledge, to hear between two gurgles... "Barrels!...
Barrels!... Do you have any barrels for sale?




XXVII


THE END OF THE GHOST'S LOVES


This is where the _written_ account left to me by the Persian ends.

Despite the horror of a situation that seemed to definitively doom them
At the time of their deaths, Mr. de Chagny and his companion were saved by the
Christine Daaé's sublime dedication. And I owe everything else to
the adventure from the mouth of the daroga itself.

When I went to see him, he was still living in his small apartment in the
Rue de Rivoli, opposite the Tuileries. He was very ill and he didn't
It required nothing less than all my zeal as a reporter-historian in the service
the truth to convince him to relive the incredible drama with me.
It was still his old and faithful servant Darius who served him.
and led me to him. The daroga received me at the corner of the
window overlooking the garden, seated in a large armchair where he
was trying to straighten a torso that must have once been quite beautiful.
Our Persian cat still had his magnificent eyes, but his poor face
was very tired. He had his head completely shaved, which he
he usually wore an astrakhan cap; he was dressed in
vast, very simple cloak in the sleeves of which he amused himself
subconsciously twiddling his thumbs, but his spirit had remained strong
lucid.

He could not recall the old horrors without being seized by a
a certain fever and it was in fragments that I wrested the end from him
surprising aspect of this strange story. Sometimes, he made people beg him.
long time to answer my questions, and sometimes exhilarated by his
memories he spontaneously evoked in front of me, with a vividness
striking, the terrifying image of Erik and the terrible hours that Mr. de
Chagny and he had lived in the house by the lake.

You should have seen the tremor that shook him when he described me
his awakening in the unsettling gloom of the Louis-Philippe room...
After the water disaster... And here is the end of this terrible
the story, as he told it to me in a way that completed the
written account that he had kindly entrusted to me:

Upon opening his eyes, the _daroga_ saw himself lying on a bed... Mr. de
Chagny was lying on a sofa, next to the wardrobe with a mirror.
An angel and a demon watched over them...

After the mirages and illusions of the torture chamber, the
precision of the bourgeois details of this quiet little room,
seemed to have been invented again with the intention of confusing
the mind of the mortal foolhardy enough to stray into this realm of
A living nightmare. This boat bed, these waxed mahogany chairs, this
The dresser and these brass pieces, the care with which these small squares of
Crochet lace was placed on the backs of the armchairs, the
a clock and on either side of the fireplace the small boxes
the seemingly harmless... well, this shelf filled with
seashells, red balls of yarn for pins, mother-of-pearl boats
and an enormous ostrich egg... all discreetly illuminated by
a lamp with a lampshade placed on a pedestal table... all this furniture which
was touchingly ugly, domestic, so peaceful, so reasonable
"Deep in the cellars of the Opera House," disconcerted the imagination more
than all the past fantasies.

And the shadow of the masked man, in that small, old-fashioned, precise frame
And clean, she appeared all the more formidable. She bent down
he whispered to the Persian's ear:

"Are you feeling better, Daroga?... Are you looking at my furniture?... That's all."
what remains of my poor, miserable mother...

He told her things he no longer remembered; but—and that
it seemed very strange to him—the Persian had a precise recollection that,
During this outdated view of the Louis-Philippe room, only Erik
Christine Daaé didn't say a word; she moved around without...
noise, and like a Sister of Charity who had taken a vow of silence...
She brought a cordial... or steaming tea... in a cup. The man
The masked man took it from his hands and handed it to the Persian.

As for Mr. de Chagny, he was asleep...

Erik said, pouring some rum into the daroga's cup and...
showing the viscount lying down:

He regained consciousness long before we could know if you
Would you still be alive one day, Daroga? He's doing very well... He's sleeping... He
We mustn't wake him up...

For a moment, Erik left the room and the Persian, rising up on his
elbow, looked around him... He noticed, sitting in the corner of the
fireplace, the white silhouette of Christine Daaé. He addressed her
Word... he called him... but he was still very weak and he
he fell back onto the pillow... Christine came to him, placed her hand on his
front, then moved away... And the Persian remembered that then, as he was leaving
As she walked, she didn't even glance at Monsieur de Chagny who, beside her, he
It's true, she was sleeping peacefully... and she went back to sit in
her armchair, by the fireplace, silent as a Sister of
charity that has taken a vow of silence...

Erik returned with small bottles which he placed on the mantelpiece. And
Still speaking very quietly, so as not to wake M. de Chagny, he said to the Persian,
after sitting at his bedside and feeling his pulse:

--Now you are both safe. And I will soon...
to return to the top of the earth, _to please my wife._

Whereupon he stood up, without further explanation, and disappeared again.

The Persian was now looking at Christine Daaé's calm profile
under the lamp. She was reading in a tiny book with gilded edges.
as seen in religious books. _The Imitation_ has these
those editions. And the Persian still had the natural tone in his ear
to which the other had said: "To please my wife..."

The daroga called again very gently, but Christine had to read
very far away, because she didn't hear...

Erik returned... gave the daroga a potion to drink, after having
recommended to no longer speak to "his wife" or to
no one, because it could be very dangerous for their health
of everyone.

From that moment on, the Persian still remembers the black shadow
Erik and Christine's white silhouette were still gliding
silently across the room, they leaned over him and
above Mr. de Chagny. The Persian was still very weak and the
The slightest noise, the door of the mirrored wardrobe would open in
squeaking, for example, gave him a headache... and then he
fell asleep like Mr. de Chagny.

This time, he was only to wake up at home, cared for by
his faithful Darius, who informed him that he had been, the previous night,
found against the door of his apartment, where he must have been
transported by a stranger, who had taken care to ring before
move away.

As soon as the daroga had regained its strength and responsibility,
he sent to inquire about the viscount at the count's residence
Philippe.

He was told that the young man had not reappeared and that the
Count Philippe was dead. His body had been found on the bank of the
Opera Lake, on the Scribe Street side. The Persian remembered the
funeral mass which he had attended behind the wall of the
In the hall of mirrors, he no longer doubted the crime or the criminal. Without
With great difficulty, alas! Knowing Erik, he reconstructed the tragedy. After having
Philippe believed that his brother had kidnapped Christine Daaé.
he rushed after him on that road to Brussels, where he knew
that everything was prepared for such an adventure. There was no
He met the young people, he had returned to the Opera, had
recalled Raoul's strange confidences about his fantastic rival,
had learned that the viscount had tried everything to penetrate the
underneath the theatre and finally that he had disappeared, leaving his hat
in the diva's dressing room, next to a box of pistols. And the
The count, who no longer doubted his brother's madness, had gone to his
A turn launched into this infernal underground labyrinth. Was it necessary?
more, in the eyes of the Persian, so that the body of the
count on the shore of the lake, where the song of the siren kept watch, the
Erik's siren, that concierge of the Lake of the Dead?

So the Persian did not hesitate. Horrified by this new outrage, he did not
being able to remain in uncertainty about where he stood relative to
The final fate of the Viscount and Christine Daaé, he decided to do everything
to tell the justice system.

However, the investigation of the case had been entrusted to Judge Faure.
And it was at his house that he went to knock. We can guess what sort of
a skeptical, down-to-earth, superficial mind (I say it as I see fit
thinks) and completely unprepared for such a confidence, received the
The deposition of the daroga. He was treated like a madman.

The Persian, despairing of ever being heard, had then...
to write. Since the justice system didn't want his testimony, the
The press might seize upon it, and one evening he had just drawn the
last line of the story that I have faithfully reported here when his
Darius's servant told him about a stranger who hadn't said his name.
name, whose face it was impossible to see and who had declared
simply that he would not leave the place until after speaking to
_daroga._

The Persian, immediately sensing the personality of this singular man
visitor, ordered that he be brought in immediately.

The daroga had not been mistaken.

It was the Phantom! It was Erik!

He appeared extremely weak and was clinging to the wall as if he
feared falling... Having removed his hat, he showed a forehead
His face was as pale as wax. The rest of his face was hidden by the mask.

The Persian had stood before him.

--Murderer of Count Philippe, what have you done to his brother and to
Christine Daaé?

At this formidable apostrophe, Erik staggered and for a moment held the
silence, then, having dragged himself to an armchair, he let himself
he fell with a deep sigh. And then, in short sentences,
in short words, in short breaths:

--_Daroga_, don't talk to me about Count Philippe... He was dead...
already... when I left my house... he was dead...
already... when... the siren sang... it was an accident... an
sad... a... terribly sad... accident... He had fallen
quite clumsily, simply, and naturally, in the lake!...

"You're lying!" cried the Persian.

Then Erik bowed his head and said:

--I'm not here... to talk to you about Count Philippe... but to
To tell you that... I'm going to die...

Where are Raoul de Chagny and Christine Daaé?...

--I am going to die.

--Raoul de Chagny and Christine Daaé?

--...of love... daroga... I'm going to die of love... that's how it is...
I loved him so much!... And I still love him, daroga, since I'm dying for him, I
I'm telling you... If you only knew how beautiful she was when she let me...
to embrace her alive, upon her eternal salvation... It was the first
The first time, _daroga_, the first time, you hear, that I kissed a
Woman... Yes, alive, I kissed her while she was alive and she was beautiful
Like a dead woman?...

The Persian had stood up and dared to touch Erik. He shook his
arm.

--Will you finally tell me if she is dead or alive?...

"Why are you shaking me like this?" Erik replied with difficulty. "I'm telling you..."
that it's me who's going to die... yes, I kissed her while she was alive...

--And now she's dead?

--I'm telling you I kissed her like that on the forehead... and she didn't
She pulled her forehead away from my mouth!... Ah! She's an honest girl!
As for being dead, I don't think so, although it's none of my business.
No more... No! No! She's not dead! And we mustn't...
I just found out someone touched a hair on his head! It's a
brave and honest girl who saved your life, on top of everything else,
Daroga, in a moment when I wouldn't have given two cents for your skin
From Persian. Deep down, nobody cared about you. Why were you
There with that young man? You were going to die on top of everything else!
Honestly, she begged me for her young man, but I told her
I had replied that, since she had turned the scorpion, I was
who, by that very fact and through his good will, became her fiancé, and whom she
didn't need two fiancés, which was quite fair; as for
You, you didn't exist, you no longer existed, I repeat, and
You were going to die with the other fiancé!

But listen carefully, daroga, how you were screaming like possessed people
Because of the water, Christine came to me, her beautiful big eyes
her blue eyes were open, and she swore to me, on her eternal salvation, that she
consented _to be my living wife!_ Until then, deep down in her
eyes, daroga, I had always seen my wife dead; it was the first
the first time I saw _my wife alive._ She was sincere, about her
Eternal salvation. She wouldn't kill herself. Deal. One
Half a minute later, all the waters had returned to the lake, and
I was sticking your tongue out, daroga, because I truly believed, I swear, that you were there
I would stay!... Finally!... There! It was understood! I owed you
to take back home to the top of the earth. Finally, when you have me
Having cleared the floor of the Louis-Philippe room, I am there
I came back, all alone.

"What had you done with the Viscount of Chagny?" interrupted the Persian.

--Ah! You understand... that one, daroga, I wasn't going to do it like that
Report it immediately to the top of the earth... He was a hostage...
But I also couldn't keep it in the lake house, at
because of Christine; so I locked him up nice and comfortable, I
neatly chained (the scent of Mazenderan had made him limp as
a figure) in the Communards' vault which is in the most
deserted from the most distant cellar of the Opera, lower than the
fifth below, where nobody ever goes and from where one cannot
to make myself heard by no one. I was quite calm and I am
I returned to Christine. She was waiting for me...

At this point in his story, it seems that the Phantom rose so
solemnly, the Persian who had resumed his place in his armchair
He too had to get up, as if obeying the same movement and feeling
that it was impossible to remain seated at such a solemn moment and
he even (the Persian himself told me) removed it, although he had the head
shaved, his astrakhan cap.

"Yes! She was waiting for me," Erik continued, and began to tremble like a...
leaf, but trembling with a truly solemn emotion... she
waiting for me, straight ahead, alive, like a real, living bride, on
his eternal salvation... And when I stepped forward, more timid than a
As a small child, she didn't run away... no, no... she is
stayed... she waited for me... I even think, daroga, that she has a
A little... oh! Not much... but a little, like a living bride,
She held out her forehead... And... and... I... kissed her!... Me!... me!...
Me!... And she didn't die!... And she stayed all
naturally next to me, after I had kissed her, like
That... on the forehead... Ab! How good it is, daroga, to kiss
Someone!... You can't know!... But me! Me!... My mother,
Daroga, my poor miserable mother never wanted me to kiss her...
She was running away... throwing my mask at me!... and no woman!...
Never!... never!... Ha! Ha! Ha! Well, isn't that right?... of such a kind
Happiness, isn't it? I cried. And I fell crying.
her feet... and I kissed her feet... her little feet, in
crying... You're crying too, daroga; and she was crying too...
The angel wept!

As he recounted these things, Erik sobbed, and the Persian, indeed,
she could not hold back her tears in front of this masked man who, shoulders
shaken, hands on her chest, sometimes groaning in pain and
sometimes of tenderness.

--...Oh! Daroga, I felt her tears running down my forehead!
Me! Me! They were warm... they were soft! They
Her tears were everywhere, hidden under my mask! They were going to mingle.
Tears in my eyes!... they flowed right into my mouth...
Ah! Her tears, on me! Listen, daroga, listen, to what I have
Done... I ripped off my mask so as not to miss a single one of his
Tears... And she didn't run away!... And she didn't die! She
stayed alive, crying... over me... with me... We have
We wept together!... Lord of heaven! You gave me everything
The happiness of the world!

And Erik had collapsed, groaning in the armchair.

--Ah! I'm not going to die yet... right away... but leave me
"Cry!" he had said to the Persian.

After a moment, the Man in the Mask resumed:

--Listen, daroga... listen to this carefully... while I was at his
feet... I heard her say, "Poor unfortunate Erik!" and
She took my hand!... Me, I was nothing more than, you understand, a
Poor dog, ready to die for her... like I'm telling you, daroga!

"Imagine, I had a ring in my hand, a gold ring that I
I had given her... which she had lost... and which I found... a
A wedding ring, what!... I slipped it into her little hand and I...
said: Here!... take this!... take this for yourself... and for him... This
will be my wedding present... the gift for poor, unfortunate Erik... I
I know you love him, young man... don't cry anymore!... She told me
asked him, in a very gentle voice, what I meant; then I told him
I made it clear, and she understood immediately that I wasn't in favor of it.
She was like a poor dog ready to die... but she, she could
she could marry the young man whenever she wanted, because she had
cried with me... Ah! Daroga... you think... that... when I told him
Saying that, it was as if I were calmly cutting up my
My heart was breaking, but she had cried with me... and she had said:
"Poor, unfortunate Erik!..."

Erik's emotion was so intense that he had to warn the Persian not to
to look at him, for he was suffocating and he needed to remove
his mask. On that subject, the daroga told me that he had gone
he himself was at the window and had opened it with a heavy heart
Please, but take great care to fix the tops of the garden trees
from the Tuileries so as not to encounter the face of the monster.

"I went," Erik continued, "to free the young man and I
I told him to follow me to Christine... They kissed
in front of me in the Louis-Philippe room... Christine had my
ring... I made Christine swear that when I died she
would come one night, passing by the lake on Scribe Street, to bury me
in great secrecy with the gold ring she had supposedly worn until this
Just then... I told her how she would find my body and this
that it needed to be done... So, Christine kissed me for the
first time, in turn, there, on the front... (don't look,
daroga!) there, on the forehead... on my forehead!... (don't look,
daroga!) and they both left... Christine wasn't crying
no more... I alone wept... daroga, daroga... if Christine holds on
Her promise, she will return soon!...

And Erik had fallen silent. The Persian had asked him no more questions.
He was completely reassured about the fate of Raoul de Chagny and of
Christine Daaé, and none of those of the human race could have, after
having heard her that night, doubting Erik's word which
was crying.

The monster had put his mask back on and gathered his strength to leave
the daroga. He had told him that when he felt his end was near
Next, he would send him something to thank him for the good he had done him.
had once wanted what he held most dear in the world: all the
Christine Daaé's papers, which she had written at the very moment
of this adventure for Raoul, and which she had left to
Erik, and a few objects that came from her, two handkerchiefs, a
A pair of gloves and a shoelace. To a question from the Persian, Erik
he learned that the two young people had met as soon as they saw each other
free, had resolved to go and find a priest deep in some
solitude where they would hide their happiness and which they had taken, in
this plan, "the Gare du Nord of the World." Finally, Erik was counting on the
Persian, for, as soon as he had received the relics and the
Having promised the papers, he announced his death to the two young men. He should
to do this, pay for a line in the newspaper's obituary section.
_The_Era._

That was all.

The Persian had escorted Erik to the door of his apartment and
Darius had accompanied him to the sidewalk, supporting him. One
A cab was waiting. Erik got in. The Persian, who had returned to the
window, heard him say to the coachman: "Opera embankment".

And then, the carriage disappeared into the night. The Persian had, for
The last time, I saw poor, unfortunate Erik.

Three weeks later, the newspaper L'Époque published this
Obituary announcement:

"ERIK IS DEAD."




EPILOGUE


This is the true story of the Phantom of the Opera. As I
As I announced at the beginning of this work, there can be no doubt now
that Erik actually lived. Too much evidence of his existence is
made available to everyone today so that we can't keep up,
_reasonably_, Erik's actions and words throughout the
The Chagny tragedy.

There is no need to repeat here how passionate this affair was
the capital. This kidnapped artist, the Count of Chagny died in
such exceptional circumstances, his missing brother and the triple sleep
Lighting technicians at the Opera!... What a tragedy! What
Passions! What crimes had unfolded around Raoul's idyll?
And of sweet and charming Christine!... What had become of the sublime
and mysterious singer whose earth should never, ever again
Hear about it?... She was portrayed as a victim of rivalry.
of the two brothers, and no one imagined what had happened; no one
understood that since Raoul and Christine had both disappeared, the
Two fiancés had withdrawn far from the world to experience happiness
that they would not have wanted it public after the unexplained death of the count
Philippe... They had taken a train one day from the Gare du Nord of
World... Me too, maybe, one day, I'll take the train to this
Watch out for her and I'll search around your lakes, O Norway!
Silent Scandinavia! The traces of Raoul, perhaps still alive.
and of Christine, and also of Valerius's mother, who also disappeared
At the same time!... Perhaps one day, I will hear with my own ears
The solitary echo of the North of the World, repeating the song of the one who has
Known the Angel of Music?...

Long after the case, through the unintelligent efforts of Mr. Judge
Faure's investigation was classified, the press reported from time to time,
still sought to unravel the mystery... and continued to
ask where was the monstrous hand that had prepared and executed
So many unimaginable catastrophes! (Crime and disappearance.)

A boulevard newspaper, which was aware of all the gossip from
behind the scenes, he was the only one to write:

--This hand belongs to the Phantom of the Opera.

And yet he did it naturally in an ironic way.

Only the Persian, whom they had refused to listen to and who did not renew
at this point, after Erik's visit, his first attempt with the
Justice possessed the whole truth.

And he possessed the main evidence that had come to him with
the pious relics foretold by the Phantom...

It was up to me to supplement this evidence, with the help of the daroga
himself. I kept him informed daily of my research.
and he guided them. For years and years he had not
returned to the Opera, but he had retained the memory of the monument
the most accurate, and there was no better guide to make me...
discovering the most hidden corners. He was the one who showed me around.
the sources I could draw from, the people I could interview; that's
he was the one who pushed me to knock on Mr. Poligny's door, at the moment
that the poor man was practically dying. I didn't know that.
low and I will never forget the effect my
questions about the ghost. He looked at me, as if he saw the
devil, and only answered me with a few incoherent sentences, but which
attested (this was the essential point) how much F. de l'O. had, in
his time, threw the disturbance into this already very agitated life (Mr.
Poligny was what we would call a bon vivant).

When I reported to the Persian the meager result of my visit to Mr.
Poligny, the _daroga_ gave a faint smile and said to me: "Never Poligny
did not know how much that extraordinary scoundrel Erik (sometimes the Persian) knew
(spoke of Erik as a god, sometimes as a vile scoundrel)
It "worked". Poligny was superstitious and Erik knew it.
he also knew a lot about public and private affairs
of the Opera.

When Mr. Poligny heard a mysterious voice telling him, in the
lodge no. 5, the way he used his time and the trust of
his partner, he didn't ask for anything more. Struck first as if by a
The voice of heaven, he thought himself damned, and then, as the voice asked him to
The money, he saw clearly in the end that he was being played by a master
singer of whom Debienne himself was a victim. Both, already weary of
Their leadership, for many reasons, left without trying
to learn more about the personality of this strange F. de l'O.,
who had sent them such a peculiar set of specifications. They
bequeathed all the mystery to the next direction by pushing a
a big sigh of satisfaction, finally rid of a story that...
had greatly intrigued them without making either of them laugh.

Thus spoke the Persian on behalf of Messrs. Debienne and Poligny.
In this context, I spoke to him about their successors and I was surprised that in
In the _Memoirs of a Director_, by Mr. Moncharmin, there was talk of a
such a complete account of the actions and words of F. de l'O. in the first
in part, to the point of saying nothing more about it, or almost nothing at all.
second. To what the Persian, who knew these Memoirs as if he knew them
had written, pointed out to me that I would find the explanation of all
the matter if I took the time to reflect on the few lines that,
In the second part of these Memoirs, Moncharmin has indeed
I wanted to dedicate more time to the Phantom. Here are those lines, which we
are of particular interest, moreover, since one finds there
related the very simple way in which the famous story of the
twenty thousand francs:

"Regarding F. de l'O. (this is Mr. Moncharmin speaking), of whom I have
narrated here, at the beginning of my Memoirs, some of the
singular fantasies, I only want to say one thing now, which is that he
redeemed, with a kind gesture, all the trouble he had caused my
dear colleague and, I must confess, myself. He judged
No doubt there were limits to all jokes, especially
when it costs so much and when the police commissioner is
"Seized," because, at the very minute we had arranged to meet
in our office to Mr. Mifroid to tell him the whole story,
A few days after Christine Daaé's disappearance, we found
on Richard's desk, in a beautiful envelope on which one
he read in red ink: _From F. de l'O._, the sums quite
important things that he had managed to get out momentarily, and in
a way of playing, from the director's box. Richard was immediately
I was of the opinion that we should leave it at that and not pursue the matter further.
agreed to agree with Richard. And all's well that ends well
"Good. Isn't that right, my dear F. de l'O.?"

Obviously, Moncharmin, especially after this restitution, continued to
to believe that he had for a moment been the plaything of burlesque imagination
of Richard, just as Richard, for his part, never ceased to believe that
Moncharmin, seeking revenge for some jokes, had amused himself by
inventing the whole F. de l'O. affair.

Wasn't this the moment to ask the Persian to teach me by
What trick did the Phantom use to make twenty thousand francs disappear?
Richard's pocket, despite the safety pin. He replied to me
that he had not looked into this minor detail, but that, if I
I wanted to "work" on site myself, I had to
The key to the puzzle will certainly be found in the director's office.
himself, remembering that Erik hadn't been nicknamed for nothing
_the trap enthusiast._ And I promised the Persian I would surrender myself immediately
that I would have the time for useful investigations in that area. I
I will tell the reader right away that the results of these investigations
were perfectly satisfactory. I did not believe, in truth,
discovering so much undeniable evidence of the authenticity of
phenomena attributed to the Phantom.

And it is good to know that the Persian's papers, those of
Christine Daaé, the statements made to me by the elders
collaborators of Messrs. Richard and Moncharmin and by little Meg
herself (this excellent Madame Giry having, alas! passed away) and
by Sorelli, who is now retired in Louveciennes—it is
"Okay," I said, "let it be known that all of this, which constitutes the parts..."
documentaries about the Phantom's existence, pieces that I will submit
in the Opera archives, is controlled by several
important discoveries of which I can rightly take some pride.

Although I was unable to find the Lake House, Erik having definitively
condemned all the secret entrances (and yet I'm sure he
It would be easy to enter if the lake were drained.
as I have repeatedly asked the administration of
fine arts)[12], I nevertheless discovered the secret corridor of
Communards, whose wooden wall is crumbling in places; and,
Similarly, I updated the trapdoor through which the Persian and Raoul
They went down into the underbelly of the theatre. I noted, in the dungeon
Communards, many initials traced on the walls by the
unfortunate souls who were locked up there and, among those initials, an R and an
C.--RC? Isn't this significant? Raoul de Chagny! The letters
are still very visible today. I did not, of course,
I stopped there. In the first and third ones below, I played
two strikes from a pivoting system, completely unknown to
machinists, who only use horizontal sliding trapdoors.

Finally, I can say to the reader, with full knowledge of the facts:
"Visit the Opera House one day, ask to walk around in peace without
Stupid guide, enter box number 5 and bang on the enormous
column that separates this box from the front of the stage; strike with your
cane or with your fist and listen... up to the height of your
head: _the column sounds hollow!_ And after that, don't be surprised
to the point that she could have been inhabited by the voice of the Phantom; there is,
In this column, there's room for two men. Only if you
It is surprising that during the phenomena of lodge no. 5 no one was
Returning to this column, remember that it offers the appearance of
solid marble and the voice that was enclosed seemed rather to come
on the opposite side (because the ventriloquist ghost's voice came from where it
wanted). The column is worked, sculpted, excavated and
mangled by the artist's chisel. I haven't given up hope of
discover one day the piece of sculpture that was supposed to lower and
to be raised at will, to leave a free and mysterious passage to the
correspondence of the Phantom with Mrs. Giry and to her generosity.
Of course, all of this, which I saw, felt, and touched, is nothing compared to
what, in reality, an enormous and fabulous being like Erik must have created
in the mystery of a monument like the Opera House, but I
I would give all these discoveries for the one I have been given to
to be done, in front of the administrator himself, in the director's office,
a few centimeters from the armchair: a trapdoor, the width of the
A plank of parquet flooring, no longer than a forearm... a trapdoor
which folds down like the lid of a box, a trapdoor through which I see
to pull out a hand that works deftly in the hem of a garment
cod's tail trailing...

That's where the forty thousand francs had gone!... That was
also that, through some intermediary, they had returned...

When I spoke about it with understandable emotion to the Persian, I
I told him:

--Erik was simply having fun--since the forty thousand francs are
income—to play around with its specifications?...

He replied:

Don't believe it! Erik needed money... Thinking he was out of
humanity, he was not troubled by scruples and he made use of
extraordinary gifts of skill and imagination that he had received
of nature as compensation for the atrocious ugliness with which it had
endowed, to exploit humans, and sometimes in the most...
more artistic in the world, because the trick was often worth its weight in gold.
If he returned the forty thousand francs, of his own volition, to Messrs.
Richard and Moncharmin, it's that at the time of restitution - there is no
He didn't need it anymore! He had given up his marriage to Christine
Daaé. He had renounced all things above the earth.

According to the Persian, Erik came from a small town in
near Rouen. He was the son of a masonry contractor.
had fled early from his father's home, where his ugliness was a
an object of horror and terror for his parents. For a while, he
had exhibited himself at fairs, where his impresario showed him as
"A living dead man." He had had to travel across Europe from fair to fair and
to complete his strange education as an artist and magician at the source
even art and magic, among the Bohemians. A whole period
Erik's existence was rather obscure. He reappears at the fair.
from Nizhny Novgorod, where he was performing in all his awful
glory. He was already singing like no one in the world has ever sung;
He performed as a ventriloquist and did some juggling.
extraordinary things that the caravans talked about upon their return to Asia
Again, all along the way. That's how his reputation spread.
walls of Mazenderan's palace, where the little sultana, favorite of the
Sha-en-Shah was bored. A fur trader, who was going to
Samarkand, who was returning from Nizhny Novgorod, recounted the miracles he
had seen them under Erik's tent. The merchant was brought to the Palace, and
Mazenderan's daroga had to interrogate him. Then, the daroga was tasked with
to search for Erik. He brought him back to Persia, where during
For a few months he had, as they say in Europe, the upper hand.
He thus committed quite a few horrors, for he seemed to know neither the
Neither good nor evil, and he cooperated in some fine political assassinations.
as calmly as he fought, with diabolical inventions,
The Emir of Afghanistan, at war with the Empire. The Shah took him
in friendship. It is at this moment that the _Pink Hours of
Mazenderan_, whose account of the daroga gave us a glimpse of. Like
Erik had entirely personal ideas about architecture and
that he conceived of a palace as a magician might imagine a
combination lockbox, the sha-en-shah commissioned him to construct a
this genre, which he successfully completed and which was, it seems, so ingenious
that His Majesty could walk everywhere without being seen and
disappear without it being possible to discover by what means.
When the sha-en-shah found himself the master of such a jewel, he ordered,
as a certain Tsar had done with regard to the brilliant architect
from a church in Red Square, Moscow, that Erik's
golden eyes. But he reflected that, even blind, Erik could
to build yet another, equally extraordinary residence for another sovereign,
and then, finally, that, while Erik was alive, someone held the secret of
marvelous palace. Erik's death was decided, as well as that of
all the workers who had worked under his orders. The daroga of
Mazenderan was tasked with carrying out this abominable order. Erik...
had done him some favors and made him laugh a lot. He saved him by
providing him with the means to escape. But he almost paid with his life.
this generous weakness. Fortunately for the daroga, it was found, on
the shore of the Caspian Sea, a corpse half-eaten by the
seabirds and which was mistaken for Erik's, because some friends of the
Daroga had dressed this corpse in clothes that had belonged to Erik
himself. The daroga got away with losing his favor, his
goods, and for exile. The Persian Treasury continued, however, because the
Daroga was of royal lineage, to grant him a small pension of
a few hundred francs a month, and that's when he came to
to take refuge in Paris.

As for Erik, he had passed through Asia Minor, then had gone to
Constantinople, where he had entered the service of the sultan. I would have done
to understand the services he could render to a sovereign haunted by
all the terrors, when I say that it was Erik who built
all the famous trapdoors, secret rooms, and safes
mysterious that was found at Yildiz-Kiosk, after the last
Turkish revolution. It was he again[13] who had this idea of
to create automata dressed like the prince and resembling him
mistaking the prince himself, automatons that made people believe that the
The leader of the believers was standing in a place, awake, when he
rested in another.

Naturally, he had to leave the Sultan's service for the same reasons.
reasons why he had to flee Persia. He knew too much.
So, very tired of his adventurous, formidable, and monstrous
Throughout his life, he wished to become someone _like everyone else._ And he
fit entrepreneur, like an ordinary entrepreneur who builds
Houses for everyone, with ordinary bricks! He bid
some foundation work at the Opera. When he saw himself in the
Beneath such a vast stage, his natural artistry, whimsical and
_magical_, it took over again. And besides, wasn't he still as
ugly? He dreamed of creating a dwelling unknown to the rest of the earth and
who would hide it forever from the sight of men.

We know and can guess what comes next. It's there throughout this...
An incredible, yet true, adventure. Poor, unfortunate Erik!
Should we pity him? Should we curse him? He only asked to be
someone, like everyone else! But he was too ugly! And he had to
to hide one's genius or _to play tricks with it_, when, with a face
Ordinarily, he would have been one of the noblest of the human race! He
had a heart to contain the empire of the world, and he finally had to
content with a cellar. We must truly pity the Ghost of
The Opera!

I prayed, despite his crimes, over his remains, and that God had
I must feel sorry for him! Why did God make a man so ugly?
That one?

I am sure, of course, that I prayed over his corpse the other day.
when it was dug up from the ground, in the very spot where it was buried
The living voices; it was his skeleton. It's not about ugliness.
I recognized him by his head, because when they died, so long ago
For a long time, all men were ugly, but to the gold ring that he
was wearing it, and Christine Daaé had certainly come to slip it to him.
finger, before burying him, as she had promised him.

The skeleton was found very close to the small fountain, at this
the place where, for the first time, when he led her into the
beneath the theatre, the Angel of Music had been held in his arms
Trembling, Christine Daaé fainted.

And now, what are we going to do with this skeleton? We're not going to throw it away.
To the mass grave?... Me, I say: the place for the Phantom's skeleton
the Opera's archives are in the archives of the National Academy of Music; this
is not an ordinary skeleton.

[Note 12: I was still talking about it forty-eight hours before]
the appearance of this work, to Mr. Dujardin-Beaumetz, our si
a friendly undersecretary of state for fine arts, who left me
some hope, and I told him that it was the duty of the State to
put an end to the legend of the Phantom in order to re-establish ourselves on a foundational basis
Erik's story is undeniably fascinating. For this reason, it is
necessary, and it would be the culmination of my personal work, of
find the Lake House, in which perhaps still
treasures for the art of music. There is no longer any doubt that Erik was a
An incomparable artist. Who's to say we won't find in the
Lake House, the famous score of his _Don Juan Triumphant?_]

[Note 13: Interview with Mohamed-Ali Bey, the day after the entry
troops from Salonika to Constantinople, by the special envoy of
_Morning._]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It can only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    anything. You can copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You can convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinuous
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Yew
the second copy is also defective, you may request a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The disability or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of others
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. So, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Oliver Twist, Vol. 2 (of 3)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Oliver Twist, Vol. 2 (of 3)

Author: Charles Dickens

Illustrator: George Cruikshank


        
Release date: December 4, 2014 [eBook #47530]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/47530

Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
        generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLIVER TWIST, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***

OLIVER TWIST.

VOL. II.




[Illustration: _The Burglary._

London, Richard Bentley, Jany. 1, 1838.]




OLIVER TWIST.

BY CHARLES DICKENS. AUTHOR OF “THE PICKWICK PAPERS.”

    SECOND EDITION.
    IN THREE VOLUMES.
    VOL. II.

    LONDON:
    RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

    1839.




    WHITING,
    BEAUFORT HOUSE.




OLIVER TWIST.




CHAPTER XX.

WHEREIN OLIVER IS DELIVERED OVER TO MR. WILLIAM SIKES.


WHEN Oliver awoke in the morning he was a good deal surprised to find
that a new pair of shoes with strong thick soles had been placed at
his bedside, and that his old ones had been removed. At first he was
pleased with the discovery, hoping that it might be the forerunner of
his release; but such thoughts were quickly dispelled on his sitting
down to breakfast alone with the Jew, who told him, in a tone and
manner which increased his alarm, that he was to be taken to the
residence of Bill Sikes that night.

“To—to—stop there, sir?” asked Oliver, anxiously.

“No, no, my dear, not to stop there,” replied the Jew. “We shouldn’t
like to lose you. Don’t be afraid, Oliver, you shall come back to us
again. Ha! ha! ha! We wont be so cruel as to send you away, my dear. Oh
no, no!”

The old man, who was stooping over the fire toasting a piece of bread,
looked round as he bantered Oliver thus, and chuckled as if to shew
that he knew he would still be very glad to get away if he could.

“I suppose,” said the Jew, fixing his eyes on Oliver, “you want to know
what you’re going to Bill’s for—eh, my dear?”

Oliver coloured involuntarily to find that the old thief had been
reading his thoughts; but boldly said, “Yes, he did want to know.”

“Why, do you think?” inquired Fagin, parrying the question.

“Indeed I don’t know, sir,” replied Oliver.

“Bah!” said the Jew, turning away with a disappointed countenance from
a close perusal of the boy’s face. “Wait till Bill tells you, then.”

The Jew seemed much vexed by Oliver’s not expressing any greater
curiosity on the subject; but the truth is, that, although he felt very
anxious, he was too much confused by the earnest cunning of Fagin’s
looks, and his own speculations, to make any further inquiries just
then. He had no other opportunity; for the Jew remained very surly and
silent till night, when he prepared to go abroad.

“You may burn a candle,” said the Jew, putting one upon the table; “and
here’s a book for you to read till they come to fetch you. Good night!”

“Good night, sir!” replied Oliver, softly.

The Jew walked to the door, looking over his shoulder at the boy as he
went, and, suddenly stopping, called him by his name.

Oliver looked up; the Jew, pointing to the candle, motioned him to
light it. He did so; and, as he placed the candlestick upon the table,
saw that the Jew was gazing fixedly at him with lowering and contracted
brows from the dark end of the room.

“Take heed, Oliver! take heed!” said the old man, shaking his right
hand before him in a warning manner. “He’s a rough man, and thinks
nothing of blood when his own is up. Whatever falls out, say nothing,
and do what he bids you. Mind!” Placing a strong emphasis on the last
word, he suffered his features gradually to resolve themselves into a
ghastly grin; and, nodding his head, left the room.

Oliver leant his head upon his hand when the old man disappeared, and
pondered with a trembling heart on the words he had just heard. The
more he thought of the Jew’s admonition, the more he was at a loss to
divine its real purpose and meaning. He could think of no bad object
to be attained by sending him to Sikes which would not be equally
well answered by his remaining with Fagin; and after meditating for
a long time, concluded that he had been selected to perform some
ordinary menial offices for the housebreaker, until another boy better
suited for his purpose could be engaged. He was too well accustomed
to suffering, and had suffered too much where he was, to bewail the
prospect of a change very severely. He remained lost in thought for
some minutes, and then with a heavy sigh snuffed the candle, and taking
up the book which the Jew had left with him, began to read.

He turned over the leaves carelessly at first, but, lighting on a
passage which attracted his attention, soon became intent upon the
volume. It was a history of the lives and trials of great criminals,
and the pages were soiled and thumbed with use. Here, he read of
dreadful crimes that make the blood run cold; of secret murders that
had been committed by the lonely wayside, and bodies hidden from the
eye of man in deep pits and wells, which would not keep them down, deep
as they were, but had yielded them up at last, after many years, and so
maddened the murderers with the sight, that in their horror they had
confessed their guilt, and yelled for the gibbet to end their agony.
Here, too, he read of men who, lying in their beds at dead of night,
had been tempted and led on by their own bad thoughts to such dreadful
bloodshed as it made the flesh creep and the limbs quail to think of.
The terrible descriptions were so real and vivid, that the sallow pages
seemed to turn red with gore, and the words upon them to be sounded in
his ears as if they were whispered in hollow murmurs by the spirits of
the dead.

In a paroxysm of fear the boy closed the book and thrust it from him.
Then, falling upon his knees, he prayed Heaven to spare him from such
deeds, and rather to will that he should die at once, than be reserved
for crimes so fearful and appalling. By degrees he grew more calm, and
besought in a low and broken voice that he might be rescued from his
present dangers, and that if any aid were to be raised up for a poor
outcast boy, who had never known the love of friends or kindred, it
might come to him now, when, desolate and deserted, he stood alone in
the midst of wickedness and guilt.

He had concluded his prayer, but still remained with his head buried in
his hands, when a rustling noise aroused him.

“What’s that!” he cried, starting up, and catching sight of a figure
standing by the door. “Who’s there?”

“Me—only me,” replied a tremulous voice.

Oliver raised the candle above his head, and looked towards the door.
It was Nancy.

“Put down the light,” said the girl, turning away her head; “it hurts
my eyes.”

Oliver saw that she was very pale, and gently inquired if she were ill.
The girl threw herself into a chair, with her back towards him, and
wrung her hands; but made no reply.

“God forgive me!” she cried after a while, “I never thought of all
this.”

“Has anything happened?” asked Oliver, “Can I help you? I will if I
can; I will, indeed.”

She rocked herself to and fro, caught her throat, and, uttering a
gurgling sound, struggled and gasped for breath.

“Nancy!” cried Oliver, greatly alarmed, “What is it?”

The girl beat her hands upon her knees, and her feet upon the ground,
and, suddenly stopping, drew her shawl close round her, and shivered
with cold.

Oliver stirred the fire. Drawing her chair close to it, she sat there
for a little time without speaking, but at length she raised her head,
and looked round.

“I don’t know what comes over me sometimes,” said the girl, affecting
to busy herself in arranging her dress; “it’s this damp, dirty room, I
think. Now, Nolly, dear, are you ready?”

“Am I to go with you?” asked Oliver.

“Yes; I have come from Bill,” replied the girl. “You are to go with me.”

“What for?” said Oliver, recoiling.

“What for!” echoed the girl, raising her eyes, and averting them again
the moment they encountered the boy’s face. “Oh! for no harm.”

“I don’t believe it,” said Oliver, who had watched her closely.

“Have it your own way,” rejoined the girl, affecting to laugh. “For no
good, then.”

Oliver could see that he had some power over the girl’s better
feelings, and for an instant thought of appealing to her compassion on
his helpless state. But then the thought darted across his mind that
it was barely eleven o’clock, and that many people were still in the
streets, of whom surely some might be found to give credence to his
tale. As the reflection occurred to him, he stepped forward, and said
somewhat hastily that he was ready.

Neither his brief consideration nor its purport were lost upon his
companion. She eyed him narrowly while he spoke, and cast upon him a
look of intelligence which sufficiently shewed that she guessed what
had been passing in his thoughts.

“Hush!” said the girl, stooping over him, and pointing to the door as
she looked cautiously round. “You can’t help yourself. I have tried
hard for you, but all to no purpose. You are hedged round and round,
and if ever you are to get loose from here, this is not the time.”

Struck by the energy of her manner, Oliver looked up in her face with
great surprise. She seemed to speak the truth; her countenance was
white and agitated, and she trembled with very earnestness.

“I have saved you from being ill-used once, and I will again, and I do
now,” continued the girl aloud; “for those who would have fetched you,
if I had not, would have been far more rough than me. I have promised
for your being quiet and silent; if you are not, you will only do harm
to yourself and me too, and perhaps be my death. See here! I have borne
all this for you already, as true as God sees me shew it.”

She pointed hastily to some livid bruises upon her neck and arms, and
continued with great rapidity.

“Remember this, and don’t let me suffer more for you just now. If I
could help you I would, but I have not the power. They don’t mean to
harm you, and whatever they make you do, is no fault of yours. Hush!
every word from you is a blow for me. Give me your hand—make haste,
your hand!”

She caught the hand which Oliver instinctively placed in hers, and,
blowing out the light, drew him after her up the stairs. The door was
opened quickly by some one shrouded in the darkness, and as quickly
closed when they had passed out. A hackney-cabriolet was in waiting;
and, with the same vehemence which she had exhibited in addressing
Oliver, the girl pulled him in with her, and drew the curtains close.
The driver wanted no directions, but lashed his horse into full speed
without the delay of an instant.

The girl still held Oliver fast by the hand, and continued to pour into
his ear the warnings and assurances she had already imparted. All was
so quick and hurried that he had scarcely time to recollect where he
was, or how he came there, when the carriage stopped at the same house
to which the Jew’s steps had been directed on the previous evening.

For one brief moment Oliver cast a hurried glance along the empty
street, and a cry for help hung upon his lips. But the girl’s voice
was in his ear, beseeching him in such tones of agony to remember
her, that he had not the heart to utter it; while he hesitated, the
opportunity was gone, for he was already in the house, and the door was
shut.

“This way,” said the girl, releasing her hold for the first time.
“Bill!”

“Hallo!” replied Sikes, appearing at the head of the stairs with a
candle. “Oh! that’s the time of day. Come on!”

This was a very strong expression of approbation, and an uncommonly
hearty welcome from a person of Mr. Sikes’s temperament. Nancy,
appearing much gratified thereby, saluted him cordially.

“Bullseye’s gone home with Tom,” observed Sikes, as he lighted them up.
“He’d have been in the way.”

“That’s right,” rejoined Nancy.

“So you’ve got the kid,” said Sikes, when they had all reached the
room: closing the door as he spoke.

“Yes, here he is,” replied Nancy.

“Did he come quiet?” inquired Sikes.

“Like a lamb,” rejoined Nancy.

“I’m glad to hear it,” said Sikes, looking grimly at Oliver, “for the
sake of his young carcase, as would otherways have suffered for it.
Come here, young un, and let me read you a lectur’, which is as well
got over at once.”

Thus addressing his new _protégé_, Mr. Sikes pulled off his cap and
threw it into a corner; and then, taking him by the shoulder, sat
himself down by the table, and stood Oliver in front of him.

“Now first, do you know wot this is?” inquired Sikes, taking up a
pocket-pistol which lay on the table.

Oliver replied in the affirmative.

“Well then, look here,” continued Sikes. “This is powder, that ’ere’s a
bullet, and this is a little bit of a old hat for waddin’.”

Oliver murmured his comprehension of the different bodies referred
to, and Mr. Sikes proceeded to load the pistol with great nicety and
deliberation.

“Now it’s loaded,” said Mr. Sikes, when he had finished.

“Yes, I see it is, sir,” replied Oliver, trembling.

“Well,” said the robber, grasping Oliver’s wrist tightly, and putting
the barrel so close to his temple that they touched, at which moment
the boy could not repress a shriek; “if you speak a word when you’re
out o’doors with me, except when I speak to you, that loading will be
in your head without notice—so, if you _do_ make up your mind to speak
without leave, say your prayers first.”

Having bestowed a scowl upon the object of this warning, to increase
its effect, Mr. Sikes continued,—

“As near as I know, there is’nt anybody as would be asking very
partickler arter you, if you _was_ disposed of; so I needn’t take this
devil-and-all of trouble to explain matters to you if it warn’t for
your own good. D’ye hear me?”

“The short and the long of what you mean,” said Nancy, speaking very
emphatically, and slightly frowning at Oliver as if to bespeak his
serious attention to her words, “is, that if you’re crossed by him
in this job you have on hand, you’ll prevent his ever telling tales
afterwards by shooting him through the head, and take your chance of
swinging for it as you do for a great many other things in the way of
business every month of your life.”

“That’s it!” observed Mr. Sikes, approvingly; “women can always put
things in fewest words, except when it’s blowing up, and then they
lengthens it out. And now that he’s thoroughly up to it, let’s have
some supper, and get a snooze afore starting.”

In pursuance of this request, Nancy quickly laid the cloth, and,
disappearing for a few minutes, presently returned with a pot of
porter and a dish of sheep’s heads, which gave occasion to several
pleasant witticisms on the part of Mr. Sikes, founded upon the singular
coincidence of “jemmies” being a cant name common to them and an
ingenious implement much used in his profession. Indeed, the worthy
gentleman, stimulated perhaps by the immediate prospect of being in
active service, was in great spirits and good humour; in proof whereof
it may be here remarked that he humorously drank all the beer at a
draught, and did not utter, on a rough calculation, more than fourscore
oaths during the whole progress of the meal.

Supper being ended—it may be easily conceived that Oliver had no great
appetite for it—Mr. Sikes disposed of a couple of glasses of spirits
and water, and threw himself upon the bed, ordering Nancy, with many
imprecations in case of failure, to call him at five precisely. Oliver
stretched himself in his clothes, by command of the same authority, on
a mattress upon the floor; and the girl mending the fire, sat before
it, in readiness to rouse them at the appointed time.

For a long time Oliver lay awake, thinking it not impossible that Nancy
might seek that opportunity of whispering some further advice; but
the girl sat brooding over the fire without moving, save now and then
to trim the light. Weary with watching and anxiety, he at length fell
asleep.

When he awoke, the table was covered with tea-things, and Sikes was
thrusting various articles into the pockets of his great-coat, which
hung over the back of a chair, while Nancy was busily engaged in
preparing breakfast. It was not yet daylight, for the candle was still
burning, and it was quite dark outside. A sharp rain, too, was beating
against the window-panes, and the sky looked black and cloudy.

“Now, then!” growled Sikes, as Oliver started up; “half-past five! Look
sharp, or you’ll get no breakfast, for it’s late as it is.”

Oliver was not long in making his toilet; and, having taken some
breakfast, replied to a surly inquiry from Sikes, by saying that he was
quite ready.

Nancy, scarcely looking at the boy, threw him a handkerchief to tie
round his throat, and Sikes gave him a large rough cape to button over
his shoulders. Thus attired, he gave his hand to the robber, who,
merely pausing to shew him, with a menacing gesture, that he had the
pistol in a side pocket of his great-coat, clasped it firmly in his,
and, exchanging a farewell with Nancy, led him away.

Oliver turned for an instant when they reached the door, in the hope of
meeting a look from the girl. But she had resumed her old seat in front
of the fire, and sat perfectly motionless before it.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE EXPEDITION.


IT was a cheerless morning when they got into the street, blowing and
raining hard, and the clouds looking dull and stormy. The night had
been very wet, for large pools of water had collected in the road and
the kennels were overflowing. There was a faint glimmering of the
coming day in the sky, but it rather aggravated than relieved the gloom
of the scene, the sombre light only serving to pale that which the
street-lamps afforded, without shedding any warmer or brighter tints
upon the wet housetops and dreary streets. There appeared to be nobody
stirring in that quarter of the town, for the windows of the houses
were all closely shut, and the streets through which they passed were
noiseless and empty.

By the time they had turned into the Bethnal Green road, the day had
fairly begun to break. Many of the lamps were already extinguished;
a few country waggons were slowly toiling on towards London; and now
and then a stagecoach, covered with mud, rattled briskly by, the
driver bestowing, as he passed, an admonitory lash upon the heavy
waggoner who, by keeping on the wrong side of the road, had endangered
his arriving at the office a quarter of a minute after his time. The
public-houses, with gas-lights burning inside, were already open. By
degrees other shops began to be unclosed, and a few scattered people
were met with. Then came straggling groups of labourers going to their
work; then men and women with fish-baskets on their heads; donkey-carts
laden with vegetables, chaise-carts filled with live-stock or whole
carcasses of meat; milkwomen with pails; and an unbroken concourse of
people trudging out with various supplies to the eastern suburbs of the
town. As they approached the City, the noise and traffic gradually
increased; and when they threaded the streets between Shoreditch and
Smithfield, it had swelled into a roar of sound and bustle. It was as
light as it was likely to be till night came on again, and the busy
morning of half the London population had begun.

Turning down Sun-street and Crown-street, and crossing Finsbury-square,
Mr. Sikes struck, by way of Chiswell-street, into Barbican, thence into
Long-lane, and so into Smithfield, from which latter place arose a
tumult of discordant sounds that filled Oliver Twist with surprise and
amazement.

It was market-morning. The ground was covered nearly ankle-deep with
filth and mire; and a thick steam perpetually rising from the reeking
bodies of the cattle, and mingling with the fog, which seemed to rest
upon the chimney-tops, hung heavily above. All the pens in the centre
of the large area, and as many temporary ones as could be crowded
into the vacant space, were filled with sheep; and tied up to posts
by the gutter side were long lines of beasts and oxen three or four
deep. Countrymen, butchers, drovers, hawkers, boys, thieves, idlers,
and vagabonds of every low grade, were mingled together in a dense
mass; the whistling of drovers, the barking of dogs, the bellowing and
plunging of beasts, the bleating of sheep, and grunting and squeaking
of pigs; the cries of hawkers, the shouts, oaths, and quarrelling on
all sides; the ringing of bells and roar of voices that issued from
every public-house; the crowding, pushing, driving, beating, whooping,
and yelling; the hideous and discordant din that resounded from every
corner of the market; and the unwashed, unshaven, squalid, and dirty
figures constantly running to and fro, and bursting in and out of the
throng, rendered it a stunning and bewildering scene, which quite
confounded the senses.

Mr. Sikes, dragging Oliver after him, elbowed his way through the
thickest of the crowd, and bestowed very little attention upon the
numerous sights and sounds which so astonished the boy. He nodded twice
or thrice to a passing friend, and, resisting as many invitations to
take a morning dram, pressed steadily onward until they were clear of
the turmoil, and had made their way through Hosier-lane into Holborn.

“Now, young un!” said Sikes surlily, looking up at the clock of St.
Andrew’s church, “hard upon seven! you must step out. Come, don’t lag
behind already, Lazy-legs!”

Mr. Sikes accompanied this speech with a fierce jerk at his little
companion’s wrist; and Oliver, quickening his pace into a kind of trot,
between a fast walk and a run, kept up with the rapid strides of the
housebreaker as well as he could.

They kept on their course at this rate until they had passed Hyde Park
corner, and were on their way to Kensington, when Sikes relaxed his
pace until an empty cart which was at some little distance behind, came
up: when, seeing “Hounslow” written upon it, he asked the driver, with
as much civility as he could assume, if he would give them a lift as
far as Isleworth.

“Jump up,” said the man. “Is that your boy?”

“Yes; he’s my boy,” replied Sikes, looking hard at Oliver, and putting
his hand abstractedly into the pocket where the pistol was.

“Your father walks rather too quick for you, don’t he, my man?”
inquired the driver, seeing that Oliver was out of breath.

“Not a bit of it,” replied Sikes, interposing. “He’s used to it. Here,
take hold of my hand, Ned. In with you!”

Thus addressing Oliver, he helped him into the cart; and the driver,
pointing to a heap of sacks, told him to lie down there, and rest
himself.

As they passed the different milestones, Oliver wondered more and
more where his companion meant to take him. Kensington, Hammersmith,
Chiswick, Kew Bridge, Brentford, were all passed; and yet they kept
on as steadily as if they had only begun their journey. At length
they came to a public-house called the Coach and Horses, a little way
beyond which another road appeared to turn off. And here the cart
stopped.

Sikes dismounted with great precipitation, holding Oliver by the hand
all the while; and, lifting him down directly, bestowed a furious
look upon him, and rapped the side-pocket with his fist in a very
significant manner.

“Good-bye, boy,” said the man.

“He’s sulky,” replied Sikes, giving him a shake; “he’s sulky,—a young
dog! Don’t mind him.”

“Not I!” rejoined the other, getting into his cart. “It’s a fine day,
after all.” And he drove away.

Sikes waited till he had fairly gone, and then, telling Oliver he might
look about him if he wanted, once again led him forward on his journey.

They turned round to the left a short way past the public-house, and
then, taking a right-hand road, walked on for a long time, passing many
large gardens and gentlemen’s houses on both sides of the way, and
stopping for nothing but a little beer, until they reached a town, in
which, against the wall of a house, Oliver saw written up in pretty
large letters, “Hampton.” Here they lingered about in the fields for
some hours. At length, they came back into the town, and keeping on,
past a public-house which bore the sign of the Red Lion, and by the
river-side for a short distance, they came to an old public-house with
a defaced sign-board, and ordered some dinner by the kitchen fire.

The kitchen was an old, low-roofed room, with a great beam across the
middle of the ceiling, and benches with high backs to them by the fire,
on which were seated several rough men in smock-frocks, drinking and
smoking. They took no notice of Oliver, and very little of Sikes; and,
as Sikes took very little notice of them, he and his young comrade sat
in a corner by themselves, without being much troubled by the company.

They had some cold meat for dinner, and sat here so long after it,
while Mr. Sikes indulged himself with three or four pipes, that Oliver
began to feel quite certain they were not going any further. Being
much tired with the walk and getting up so early, he dozed a little
at first, and then, quite overpowered by fatigue and the fumes of the
tobacco, fell fast asleep.

It was quite dark when he was awakened by a push from Sikes. Rousing
himself sufficiently to sit up and look about him, he found that worthy
in close fellowship and communication with a labouring man, over a pint
of ale.

“So, you’re going on to Lower Halliford, are you?” inquired Sikes.

“Yes, I am,” replied the man, who seemed a little the worse—or better,
as the case might be—for drinking; “and not slow about it neither. My
horse hasn’t got a load behind him going back, as he had coming up in
the mornin’, and he wont be long a-doing of it. Here’s luck to him!
Ecod! he’s a good un!”

“Could you give my boy and me a lift as far as there?” demanded Sikes,
pushing the ale towards his new friend.

“If you’re going directly, I can,” replied the man, looking out of the
pot. “Are you going to Halliford?”

“Going on to Shepperton,” replied Sikes.

“I’m your man as far as I go,” replied the other. “Is all paid, Becky?”

“Yes, the other gentleman’s paid,” replied the girl.

“I say!” said the man, with tipsy gravity, “that wont do, you know.”

“Why not?” rejoined Sikes. “You’re a-going to accommodate us, and wot’s
to prevent my standing treat for a pint or so, in return?”

The stranger reflected upon this argument with a very profound face,
and having done so, seized Sikes by the hand, and declared he was a
real good fellow. To which Mr. Sikes replied, he was joking;—as if he
had been sober, there would have been strong reason to suppose he was.

After the exchange of a few more compliments, they bade the company
good night, and went out, the girl gathering up the pots and glasses as
they did so, and lounging out to the door, with her hands full, to see
the party start.

The horse, whose health had been drunk in his absence, was standing
outside, ready harnessed to the cart. Oliver and Sikes got in without
any further ceremony, and the man, to whom he belonged, having lingered
a minute or two “to bear him up,” and to defy the hostler and the
world to produce his equal, mounted also. Then the hostler was told to
give the horse his head, and, his head being given him, he made a very
unpleasant use of it, tossing it into the air with great disdain, and
running into the parlour windows over the way; after performing which
feats, and supporting himself for a short time on his hind-legs, he
started off at great speed, and rattled out of the town right gallantly.

The night was very dark. A damp mist rose from the river and the
marshy ground about, and spread itself over the dreary fields. It was
piercing cold, too; all was gloomy and black. Not a word was spoken,
for the driver had grown sleepy, and Sikes was in no mood to lead him
into conversation. Oliver sat huddled together in a corner of the cart,
bewildered with alarm and apprehension, and figuring strange objects in
the gaunt trees, whose branches waved grimly to and fro, as if in some
fantastic joy at the desolation of the scene.

As they passed Sunbury church, the clock struck seven. There was a
light in the ferry-house window opposite, which streamed across the
road, and threw into more sombre shadow a dark yew-tree with graves
beneath it. There was a dull sound of falling water not far off, and
the leaves of the old tree stirred gently in the night wind. It seemed
like quiet music for the repose of the dead.

Sunbury was passed through, and they came again into the lonely road.
Two or three miles more, and the cart stopped. Sikes alighted, and,
taking Oliver by the hand, they once again walked on.

They turned into no house at Shepperton, as the weary boy had expected,
but still kept walking on, in mud and darkness, through gloomy lanes
and over cold open wastes, until they came within sight of the lights
of a town at no great distance. On looking intently forward, Oliver saw
that the water was just below them, and that they were coming to the
foot of a bridge.

Sikes kept straight on till they were close upon the bridge, and then
turned suddenly down a bank upon the left. “The water!” thought Oliver,
turning sick with fear. “He has brought me to this lonely place to
murder me!”

He was about to throw himself on the ground, and make one struggle
for his young life, when he saw that they stood before a solitary
house, all ruinous and decayed. There was a window on each side of the
dilapidated entrance, and one story above; but no light was visible. It
was dark, dismantled, and, to all appearance, uninhabited.

Sikes, with Oliver’s hand still in his, softly approached the low
porch, and raised the latch. The door yielded to the pressure, and they
passed in together.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE BURGLARY.


“HALLO!” cried a loud, hoarse voice, directly they had set foot in the
passage.

“Don’t make such a row,” said Sikes, bolting the door. “Shew a glim,
Toby.”

“Aha! my pal,” cried the same voice; “a glim, Barney, a glim! Shew the
gentleman in, Barney; and wake up first, if convenient.”

The speaker appeared to throw a boot-jack, or some such article, at
the person he addressed, to rouse him from his slumbers; for the noise
of a wooden body falling violently was heard, and then an indistinct
muttering, as of a man between asleep and awake.

“Do you hear?” cried the same voice. “There’s Bill Sikes in the
passage with nobody to do the civil to him; and you sleeping there,
as if you took laudanum with your meals, and nothing stronger. Are
you any fresher now, or do you want the iron candlestick to wake you
thoroughly?”

A pair of slipshod feet shuffled hastily across the bare floor of the
room as this interrogatory was put; and there issued from a door on
the right hand, first a feeble candle, and next, the form of the same
individual who has been heretofore described as labouring under the
infirmity of speaking through his nose, and officiating as waiter at
the public-house on Saffron Hill.

“Bister Sikes!” exclaimed Barney, with real or counterfeit joy; “cub
id, sir; cub id.”

“Here! you get on first,” said Sikes, putting Oliver in front of him.
“Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels.”

Muttering a curse upon his tardiness, Sikes pushed Oliver before him,
and they entered a low dark room with a smoky fire, two or three broken
chairs, a table, and a very old couch, on which, with his legs much
higher than his head, a man was reposing at full length, smoking a
long clay pipe. He was dressed in a smartly-cut snuff-coloured coat,
with large brass buttons, an orange neckerchief, a coarse, staring,
shawl-pattern waistcoat, and drab breeches. Mr. Crackit (for he it
was) had no very great quantity of hair, either upon his head or face,
but what he had was of a reddish dye, and tortured into long corkscrew
curls, through which he occasionally thrust some very dirty fingers,
ornamented with large common rings. He was a trifle above the middle
size, and apparently rather weak in the legs; but this circumstance by
no means detracted from his own admiration of his top-boots, which he
contemplated in their elevated situation with lively satisfaction.

“Bill, my boy!” said this figure, turning his head towards the door,
“I’m glad to see you. I was almost afraid you’d given it up, in which
case I should have made a personal wentur. Hallo!”

Uttering this exclamation in a tone of great surprise, as his eyes
rested on Oliver, Mr. Toby Crackit brought himself into a sitting
posture and demanded who that was.

“The boy—only the boy!” replied Sikes, drawing a chair towards the
fire.

“Wud of Bister Fagid’s lads,” exclaimed Barney, with a grin.

“Fagin’s, eh!” exclaimed Toby, looking at Oliver. “Wot an inwalable
boy that’ll make for the old ladies’ pockets in chapels. His mug is a
fortun’ to him.”

“There—there’s enough of that,” interposed Sikes, impatiently, and
stooping over his recumbent friend he whispered a few words in his ear,
at which Mr. Crackit laughed immensely, and honoured Oliver with a long
stare of astonishment.

“Now,” said Sikes, as he resumed his seat, “if you’ll give us something
to eat and drink while we’re waiting, you’ll put some heart in us,—or
in me, at all events. Sit down by the fire, younker, and rest yourself;
for you’ll have to go out with us again to-night, though not very far
off.”

Oliver looked at Sikes in mute and timid wonder, and drawing a stool
to the fire, sat with his aching head upon his hands, scarcely knowing
where he was, or what was passing around him.

“Here,” said Toby, as the young Jew placed some fragments of food and
a bottle upon the table, “Success to the crack!” He rose to honour the
toast, and, carefully depositing his empty pipe in a corner, advanced
to the table, filled a glass with spirits, and drank off its contents.
Mr. Sikes did the same.

“A drain for the boy,” said Toby, half filling a wine-glass. “Down with
it, innocence.”

“Indeed,” said Oliver, looking piteously up into the man’s face;
“indeed, I——”

“Down with it!” echoed Toby. “Do you think I don’t know what’s good for
you? Tell him to drink it, Bill.”

“He had better,” said Sikes, clapping his hand upon his pocket. “Burn
my body, if he isn’t more trouble than a whole family of Dodgers. Drink
it, you perwerse imp; drink it!”

Frightened by the menacing gestures of the two men, Oliver hastily
swallowed the contents of the glass, and immediately fell into a
violent fit of coughing, which delighted Toby Crackit and Barney, and
even drew a smile from the surly Mr. Sikes.

This done, and Sikes having satisfied his appetite (Oliver could eat
nothing but a small crust of bread which they made him swallow), the
two men laid themselves down on chairs for a short nap. Oliver retained
his stool by the fire; and Barney, wrapped in a blanket, stretched
himself on the floor, close outside the fender.

They slept, or appeared to sleep, for some time; nobody stirring but
Barney, who rose once or twice to throw coals upon the fire. Oliver
fell into a heavy doze, imagining himself straying along through the
gloomy lanes, or wandering about the dark churchyard, or retracing some
one or other of the scenes of the past day, when he was roused by Toby
Crackit jumping up and declaring it was half-past one.

In an instant the other two were on their legs, and all were actively
engaged in busy preparation. Sikes and his companion enveloped their
necks and chins in large dark shawls, and drew on their great-coats,
while Barney, opening a cupboard, brought forth several articles, which
he hastily crammed into the pockets.

“Barkers for me, Barney,” said Toby Crackit.

“Here they are,” replied Barney, producing a pair of pistols. “You
loaded them yourself.”

“All right!” replied Toby, stowing them away. “The persuaders?”

“I’ve got ’em,” replied Sikes.

“Crape, keys, centre-bits, darkies—nothing forgotten?” inquired Toby,
fastening a small crowbar to a loop inside the skirt of his coat.

“All right,” rejoined his companion. “Bring them bits of timber,
Barney: that’s the time of day.”

With these words he took a thick stick from Barney’s hands, who, having
delivered another to Toby, busied himself in fastening on Oliver’s
cape.

“Now then!” said Sikes, holding out his hand.

Oliver, who was completely stupified by the unwonted exercise, and
the air, and the drink which had been forced upon him, put his hand
mechanically into that which Sikes extended for the purpose.

“Take his other hand, Toby,” said Sikes. “Look out, Barney.”

The man went to the door, and returned to announce that all was quiet.
The two robbers issued forth with Oliver between them; and Barney,
having made all fast, rolled himself up as before, and was soon asleep
again.

It was now intensely dark. The fog was much heavier than it had been
in the early part of the night, and the atmosphere was so damp that,
although no rain fell, Oliver’s hair and eyebrows, within a few minutes
after leaving the house, had become stiff with the half-frozen moisture
that was floating about. They crossed the bridge, and kept on towards
the lights which he had seen before. They were at no great distance
off; and, as they walked pretty briskly, they soon arrived at Chertsey.

“Slap through the town,” whispered Sikes; “there’ll be nobody in the
way to-night to see us.”

Toby acquiesced; and they hurried through the main street of the little
town, which at that late hour was wholly deserted. A dim light shone
at intervals from some bedroom-window, and the hoarse barking of dogs
occasionally broke the silence of the night; but there was nobody
abroad, and they had cleared the town as the church bell struck two.

Quickening their pace, they turned up a road upon the left hand. After
walking about a quarter of a mile, they stopped before a detached
house surrounded by a wall, to the top of which Toby Crackit, scarcely
pausing to take breath, climbed in a twinkling.

“The boy next,” said Toby. “Hoist him up: I’ll catch hold of him.”

Before Oliver had time to look round, Sikes had caught him under the
arms, and in three or four seconds he and Toby were lying on the grass
on the other side. Sikes followed directly, and they stole cautiously
towards the house.

And now, for the first time, Oliver, well nigh mad with grief and
terror, saw that housebreaking and robbery, if not murder, were
the objects of the expedition. He clasped his hands together, and
involuntarily uttered a subdued exclamation of horror. A mist came
before his eyes, the cold sweat stood upon his ashy face, his limbs
failed him, and he sunk upon his knees.

“Get up!” murmured Sikes, trembling with rage, and drawing the pistol
from his pocket; “get up, or I’ll strew your brains upon the grass.”

“Oh! for God’s sake let me go!” cried Oliver; “let me run away and die
in the fields. I will never come near London; never, never! Oh! pray
have mercy upon me, and do not make me steal. For the love of all the
bright angels that rest in heaven, have mercy upon me!”

The man to whom this appeal was made swore a dreadful oath, and had
cocked the pistol, when Toby, striking it from his grasp, placed his
hand upon the boy’s mouth and dragged him to the house.

“Hush!” cried the man; “it wont answer here. Say another word, and
I’ll do your business myself with a crack on the head that makes no
noise, and is quite as certain and more genteel. Here, Bill, wrench the
shutter open. He’s game enough, now, I’ll engage. I’ve seen older hands
of his age took the same way for a minute or two on a cold night.”

Sikes, invoking terrific imprecations upon Fagin’s head for sending
Oliver on such an errand, plied the crowbar vigorously, but with little
noise; after some delay, and some assistance from Toby, the shutter to
which he had referred swung open on its hinges.

It was a little lattice window, about five feet and a half above the
ground, at the back of the house, which belonged to a scullery, or
small brewing-place, at the end of the passage: the aperture was so
small that the inmates had probably not thought it worth while to
defend it more securely; but it was large enough to admit a boy of
Oliver’s size nevertheless. A very brief exercise of Mr. Sikes’s art
sufficed to overcome the fastening of the lattice, and it soon stood
wide open also.

“Now listen, you young limb,” whispered Sikes, drawing a dark lantern
from his pocket, and throwing the glare full on Oliver’s face; “I’m
a going to put you through there. Take this light, go softly up the
steps straight afore you, and along the little hall to the street-door:
unfasten it, and let us in.”

“There’s a bolt at the top you wont be able to reach,” interposed Toby.
“Stand upon one of the hall chairs. There are three there, Bill, with a
jolly large blue unicorn and a gold pitchfork on ’em, which is the old
lady’s arms.”

“Keep quiet, can’t you?” replied Sikes, with a threatening look. “The
room-door is open, is it?”

“Wide,” replied Toby, after peeping in to satisfy himself. “The game
of that is that they always leave it open with a catch, so that the
dog, who’s got a bed in here, may walk up and down the passage when he
feels wakeful. Ha! ha! Barney ’ticed him away to-night, so neat.”

Although Mr. Crackit spoke in a scarcely audible whisper, and laughed
without noise, Sikes imperiously commanded him to be silent, and to get
to work. Toby complied by first producing his lantern, and placing it
on the ground; and then planting himself firmly with his head against
the wall beneath the window, and his hands upon his knees, so as to
make a step of his back. This was no sooner done than Sikes, mounting
upon him, put Oliver gently through the window with his feet first;
and, without leaving hold of his collar, planted him safely on the
floor inside.

“Take this lantern,” said Sikes, looking into the room. “You see the
stairs afore you?”

Oliver, more dead than alive, gasped out, “Yes;” and Sikes, pointing
to the street-door with the pistol-barrel, briefly advised him to take
notice that he was within shot all the way, and that if he faltered he
would fall dead that instant.

“It’s done in a minute,” said Sikes, in the same low whisper. “Directly
I leave go of you, do your work. Hark!”

“What’s that?” whispered the other man.

They listened intently.

“Nothing,” said Sikes, releasing his hold of Oliver. “Now!”

In the short time he had had to collect his senses, the boy had firmly
resolved that, whether he died in the attempt or not, he would make one
effort to dart up stairs from the hall and alarm the family. Filled
with this idea, he advanced at once, but stealthily.

“Come back!” suddenly cried Sikes aloud. “Back! back!”

Scared by the sudden breaking of the dead stillness of the place, and a
loud cry which followed it, Oliver let his lantern fall, and knew not
whether to advance or fly.

The cry was repeated—a light appeared—a vision of two terrified
half-dressed men at the top of the stairs swam before his eyes—a
flash—a loud noise—a smoke—a crash somewhere, but where he knew
not,—and he staggered back.

Sikes had disappeared for an instant; but he was up again, and had
him by the collar before the smoke had cleared away. He fired his own
pistol after the men who were already retreating, and dragged the boy
up.

“Clasp your arm tighter,” said Sikes, as he drew him through the
window. “Give me a shawl here. They’ve hit him. Quick! Damnation, how
the boy bleeds!”

Then came the loud ringing of a bell, mingled with the noise of
fire-arms and the shouts of men, and the sensation of being carried
over uneven ground at a rapid pace. And then the noises grew confused
in the distance, and a cold deadly feeling crept over the boy’s heart,
and he saw or heard no more.




CHAPTER XXIII.

    WHICH CONTAINS THE SUBSTANCE OF A PLEASANT CONVERSATION
    BETWEEN MR. BUMBLE AND A LADY; AND SHEWS THAT EVEN A BEADLE
    MAY BE SUSCEPTIBLE ON SOME POINTS.


THE night was bitter cold. The snow lay upon the ground frozen into a
hard thick crust, so that only the heaps that had drifted into byways
and corners were affected by the sharp wind that howled abroad, which,
as if expending increased fury on such prey as it found, caught it
savagely up in clouds, and, whirling it into a thousand misty eddies,
scattered it in air. Bleak, dark, and piercing cold, it was a night
for the well-housed and fed to draw round the bright fire and thank
God they were at home, and for the homeless starving wretch to lay him
down and die. Many hunger-worn outcasts close their eyes in our bare
streets at such times, who, let their crimes have been what they may,
can hardly open them in a more bitter world.

Such was the aspect of out-of-doors affairs when Mrs. Corney, the
matron of the workhouse, to which our readers have been already
introduced as the birthplace of Oliver Twist, sat herself down before
a cheerful fire in her own little room, and glanced with no small
degree of complacency at a small round table, on which stood a tray of
corresponding size, furnished with all necessary materials for the most
grateful meal that matrons enjoy. In fact, Mrs. Corney was about to
solace herself with a cup of tea: and as she glanced from the table to
the fireplace, where the smallest of all possible kettles was singing
a small song in a small voice, her inward satisfaction evidently
increased,—so much so, indeed, that Mrs. Corney smiled.

“Well,” said the matron, leaning her elbow on the table, and looking
reflectively at the fire, “I’m sure we have all on us a great deal to
be grateful for—a great deal, if we did but know it. Ah!”

Mrs. Corney shook her head mournfully, as if deploring the mental
blindness of those paupers who did not know it, and thrusting a silver
spoon (private property) into the inmost recesses of a two-ounce tin
tea-caddy, proceeded to make the tea.

How slight a thing will disturb the equanimity of our frail minds! The
black teapot, being very small and easily filled, ran over while Mrs.
Corney was moralizing, and the water slightly scalded Mrs. Corney’s
hand.

“Drat the pot!” said the worthy matron, setting it down very hastily on
the hob; “a little stupid thing, that only holds a couple of cups! What
use is it of to any body?—except,” said Mrs. Corney, pausing,—“except
to a poor desolate creature like me. Oh dear!”

With these words the matron dropped into her chair, and, once more
resting her elbow on the table, thought of her solitary fate. The small
teapot and the single cup had awakened in her mind sad recollections
of Mr. Corney (who had not been dead more than five-and-twenty years),
and she was overpowered.

“I shall never get another!” said Mrs. Corney, pettishly; “I shall
never get another—like him.”

Whether this remark bore reference to the husband or the teapot is
uncertain. It might have been the latter; for Mrs. Corney looked at it
as she spoke, and took it up afterwards. She had just tasted her first
cup, when she was disturbed by a soft tap at the room-door.

“Oh, come in with you!” said Mrs. Corney, sharply. “Some of the old
women dying, I suppose;—they always die when I’m at meals. Don’t stand
there, letting the cold air in, don’t. What’s amiss now, eh?”

“Nothing, ma’am, nothing,” replied a man’s voice.

“Dear me!” exclaimed the matron, in a much sweeter tone, “is that Mr.
Bumble?”

“At your service, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, who had been stopping
outside to rub his shoes clean, and shake the snow off his coat, and
who now made his appearance, bearing the cocked-hat in one hand and a
bundle in the other. “Shall I shut the door, ma’am?”

The lady modestly hesitated to reply, lest there should be any
impropriety in holding an interview with Mr. Bumble with closed doors.
Mr. Bumble, taking advantage of the hesitation, and being very cold
himself, shut it without farther permission.

“Hard weather, Mr. Bumble,” said the matron.

“Hard, indeed, ma’am,” replied the beadle. “Anti-porochial weather
this, ma’am. We have given away, Mrs. Corney,—we have given away a
matter of twenty quartern loaves and a cheese and a half this very
blessed afternoon; and yet them paupers are not contented.”

“Of course not. When would they be, Mr. Bumble?” said the matron,
sipping her tea.

“When, indeed, ma’am!” rejoined Mr. Bumble. “Why, here’s one man that,
in consideration of his wife and large family, has a quartern loaf and
a good pound of cheese, full weight. Is he grateful, ma’am,—is he
grateful? Not a copper farthing’s worth of it! What does he do, ma’am,
but ask for a few coals, if it’s only a pocket-handkerchief full, he
says! Coals!—what would he do with coals?—Toast his cheese with
’em, and then come back for more. That’s the way with these people,
ma’am;—give ’em a apron full of coals to-day, and they’ll came back
for another the day after to-morrow, as brazen as alabaster.”

The matron expressed her entire concurrence in this intelligible
simile, and the beadle went on.

“I never,” said Mr. Bumble, “see anything like the pitch it’s got
to. The day afore yesterday, a man—you have been a married woman,
ma’am, and I may mention it to you—a man, with hardly a rag upon his
back (here Mrs. Corney looked at the floor), goes to our overseer’s
door when he has got company coming to dinner, and says, he must be
relieved, Mrs. Corney. As he wouldn’t go away, and shocked the company
very much, our overseer sent him out a pound of potatoes and half
a pint of oatmeal. ‘My God!’ says the ungrateful villain, ‘what’s
the use of _this_ to me? You might as well give me a pair of iron
spectacles ‘Very good,’ says our overseer, taking ’em away again, ‘you
wont get anything else here.’—‘Then I’ll die in the streets!’ says the
vagrant.—‘Oh no, you wont,’ says our overseer.”

“Ha! ha!—that was very good!—so like Mr. Grannet, wasn’t it?”
interposed the matron. “Well, Mr. Bumble?”

“Well, ma’am,” rejoined the beadle, “he went away and _did_ die in the
streets. There’s a obstinate pauper for you!”

“It beats anything I could have believed,” observed the matron,
emphatically. “But don’t you think out-of-door relief a very bad thing
any way, Mr. Bumble? You’re a gentleman of experience, and ought to
know. Come.”

“Mrs. Corney,” said the beadle, smiling as men smile who are
conscious of superior information, “out-of-door relief, properly
managed,—properly managed, ma’am,—is the porochial safeguard. The
great principle of out-of-door relief is to give the paupers exactly
what they don’t want, and then they get tired of coming.”

“Dear me!” exclaimed Mrs. Corney. “Well, that is a good one, too!”

“Yes. Betwixt you and me, ma’am,” returned Mr. Bumble, “that’s the
great principle; and that’s the reason why, if you look at any cases
that get into them owdacious newspapers, you’ll always observe that
sick families have been relieved with slices of cheese. That’s the
rule now, Mrs. Corney, all over the country.—But, however,” said the
beadle, stooping to unpack his bundle, “these are official secrets,
ma’am; not to be spoken of except, as I may say, among the porochial
officers, such as ourselves. This is the port wine, ma’am, that the
board ordered for the infirmary,—real, fresh, genuine port wine, only
out of the cask this afternoon,—clear as a bell, and no sediment.”

Having held the first bottle up to the light, and shaken it well to
test its excellence, Mr. Bumble placed them both on the top of a chest
of drawers, folded the handkerchief in which they had been wrapped,
put it carefully in his pocket, and took up his hat as if to go.

“You’ll have a very cold walk, Mr. Bumble,” said the matron.

“It blows, ma’am,” replied Mr. Bumble, turning up his coat-collar,
“enough to cut one’s ears off.”

The matron looked from the little kettle to the beadle who was moving
towards the door, and as the beadle coughed, preparatory to bidding her
good night, bashfully inquired whether—whether he wouldn’t take a cup
of tea?

Mr. Bumble instantaneously turned back his collar again, laid his hat
and stick upon a chair, and drew another chair up to the table. As he
slowly seated himself, he looked at the lady. She fixed her eyes upon
the little teapot. Mr. Bumble coughed again, and slightly smiled.

Mrs. Corney rose to get another cup and saucer from the closet. As she
sat down, her eyes once again encountered those of the gallant beadle;
she coloured, and applied herself to the task of making his tea. Again
Mr. Bumble coughed,—louder this time than he had coughed yet.

“Sweet? Mr. Bumble,” inquired the matron, taking up the sugar-basin.

“Very sweet, indeed, ma’am,” replied Mr. Bumble. He fixed his eyes on
Mrs. Corney as he said this; and if ever a beadle looked tender, Mr.
Bumble was that beadle at that moment.

The tea was made, and handed in silence. Mr. Bumble, having spread
a handkerchief over his knees to prevent the crumbs from sullying
the splendour of his shorts, began to eat and drink; varying these
amusements occasionally by fetching a deep sigh, which, however, had no
injurious effect upon his appetite, but, on the contrary, rather seemed
to facilitate his operations in the tea and toast department.

“You have a cat, ma’am, I see,” said Mr. Bumble, glancing at one, who,
in the centre of her family, was basking before the fire; “and kittens
too, I declare!”

“I am so fond of them, Mr. Bumble, you can’t think,” replied the
matron. “They’re _so_ happy, _so_ frolicsome, and _so_ cheerful, that
they are quite companions for me.”

“Very nice animals, ma’am,” replied Mr. Bumble, approvingly; “so very
domestic.”

“Oh, yes!” rejoined the matron, with enthusiasm; “so fond of their home
too, that it’s quite a pleasure, I’m sure.”

“Mrs. Corney, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, slowly, and marking the time
with his teaspoon, “I mean to say this, ma’am, that any cat or kitten
that could live with you, ma’am, and _not_ be fond of its home, must be
a ass, ma’am.”

“Oh, Mr. Bumble!” remonstrated Mrs. Corney.

“It’s no use disguising facts, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, slowly
flourishing the teaspoon with a kind of amorous dignity that made him
doubly impressive; “I would drown it myself with pleasure.”

“Then you’re a cruel man,” said the matron vivaciously, as she held out
her hand for the beadle’s cup, “and a very hard-hearted man besides.”

“Hard-hearted, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, “hard!” Mr. Bumble resigned
his cup without another word, squeezed Mrs. Corney’s little finger
as she took it, and inflicting two open-handed slaps upon his laced
waistcoat, gave a mighty sigh, and hitched his chair a very little
morsel farther from the fire.

It was a round table; and as Mrs. Corney and Mr. Bumble had been
sitting opposite each other, with no great space between them, and
fronting the fire, it will be seen that Mr. Bumble, in receding from
the fire, and still keeping at the table, increased the distance
between himself and Mrs. Corney; which proceeding some prudent
readers will doubtless be disposed to admire, and to consider an act
of great heroism on Mr. Bumble’s part, he being in some sort tempted
by time, place, and opportunity, to give utterance to certain soft
nothings, which, however well they may become the lips of the light
and thoughtless, do seem immeasurably beneath the dignity of judges of
the land, members of parliament, ministers of state, lord-mayors, and
other great public functionaries, but more particularly beneath the
stateliness and gravity of a beadle, who (as is well known) should be
the sternest and most inflexible among them all.

[Illustration: _Mr. Bumble and Mrs. Corney taking tea._]

Whatever were Mr. Bumble’s intentions, however,—and no doubt they
were of the best,—whatever they were, it unfortunately, happened,
as has been twice before remarked, that the table was a round one;
consequently, Mr. Bumble, moving his chair by little and little, soon
began to diminish the distance between himself and the matron, and,
continuing to travel round the outer edge of the circle, brought his
chair in time close to that in which the matron was seated. Indeed, the
two chairs touched; and when they did so, Mr. Bumble stopped.

Now, if the matron had moved her chair to the right, she would have
been scorched by the fire, and if to the left, she must have fallen
into Mr. Bumble’s arms; so (being a discreet matron, and no doubt
foreseeing these consequences at a glance) she remained where she
was, and handed Mr. Bumble another cup of tea.

“Hard-hearted, Mrs. Corney?” said Mr. Bumble, stirring his tea, and
looking up into the matron’s face; “are _you_ hard-hearted, Mrs.
Corney?”

“Dear me!” exclaimed the matron, “what a very curious question from a
single man. What can you want to know for, Mr. Bumble?”

The beadle drank his tea to the last drop, finished a piece of toast,
whisked the crumbs off his knees, wiped his lips, and deliberately
kissed the matron.

“Mr. Bumble,” cried that discreet lady in a whisper, for the fright
was so great that she had quite lost her voice, “Mr. Bumble, I shall
scream!” Mr. Bumble made no reply, but in a slow and dignified manner
put his arm round the matron’s waist.

As the lady had stated her intention of screaming, of course she would
have screamed at this additional boldness, but that the exertion
was rendered unnecessary by a hasty knocking at the door, which
was no sooner heard than Mr. Bumble darted with much agility to the
wine-bottles, and began dusting them with great violence, while the
matron sharply demanded who was there. It is worthy of remark, as a
curious physical instance of the efficacy of a sudden surprise in
counteracting the effects of extreme fear, that her voice had quite
recovered all its official asperity.

“If you please, mistress,” said a withered old female pauper, hideously
ugly, putting her head in at the door, “Old Sally is a-going fast.”

“Well, what’s that to me?” angrily demanded the matron. “I can’t keep
her alive, can I?”

“No, no, mistress,” replied the old woman; “nobody can; she’s far
beyond the reach of help. I’ve seen a many people die, little babes
and great strong men, and I know when death’s a-coming well enough.
But she’s troubled in her mind; and when the fits are not on her,—and
that’s not often, for she is dying very hard,—she says she has got
something to tell which you must hear. She’ll never die quiet till you
come, mistress.”

At this intelligence the worthy Mrs. Corney muttered a variety of
invectives against old women who couldn’t even die without purposely
annoying their betters; and, muffling herself in a thick shawl which
she hastily caught up, briefly requested Mr. Bumble to stop till she
came back, lest anything particular should occur, and bidding the
messenger walk fast, and not be all night hobbling up the stairs,
followed her from the room with a very ill grace, scolding all the way.

Mr. Bumble’s conduct on being left to himself was rather inexplicable.
He opened the closet, counted the tea-spoons, weighed the sugar-tongs,
closely inspected a silver milk-pot to ascertain that it was of the
genuine metal; and, having satisfied his curiosity upon these points,
put on his cocked-hat corner-wise, and danced with much gravity
four distinct times round the table. Having gone through this very
extraordinary performance, he took off the cocked-hat again, and,
spreading himself before the fire with his back towards it, seemed to
be mentally engaged in taking an exact inventory of the furniture.




CHAPTER XXIV.

TREATS OF A VERY POOR SUBJECT, BUT IS A SHORT ONE, AND MAY BE FOUND OF
IMPORTANCE IN THIS HISTORY.


IT was no unfit messenger of death that had disturbed the quiet of
the matron’s room. Her body was bent by age, her limbs trembled with
palsy, and her face, distorted into a mumbling leer, resembled more the
grotesque shaping of some wild pencil than the work of Nature’s hand.

Alas! how few of Nature’s faces there are to gladden us with their
beauty! The cares, and sorrows, and hungerings of the world change them
as they change hearts, and it is only when those passions sleep, and
have lost their hold for ever, that the troubled clouds pass off, and
leave heaven’s surface clear. It is a common thing for the countenances
of the dead, even in that fixed and rigid state, to subside into the
long-forgotten expression of sleeping infancy, and settle into the very
look of early life; so calm, so peaceful do they grow again, that those
who knew them in their happy childhood kneel by the coffin’s side in
awe, and see the angel even upon earth.

The old crone tottered along the passages and up the stairs, muttering
some indistinct answers to the chidings of her companion; and being at
length compelled to pause for breath, gave the light into her hand, and
remained behind to follow as she might, while the more nimble superior
made her way to the room where the sick woman lay.

It was a bare garret-room, with a dim light burning at the farther
end. There was another old woman watching by the bed, and the parish
apothecary’s apprentice was standing by the fire, making a toothpick
out of a quill.

“Cold night, Mrs. Corney,” said this young gentleman, as the matron
entered.

“Very cold indeed, sir,” replied the mistress, in her most civil
tones, and dropping a curtsey as she spoke.

“You should get better coals out of your contractors,” said the
apothecary’s deputy, breaking a lump on the top of the fire with the
rusty poker; “these are not at all the sort of thing for a cold night.”

“They’re the board’s choosing, sir,” returned the matron. “The least
they could do would be to keep us pretty warm, for our places are hard
enough.”

The conversation was here interrupted by a moan from the sick woman.

“Oh!” said the young man, turning his face towards the bed, as if he
had previously quite forgotten the patient, “it’s all U. P. there, Mrs.
Corney.”

“It is, is it, sir?” asked the matron.

“If she lasts a couple of hours, I shall be surprised,” said the
apothecary’s apprentice, intent upon the toothpick’s point. “It’s a
break-up of the system altogether. Is she dozing, old lady?”

The attendant stooped over the bed to ascertain, and nodded in the
affirmative.

“Then perhaps she’ll go off in that way, if you don’t make a row,” said
the young man. “Put the light on the floor,—she wont see it there.”

The attendant did as she was bidden, shaking her head meanwhile to
intimate that the woman would not die so easily; and having done so,
resumed her seat by the side of the other nurse, who had by this time
returned. The mistress, with an expression of impatience, wrapped
herself in her shawl and sat at the foot of the bed.

The apothecary’s apprentice, having completed the manufacture of the
toothpick, planted himself in front of the fire and made good use of it
for ten minutes or so, when, apparently growing rather dull, he wished
Mrs. Corney joy of her job, and took himself off on tiptoe.

When they had sat in silence for some time the two old women rose from
the bed, and crouching over the fire, held out their withered hands to
catch the heat. The flame threw a ghastly light on their shrivelled
faces, and made their ugliness appear perfectly terrible, as in this
position they began to converse in a low voice.

“Did she say any more, Anny dear, while I was gone?” inquired the
messenger.

“Not a word,” replied the other. “She plucked and tore at her arms for
a little time; but I held her hands, and she soon dropped off. She
hasn’t much strength in her, so I easily kept her quiet. I ain’t so
weak for an old woman, although I am on parish allowance;—no, no!”

“Did she drink the hot wine the doctor said she was to have?” demanded
the first.

“I tried to get it down,” rejoined the other; “but her teeth were tight
set, and she clenched the mug so hard that it was as much as I could do
to get it back again. So _I_ drank it, and it did me good.”

Looking cautiously round to ascertain that they were not overheard, the
two hags cowered nearer to the fire, and chuckled heartily.

“I mind the time,” said the first speaker, “when she would have done
the same, and made rare fun of it afterwards.”

“Ay, that she would,” rejoined the other; “she had a merry heart. A
many many beautiful corpses she laid out, as nice and neat as wax-work.
My old eyes have seen them—ay, and these old hands touched them too;
for I have helped her scores of times.”

Stretching forth her trembling fingers as she spoke, the old creature
shook them exultingly before her face, and fumbling in her pocket
brought out an old time-discoloured tin snuff-box, from which she shook
a few grains into the outstretched palm of her companion, and a few
more into her own. While they were thus employed, the matron, who had
been impatiently watching until the dying woman should awaken from her
stupor, joined them by the fire, and sharply asked how long she was to
wait.

“Not long, mistress,” replied the second woman, looking up into her
face. “We have none of us long to wait for Death. Patience, patience!
he’ll be here soon enough for us all.”

“Hold your tongue, you doting idiot!” said the matron, sternly. “You,
Martha, tell me; has she been in this way before?”

“Often,” answered the first woman.

“But will never be again,” added the second one; “that is, she’ll never
wake again but once—and mind, mistress, that wont be for long.”

“Long or short,” said the matron, snappishly, “she wont find me here
when she does, and take care, both of you, how you worry me again for
nothing. It’s no part of my duty to see all the old women in the house
die, and I wont—that’s more. Mind that, you impudent old harridans. If
you make a fool of me again, I’ll soon cure you, I warrant you!”

She was bouncing away, when a cry from the two women, who had turned
towards the bed, caused her to look round. The sick woman had raised
herself upright, and was stretching her arms towards them.

“Who’s that?” she cried, in a hollow voice.

“Hush, hush!” said one of the women, stooping over her—“lie down, lie
down!”

“I’ll never lie down again alive!” said the woman, struggling. “I
_will_ tell her! Come here—nearer. Let me whisper in your ear.”

She clutched the matron by the arm, and forcing her into a chair by the
bedside was about to speak, when looking round, she caught sight of the
two old women bending forward in the attitude of eager listeners.

“Turn them away,” said the woman, drowsily; “make haste—make haste!”

The two old crones, chiming in together, began pouring out many piteous
lamentations that the poor dear was too far gone to know her best
friends, and uttering sundry protestations that they would never leave
her, when the superior pushed them from the room, closed the door, and
returned to the bedside. On being excluded, the old ladies changed
their tone, and cried through the keyhole that old Sally was drunk;
which, indeed, was not unlikely, since, in addition to a moderate
dose of opium prescribed by the apothecary, she was labouring under
the effects of a final taste of gin and water which had been privily
administered in the openness of their hearts by the worthy old ladies
themselves.

“Now listen to me,” said the dying woman, aloud, as if making a great
effort to revive one latent spark of energy. “In this very room—in
this very bed—I once nursed a pretty young creetur’, that was brought
into the house with her feet cut and bruised with walking, and all
soiled with dust and blood. She gave birth to a boy, and died. Let me
think—what was the year again?”

“Never mind the year,” said the impatient auditor; “what about her?”

“Ay,” murmured the sick woman, relapsing into her former drowsy state,
“what about her?—what about—I know!” she cried, jumping fiercely up:
her face flushed, and her eyes starting from her head—“I robbed her,
so I did! She wasn’t cold—I tell you she wasn’t cold, when I stole it!”

“Stole what, for God’s sake?” cried the matron, with a gesture as if
she would call for help.

“_It!_” replied the woman, laying her hand over the other’s mouth—“the
only thing she had. She wanted clothes to keep her warm, and food to
eat; but she had kept it safe, and had it in her bosom. It was gold, I
tell you!—rich gold, that might have saved her life!”

“Gold!” echoed the matron, bending eagerly over the woman as she fell
back. “Go on, go on—yes—what of it? Who was the mother?—when was it?”

“She charged me to keep it safe,” replied the woman, with a groan, “and
trusted me as the only woman about her. I stole it in my heart when
she first shewed it me hanging round her neck; and the child’s death,
perhaps, is on me besides! They would have treated him better if they
had known it all!”

“Known what?” asked the other. “Speak!”

“The boy grew so like his mother,” said the woman, rambling on, and
not heeding the question, “that I could never forget it when I saw
his face. Poor girl! poor girl!—she was so young, too!—such a gentle
lamb!—Wait; there’s more to tell. I have not told you all, have I?”

“No, no,” replied the matron, inclining her head to catch the words as
they came more faintly from the dying woman.—“Be quick, or it may be
too late!”

“The mother,” said the woman, making a more violent effort than
before—“the mother, when the pains of death first came upon her,
whispered in my ear that if her baby was born alive, and thrived, the
day might come when it would not feel so much disgraced to hear its
poor young mother named. ‘And oh, my God!’ she said, folding her thin
hands together, ‘whether it be boy or girl, raise up some friends for
it in this troubled world, and take pity upon a lonely, desolate child,
abandoned to its mercy!’”

“The boy’s name?” demanded the matron.

“They _called_ him Oliver,” replied the woman, feebly. “The gold I
stole was——”

“Yes, yes—what?” cried the other.

She was bending eagerly over the woman to hear her reply, but drew
back instinctively as she once again rose slowly and stiffly into a
sitting posture, and, clutching the coverlid with both hands, muttered
some indistinct sounds in her throat, and fell lifeless on the bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Stone dead!” said one of the old women, hurrying in as soon as the
door was opened.

“And nothing to tell, after all,” rejoined the matron, walking
carelessly away.

The two crones were, to all appearance, too busily occupied in the
preparations for their dreadful duties to make any reply, and were left
alone hovering about the body.




CHAPTER XXV.

WHEREIN THIS HISTORY REVERTS TO MR. FAGIN AND COMPANY.


WHILE these things were passing in the country workhouse, Mr. Fagin
sat in the old den—the same from which Oliver had been removed by the
girl—brooding over a dull smoky fire. He held a pair of bellows upon
his knee, with which he had apparently been endeavouring to rouse it
into more cheerful action; but he had fallen into deep thought, and
with his arms folded upon them, and his chin resting on his thumbs,
fixed his eyes abstractedly on the rusty bars.

At a table behind him sat the Artful Dodger, Master Charles Bates,
and Mr. Chitling, all intent upon a game of whist; the Artful taking
dummy against Master Bates and Mr. Chitling. The countenance of the
first-named gentleman, peculiarly intelligent at all times, acquired
great additional interest from his close observance of the game, and
his attentive perusal of Mr. Chitling’s hand, upon which, from time to
time, as occasion served, he bestowed a variety of earnest glances,
wisely regulating his own play by the result of his observations upon
his neighbour’s cards. It being a cold night, the Dodger wore his hat,
as, indeed, was often his custom within doors. He also sustained a
clay pipe between his teeth, which he only removed for a brief space
when he deemed it necessary to apply for refreshment to a quart-pot
upon the table, which stood ready filled with gin and water for the
accommodation of the company.

Master Bates was also attentive to the play; but being of a more
excitable nature than his accomplished friend, it was observable that
he more frequently applied himself to the gin and water, and moreover
indulged in many jests and irrelevant remarks, all highly unbecoming
a scientific rubber. Indeed, the Artful, presuming upon their close
attachment, more than once took occasion to reason gravely with his
companion upon these improprieties: all of which remonstrances Master
Bates took in extremely good part, merely requesting his friend to be
“blowed,” or to insert his head in a sack, or replying with some other
neatly-turned witticism of a similar kind, the happy application of
which excited considerable admiration in the mind of Mr. Chitling. It
was remarkable that the latter gentleman and his partner invariably
lost, and that the circumstance, so far from angering Master Bates,
appeared to afford him the highest amusement, inasmuch as he laughed
most uproariously at the end of every deal, and protested that he had
never seen such a jolly game in all his born days.

“That’s two doubles and the rub,” said Mr. Chitling, with a very long
face, as he drew half-a-crown from his waistcoat-pocket “I never see
such a feller as you, Jack; you win every thing. Even when we’ve good
cards, Charley and I can’t make nothing of ’em.”

Either the matter or manner of this remark, which was made very
ruefully, delighted Charley Bates so much, that his consequent shout
of laughter roused the Jew from his reverie, and induced him to
inquire what was the matter.

“Matter, Fagin!” cried Charley. “I wish you had watched a play. Tommy
Chitling hasn’t won the point, and I went partners with him against the
Artful and dum.”

“Ay, ay!” said the Jew, with a grin, which sufficiently demonstrated
that he was at no loss to understand the reason. “Try ’em again, Tom;
try ’em again.”

“No more of it for me, thankee, Fagin,” replied Mr. Chitling; “I’ve
had enough. That ’ere Dodger has such a run of luck that there’s no
standing again’ him.”

“Ha! ha! my dear,” replied the Jew, “you must get up very early in the
morning to win against the Dodger.”

“Morning!” said Charley Bates; “you must put your boots on overnight,
and have a telescope at each eye, and a opera-glass between your
shoulders, if you want to come over him.”

Mr. Dawkins received these handsome compliments with much philosophy,
and offered to cut any gentleman in company for the first
picture-card, at a shilling a time. Nobody accepting the challenge, and
his pipe being by this time smoked out, he proceeded to amuse himself
by sketching a ground-plan of Newgate on the table with the piece of
chalk which had served him in lieu of counters; whistling meantime with
peculiar shrillness.

“How precious dull you are, Tommy!” said the Dodger, stopping short
when there had been a long silence, and addressing Mr. Chitling. “What
do you think he’s thinking of, Fagin?”

“How should I know, my dear?” replied the Jew, looking round as he
plied the bellows. “About his losses, maybe; or the little retirement
in the country that he’s just left, eh?—Ha! ha! Is that it, my dear?”

“Not a bit of it,” replied the Dodger, stopping the subject of
discourse as Mr. Chitling was about to reply. “What do _you_ say,
Charley?”

“_I_ should say,” replied Master Bates, with a grin, “that he was
uncommon sweet upon Betsy. See how he’s a-blushing! Oh, my eye! here’s
a merry-go-rounder!—Tommy Chitling’s in love!—Oh, Fagin, Fagin! what
a spree!”

Thoroughly overpowered with the notion of Mr. Chitling being the victim
of the tender passion, Master Bates threw himself back in his chair
with such violence that he lost his balance, and pitched over upon the
floor, where (the accident abating nothing of his merriment) he lay
at full length till his laugh was over, when he resumed his former
position and began another.

“Never mind him, my dear,” said the Jew, winking at Mr. Dawkins, and
giving Master Bates a reproving tap with the nozzle of the bellows.
“Betsy’s a fine girl. Stick up to her, Tom: stick up to her.”

“What I mean to say, Fagin,” replied Mr. Chitling, very red in the
face, “is, that that isn’t anything to anybody here.”

“No more it is,” replied the Jew “Charley will talk. Don’t mind him, my
dear; don’t mind him. Betsy’s a fine girl. Do as she bids you, Tom, and
you’ll make your fortune.”

“So I _do_ do as she bids me,” replied Mr. Chitling; “I shouldn’t have
been milled if it hadn’t been for her advice. But it turned out a good
job for you, didn’t it, Fagin? And what’s six weeks of it? It must come
some time or another; and why not in the winter time when you don’t
want to go out a-walking so much; eh, Fagin?”

“Ah, to be sure, my dear,” replied the Jew.

“You wouldn’t mind it again, Tom, would you,” asked the Dodger, winking
upon Charley and the Jew, “if Bet was all right?”

“I mean to say that I shouldn’t,” replied Tom, angrily; “there, now!
Ah! Who’ll say as much as that, I should like to know; eh, Fagin?”

“Nobody, my dear,” replied the Jew; “not a soul, Tom. I don’t know one
of ’em that would do it besides you; not one of ’em, my dear.”

“I might have got clear off if I’d split upon her; mighn’t I, Fagin?”
angrily pursued the poor half-witted dupe. “A word from me would have
done it; wouldn’t it, Fagin?”

“To be sure it would, my dear,” replied the Jew.

“But I didn’t blab it, did I, Fagin?” demanded Tom, pouring question
upon question with great volubility.

“No, no, to be sure,” replied the Jew; “you were too stout-hearted for
that,—a deal too stout, my dear.”

“Perhaps I was,” rejoined Tom, looking round; “and if I was, what’s to
laugh at in that; eh, Fagin?”

The Jew, perceiving that Mr. Chitling was considerably roused, hastened
to assure him that nobody was laughing, and, to prove the gravity of
the company, appealed to Master Bates, the principal offender; but
unfortunately Charley, in opening his mouth to reply that he was never
more serious in his life, was unable to prevent the escape of such a
violent roar that the abused Mr. Chitling, without any preliminary
ceremonies rushed across the room, and aimed a blow at the offender,
who, being skilful in evading pursuit, ducked to avoid it, and chose
his time so well that it lighted on the chest of the merry old
gentleman, and caused him to stagger to the wall, where he stood
panting for breath, while Mr. Chitling looked on in intense dismay.

“Hark!” cried the Dodger at this moment, “I heard the tinkler.”
Catching up the light, he crept softly up stairs.

The bell rang again with some impatience while the party were in
darkness. After a short pause, the Dodger reappeared, and whispered
Fagin mysteriously.

“What!” cried the Jew, “alone?”

The Dodger nodded in the affirmative, and, shading the flame of the
candle with his hand, gave Charley Bates a private intimation in dumb
show that he had better not be funny just then. Having performed this
friendly office, he fixed his eyes on the Jew’s face and awaited his
directions.

The old man bit his yellow fingers, and meditated for some seconds; his
face working with agitation the while, as if he dreaded something, and
feared to know the worst. At length he raised his head.

“Where is he?” he asked.

The Dodger pointed to the floor above, and made a gesture as if to
leave the room.

“Yes,” said the Jew, answering the mute inquiry; “bring him down.
Hush!—Quiet, Charley!—gently, Tom! Scarce, scarce!”

This brief direction to Charley Bates and his recent antagonist to
retire, was softly and immediately obeyed. There was no sound of their
whereabout when the Dodger descended the stairs bearing the light in
his hand, and followed by a man in a coarse smock-frock, who, after
casting a hurried glance round the room, pulled off a large wrapper
which had concealed the lower portion of his face, and disclosed—all
haggard, unwashed, and unshaven, the features of flash Toby Crackit.

“How are you, Fagey?” said the worthy, nodding to the Jew. “Pop that
shawl away in my castor, Dodger, so that I may know where to find it
when I cut; that’s the time of day! You’ll be a fine young cracksman
afore the old file now.”

With these words he pulled up the smock-frock, and, winding it round
his middle, drew a chair to the fire, and placed his feet upon the hob.

“See there, Fagey,” he said, pointing disconsolately to his top-boots;
“not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when; not a bubble of
blacking, by ——! but don’t look at me in that way, man. All in good
time; I can’t talk about business till I’ve eat and drank, so produce
the sustainance, and let’s have a quiet fill-out for the first time
these three days!”

The Jew motioned to the Dodger to place what eatables there were upon
the table; and, seating himself opposite the housebreaker, waited his
leisure.

To judge from appearances, Toby was by no means in a hurry to open
the conversation. At first the Jew contented himself with patiently
watching his countenance, as if to gain from its expression some clue
to the intelligence he brought; but in vain. He looked tired and worn,
but there was the same complacent repose upon his features that they
always wore, and through dirt, and beard, and whisker, there still
shone unimpaired the self-satisfied smirk of flash Toby Crackit. Then
the Jew in an agony of impatience watched every morsel he put into
his mouth, pacing up and down the room meanwhile in irrepressible
excitement. It was all of no use. Toby continued to eat with the utmost
outward indifference until he could eat no more; and then, ordering the
Dodger out, closed the door, mixed a glass of spirits and water, and
composed himself for talking.

“First and foremost, Fagey,” said Toby.

“Yes, yes!” interposed the Jew, drawing up his chair.

Mr. Crackit stopped to take a draught of spirits and water, and to
declare that the gin was excellent; and then, placing his feet against
the low mantelpiece, so as to bring his boots to about the level of his
eye, quietly resumed.

“First and foremost, Fagey,” said the housebreaker, “how’s Bill?”

“What!” screamed the Jew, starting from his seat.

“Why, you don’t mean to say——” began Toby, turning pale.

“Mean!” cried the Jew, stamping furiously on the ground. “Where are
they?—Sikes and the boy—where are they?—where have they been?—where
are they hiding?—why have they not been here?”

“The crack failed,” said Toby, faintly.

“I know it,” replied the Jew, tearing a newspaper from his pocket, and
pointing to it. “What more?”

“They fired and hit the boy. We cut over the fields at the back with
him between us—straight as the crow flies—through hedge and ditch.
They gave chase. D—me! the whole country was awake, and the dogs upon
us.”

“The boy!” gasped the Jew.

“Bill had him on his back, and scudded like the wind. We stopped to
take him again between us; his head hung down, and he was cold. They
were close upon our heels: every man for himself, and each from the
gallows. We parted company, and left the youngster lying in a ditch.
Alive or dead, that’s all I know of him.”

The Jew stopped to hear no more; but uttering a loud yell, and twining
his hands in his hair, rushed from the room and from the house.




CHAPTER XXVI.

    IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE,
    AND MANY THINGS INSEPARABLE FROM THIS HISTORY ARE DONE AND
    PERFORMED.


THE old man had gained the street corner before he began to recover
the effect of Toby Crackit’s intelligence. He had relaxed nothing of
his unusual speed, but was still pressing onward in the same wild and
disordered manner, when the sudden dashing past of a carriage, and a
boisterous cry from the foot-passengers, who saw his danger, drove
him back upon the pavement. Avoiding as much as possible all the main
streets, and skulking only through the byways and alleys, he at length
emerged on Snow Hill. Here he walked even faster than before; nor did
he linger until he had again turned into a court, when, as if conscious
that he was now in his proper element, he fell into his usual
shuffling pace, and seemed to breathe more freely.

Near to the spot on which Snow Hill and Holborn Hill meet, there
opens, upon the right hand as you come out of the city, a narrow and
dismal alley leading to Saffron Hill. In its filthy shops are exposed
for sale huge bunches of second-hand silk handkerchiefs, of all sizes
and patterns—for here reside the traders who purchase them from
pickpockets. Hundreds of these handkerchiefs hang dangling from pegs
outside the windows, or flaunting from the door-posts; and the shelves
within are piled with them. Confined as the limits of Field Lane are,
it has its barber, its coffee-shop, its beer-shop, and its fried-fish
warehouse. It is a commercial colony of itself, the emporium of petty
larceny, visited at early morning and setting-in of dusk by silent
merchants, who traffic in dark back-parlours, and go as strangely as
they come. Here the clothesman, the shoe-vamper, and the rag-merchant,
display their goods as sign-boards to the petty thief; and stores of
old iron and bones, and heaps of mildewy fragments of woollen-stuff and
linen, rust and rot in the grimy cellars.

It was into this place that the Jew turned. He was well known to the
sallow denizens of the lane, for such of them as were on the lookout to
buy or sell nodded familiarly as he passed along. He replied to their
salutations in the same way, but bestowed no closer recognition until
he reached the further end of the alley, when he stopped to address a
salesman of small stature, who had squeezed as much of his person into
a child’s chair as the chair would hold, and was smoking a pipe at his
warehouse door.

“Why, the sight of you, Mr. Fagin, would cure the hoptalmy!” said this
respectable trader, in acknowledgment of the Jew’s inquiry after his
health.

“The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively,” said Fagin, elevating
his eyebrows, and crossing his hands upon his shoulders.

“Well! I’ve heerd that complaint of it once or twice before,” replied
the trader; “but it soon cools down again; don’t you find it so?”

Fagin nodded in the affirmative, and pointing in the direction of
Saffron Hill, inquired whether any one was up yonder to-night.

“At the Cripples?” inquired the man.

The Jew nodded.

“Let me see,” pursued the merchant, reflecting. “Yes; there’s some
half-dozen of ’em gone in that I knows. I don’t think your friend’s
there.”

“Sikes is not, I suppose?” inquired the Jew, with a disappointed
countenance.

“_Non istwentus_, as the lawyers say,” replied the little man, shaking
his head, and looking amazingly sly. “Have you got anything in my line
to-night?”

“Nothing to-night,” said the Jew, turning away.

“Are you going up to the Cripples, Fagin?” cried the little man,
calling after him. “Stop! I don’t mind if I have a drop there with
you!”

But as the Jew, looking back, waved his hand to intimate that he
preferred being alone; and, moreover, as the little man could not very
easily disengage himself from the chair, the sign of the Cripples was,
for a time, bereft of the advantage of Mr. Lively’s presence. By the
time he had got upon his legs the Jew had disappeared; so Mr. Lively,
after ineffectually standing on tiptoe, in the hope of catching sight
of him, again forced himself into the little chair, and, exchanging a
shake of the head with a lady in the opposite shop, in which doubt and
mistrust were plainly mingled, resumed his pipe with a grave demeanour.

The Three Cripples, or rather the Cripples, which was the sign by
which the establishment was familiarly known to its patrons, was the
same public-house in which Mr. Sikes and his dog have already figured.
Merely making a sign to a man in the bar, Fagin walked straight up
stairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly insinuating himself
into the chamber, looked anxiously about, shading his eyes with his
hand, as if in search of some particular person.

The room was illuminated by two gas-lights, the glare of which was
prevented by the barred shutters and closely-drawn curtains of faded
red from being visible outside. The ceiling was blackened to prevent
its colour being injured by the flaring of the lamps; and the place was
so full of dense tobacco-smoke, that at first it was scarcely possible
to discern anything further. By degrees, however, as some of it cleared
away through the open door, an assemblage of heads, as confused as the
noises that greeted the ear, might be made out; and as the eye grew
more accustomed to the scene, the spectator gradually became aware of
the presence of a numerous company, male and female, crowded round a
long table, at the upper end of which sat a chairman with a hammer of
office in his hand, while a professional gentleman, with a bluish nose
and his face tied up for the benefit of a toothache, presided at a
jingling piano in a remote corner.

As Fagin stepped softly in, the professional gentleman, running over
the keys by way of prelude, occasioned a general cry of order for
a song; which having subsided, a young lady proceeded to entertain
the company with a ballad in four verses, between each of which the
accompanyist played the melody all through as loud as he could.
When this was over, the chairman gave a sentiment; after which, the
professional gentlemen on the chairman’s right and left volunteered a
duet, and sang it with great applause.

It was curious to observe some faces which stood out prominently from
among the group. There was the chairman himself, (the landlord of the
house,) a coarse, rough, heavy-built fellow, who, while the songs
were proceeding, rolled his eyes hither and, thither, and, seeming
to give himself up to joviality, had an eye for every thing that was
done, and an ear for everything that was said—and sharp ones, too.
Near him were the singers, receiving, with professional indifference,
the compliments of the company, and applying themselves in turn to a
dozen proffered glasses of spirits and water tendered by their more
boisterous admirers, whose countenances, expressive of almost every
vice in almost every grade, irresistibly attracted the attention by
their very repulsiveness. Cunning, ferocity, and drunkenness in all its
stages, were there in their strongest aspects; and women—some with
the last lingering tinge of their early freshness almost fading as
you looked, and others with every mark and stamp of their sex utterly
beaten out, and presenting but one loathsome blank of profligacy and
crime—some mere girls, others but young women, and none past the prime
of life—formed the darkest and saddest portion of this dreary picture.

Fagin, troubled by no grave emotions, looked eagerly from face to face
while these proceedings were in progress, but, apparently, without
meeting that of which he was in search. Succeeding, at length, in
catching the eye of the man who occupied the chair, he beckoned to him
slightly, and left the room as quietly as he had entered it.

“What can I do for you, Mr. Fagin?” inquired the man, as he followed
him out to the landing. “Wont you join us? They’ll be delighted, every
one of ’em.”

The Jew shook his head impatiently, and said in a whisper, “Is _he_
here?”

“No,” replied the man.

“And no news of Barney?” inquired Fagin.

“None,” replied the landlord of the Cripples; for it was he. “He wont
stir till it’s all safe. Depend on it that they’re on the scent down
there, and that if he moved he’d blow upon the thing at once. He’s all
right enough, Barney is, else I should have heard of him. I’ll pound it
that Barney’s managing properly. Let him alone for that.”

“Will _he_ be here to-night?” asked the Jew, laying the same emphasis
on the pronoun as before.

“Monks, do you mean?” inquired the landlord, hesitating.

“Hush!” said the Jew. “Yes.”

“Certain,” replied the man, drawing a gold watch from his fob; “I
expected him here before now. If you’ll wait ten minutes, he’ll be——”

“No, no,” said the Jew, hastily, as though, however desirous he might
be to see the person in question, he was nevertheless relieved by his
absence. “Tell him I came here to see him, and that he must come to me
to-night; no, say to-morrow. As he is not here, to-morrow will be time
enough.”

“Good!” said the man. “Nothing more?”

“Not a word now,” said the Jew, descending the stairs.

“I say,” said the other, looking over the rails, and speaking in a
hoarse whisper; “what a time this would be for a sell! I’ve got Phil
Barker here, so drunk that a boy might take him.”

“Aha! But it’s not Phil Barker’s time,” said the Jew, looking up. “Phil
has something more to do before we can afford to part with him; so go
back to the company, my dear, and tell them to lead merry lives—_while
they last_. Ha! ha! ha!”

The landlord reciprocated the old man’s laugh, and returned to his
guests. The Jew was no sooner alone, than his countenance resumed its
former expression of anxiety and thought. After a brief reflection,
he called a hack-cabriolet, and bade the man drive towards Bethnal
Green. He dismissed him within some quarter of a mile of Mr. Sikes’s
residence, and performed the short remainder of the distance on foot.

“Now,” muttered the Jew, as he knocked at the door, “if there is any
deep play here, I shall have it out of you, my girl, cunning as you
are.”

She was in her room, the woman said; so Fagin crept softly up stairs,
and entered it without any previous ceremony. The girl was alone, lying
with her head upon the table, and her hair straggling over it.

“She has been drinking,” thought the Jew, coolly, “or perhaps she is
only miserable.”

The old man turned to close the door as he made this reflection, and
the noise thus occasioned roused the girl. She eyed his crafty face
narrowly, as she inquired whether there was any news, and listened to
his recital of Toby Crackit’s story. When it was concluded, she sunk
into her former attitude, but spoke not a word. She pushed the candle
impatiently away, and once or twice, as she feverishly changed her
position, shuffled her feet upon the ground; but this was all.

During this silence, the Jew looked restlessly about the room, as if to
assure himself that there were no appearances of Sikes having covertly
returned. Apparently satisfied with his inspection, he coughed twice or
thrice, and made as many efforts to open a conversation; but the girl
heeded him no more than if he had been made of stone. At length he made
another attempt, and, rubbing his hands together, said, in his most
conciliatory tone,

“And where should you think Bill was now, my dear—eh?”

The girl moaned out some scarcely intelligible reply, that she could
not tell, and seemed, from the half-smothered noise that escaped her,
to be crying.

“And the boy, too,” said the Jew, straining his eyes to catch a glimpse
of her face. “Poor leetle child!—left in a ditch, Nance; only think!”

“The child,” said the girl, suddenly looking up, “is better where he
is than among us: and if no harm comes to Bill from it, I hope he lies
dead in the ditch, and that his young bones may rot there.”

“What!” cried the Jew, in amazement.

“Ay, I do,” returned the girl, meeting his gaze. “I shall be glad to
have him away from my eyes, and to know that the worst is over. I can’t
bear to have him about me. The sight of him turns me against myself and
all of you.”

“Pooh!” said the Jew, scornfully. “You’re drunk, girl.”

“Am I?” cried the girl, bitterly. “It’s no fault of yours if I am
not! you’d never have me anything else if you had your will, except
now;—the humour doesn’t suit you, doesn’t it?”

“No!” rejoined the Jew, furiously. “It does not.”

“Change it, then!” responded the girl, with a laugh.

“Change it!” exclaimed the Jew, exasperated beyond all bounds by his
companion’s unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the night, “I
will change it! Listen to me, you drab! listen to me, who with six
words can strangle Sikes as surely as if I had his bull’s throat
between my fingers now. If he comes back, and leaves that boy behind
him,—if he gets off free, and, dead or alive, fails to restore him to
me, murder him yourself if you would have him escape Jack Ketch, and do
it the moment he sets foot in this room, or, mind me, it will be too
late!”

“What is all this?” cried the girl, involuntarily.


“What is it?” pursued Fagin, mad with rage. “This—When the boy’s worth
hundreds of pounds to me, am I to lose what chance threw me in the way
of getting safely, through the whims of a drunken gang that I could
whistle away the lives of,—and me bound, too, to a born devil that
only wants the will, and has got the power to, to——”

Panting for breath, the old man stammered for a word, and in that
one instant checked the torrent of his wrath, and changed his whole
demeanour. A moment before, his clenched hands grasped the air, his
eyes had dilated, and his face grown livid with passion; but now
he shrunk into a chair, and, cowering together, trembled with the
apprehension of having himself disclosed some hidden villany. After a
short silence, he ventured to look round at his companion, and appeared
somewhat reassured on beholding her in the same listless attitude from
which he had first roused her.

“Nancy, dear!” croaked the Jew, in his usual voice. “Did you mind me,
dear?”

“Don’t worry me, now, Fagin!” replied the girl, raising her head
languidly. “If Bill has not done it this time, he will another. He has
done many a good job for you, and will do many more when he can; and
when he can’t, he wont; so no more about that.”

“Regarding this boy, my dear?” said the Jew, rubbing the palms of his
hands nervously together.

“The boy must take his chance with the rest,” interrupted Nancy,
hastily; “and I say again, I hope he is dead, and out of harm’s way,
and out of yours,—that is, if Bill comes to no harm, and if Toby got
clear off, he’s pretty sure to, for he’s worth two of him any time.”

“And about what I was saying, my dear?” observed the Jew, keeping his
glistening eye steadily upon her.

“You must say it all over again if it’s any thing you want me to do,”
rejoined Nancy: “and if it is, you had better wait till to-morrow. You
put me up for a minute, but now I’m stupid again.”

Fagin put several other questions, all with the same drift of
ascertaining whether the girl had profited by his unguarded hints; but
she answered them so readily, and was withal so utterly unmoved by his
searching looks, that his original impression of her being more than a
trifle in liquor was fully confirmed. Nancy, indeed, was not exempt
from a failing which was very common among the Jew’s female pupils, and
in which, in their tenderer years, they were rather encouraged than
checked. Her disordered appearance, and a wholesale perfume of Geneva
which pervaded the apartment, afforded strong confirmatory evidence
of the justice of the Jew’s supposition; and when, after indulging
in the temporary display of violence above described, she subsided,
first into dulness, and afterwards into a compound of feelings, under
the influence of which she shed tears one minute, and in the next
gave utterance to various exclamations of “Never say die!” and divers
calculations as to what might be the amount of the odds so long as
a lady or gentleman were happy, Mr. Fagin, who had had considerable
experience of such matters in his time, saw, with great satisfaction,
that she was very far gone indeed.

Having eased his mind by this discovery, and accomplished his twofold
object of imparting to the girl what he had that night heard, and
ascertaining with his own eyes that Sikes had not returned, Mr. Fagin
again turned his face homeward, leaving his young friend asleep with
her head upon the table.

It was within an hour of midnight, and the weather being dark and
piercing cold, he had no great temptation to loiter. The sharp wind
that scoured the streets seemed to have cleared them of passengers
as of dust and mud, for few people were abroad, and they were to all
appearance hastening fast home. It blew from the right quarter for the
Jew, however, and straight before it he went, trembling and shivering
as every fresh gust drove him rudely on his way.

He had reached the corner of his own street, and was already fumbling
in his pocket for the door-key, when a dark figure emerged from a
projecting entrance which lay in deep shadow, and, crossing the road,
glided up to him unperceived.

“Fagin!” whispered a voice close to his ear.

“Ah!” said the Jew, turning quickly round, “is that——”

“Yes!” interrupted the stranger, harshly. “I have been lingering here
these two hours. Where the devil have you been?”

“On your business, my dear,” replied the Jew, glancing uneasily at his
companion, and slackening his pace as he spoke. “On your business all
night.”

“Oh, of course!” said the stranger, with a sneer. “Well; and what’s
come of it?”

“Nothing good,” said the Jew.

“Nothing bad, I hope?” said the stranger, stopping short, and turning a
startled look upon his companion.

The Jew shook his head, and was about to reply, when the stranger,
interrupting him, motioned to the house before which they had by this
time arrived, and remarked, that he had better say what he had got to
say under cover, for his blood was chilled with standing about so long,
and the wind blew through him.

Fagin looked as if he could have willingly excused himself from taking
home a visiter at that unseasonable hour, and muttered something
about having no fire; but his companion repeating his request in a
peremptory manner, he unlocked the door, and requested him to close it
softly, while he got a light.

“It’s as dark as the grave,” said the man, groping forward a few steps.
“Make haste. I hate this!”

“Shut the door,” whispered Fagin from the end of the passage. As he
spoke, it closed with a loud noise.

“That wasn’t my doing,” said the other man, feeling his way. “The wind
blew it to, or it shut of its own accord; one or the other. Look sharp
with the light, or I shall knock my brains out against something in
this confounded hole.”

Fagin stealthily descended the kitchen stairs, and, after a short
absence, returned with a lighted candle, and the intelligence that Toby
Crackit was asleep in the back-room below, and the boys in the front
one. Beckoning the other man to follow him, he led the way up stairs.

“We can say the few words we’ve got to say in here, my dear,” said the
Jew, throwing open a door on the first floor; “and as there are holes
in the shutters, and we never shew lights to our neighbours, we’ll set
the candle on the stairs. There!”

With these words, the Jew, stooping down, placed the candle on an
upper flight of stairs, exactly opposite the room door, and led the
way into the apartment, which was destitute of all moveables save a
broken arm-chair, and an old couch or sofa without covering, which
stood behind the door. Upon this piece of furniture the stranger
flung himself with the air of a weary man, and the Jew drawing up the
arm-chair opposite, they sat face to face. It was not quite dark, for
the door was partially open, and the candle outside threw a feeble
reflection on the opposite wall.

They conversed for some time in whispers; although nothing of the
conversation was distinguishable beyond a few disjointed words here and
there; a listener might easily have perceived that Fagin appeared to be
defending himself against some remarks of the stranger, and that the
latter was in a state of considerable irritation. They might have been
talking thus for a quarter of an hour or more, when Monks—by which
name the Jew had designated the strange man several times in the course
of their colloquy—said, raising his voice a little,

“I tell you again it was badly planned. Why not have kept him here
among the rest, and made a sneaking, snivelling pickpocket of him at
once?”

“Only hear him!” exclaimed the Jew, shrugging his shoulders.

“Why, do you mean to say you couldn’t have done it if you had chosen?”
demanded Monks, sternly. “Haven’t you done it with other boys scores of
times? If you had had patience for a twelvemonth, at most, couldn’t you
have got him convicted and sent safely out of the kingdom, perhaps for
life?”

“Whose turn would that have served, my dear?” inquired the Jew, humbly.

“Mine,” replied Monks.

“But not mine,” said the Jew, submissively. “He might have become
of use to me. When there are two parties to a bargain, it is only
reasonable that the interest of both should be consulted; is it, my
good friend?”

“What then?” demanded Monks, sulkily. “I saw it was not easy to train
him to the business,” replied the Jew; “he was not like other boys in
the same circumstances.”

“Curse him, no!” muttered the man, “or he would have been a thief long
ago.”

“I had no hold upon him to make him worse,” pursued the Jew, anxiously
watching the countenance of his companion. “His hand was not in; I
had nothing to frighten him with, which we always must have in the
beginning, or we labour in vain. What could I do? Send him out with the
Dodger and Charley? We had enough of that at first, my dear; I trembled
for us all.”

“_That_ was not my doing,” observed Monks.

“No, no, my dear!” renewed the Jew, “and I don’t quarrel with it now,
because, if it had never happened, you might never have clapped eyes
upon the boy to notice him, and so led to the discovery that it was him
you were looking for. Well; I got him back for you by means of the
girl, and then _she_ begins to favour him.”

“Throttle the girl!” said Monks, impatiently.

“Why, we can’t afford to do that just now, my dear,” replied the Jew,
smiling; “and, besides, that sort of thing is not in our way, or one
of these days I might be glad to have it done. I know what these girls
are, Monks, well. As soon as the boy begins to harden, she’ll care no
more for him than for a block of wood. You want him made a thief: if
he is alive, I can make him one from this time; and if—if—” said the
Jew, drawing nearer to the other,—“it’s not likely, mind,—but if the
worst comes to the worst, and he is dead——”

“It’s no fault of mine if he is!” interposed the other man, with a look
of terror, and clasping the Jew’s arm with trembling hands. “Mind that,
Fagin; I had no hand in it. Anything but his death, I told you from
the first. I wont shed blood; it’s always found out, and haunts a man
besides. If they shot him dead, I was not the cause; do you hear me?
Fire this infernal den!—what’s that?”

“What!” cried the Jew, grasping the coward round the body with both
arms as he sprung to his feet. “Where?”

“Yonder!” replied the man, glaring at the opposite wall. “The shadow—I
saw the shadow of a woman, in a cloak and bonnet, pass along the
wainscot like a breath!”

The Jew released his hold, and they rushed tumultuously from the room.
The candle, wasted by the draught, was standing where it had been
placed, and shewed them the empty staircase, and their own white faces.
They listened intently, but a profound silence reigned throughout the
house.

“It’s your fancy,” said the Jew, taking up the light, and turning to
his companion.

“I’ll swear I saw it!” replied Monks, trembling violently. “It was
bending forward when I saw it first, and when I spoke it darted away.”

The Jew glanced contemptuously at the pale face of his associate,
and, telling him he could follow if he pleased, ascended the stairs.
They looked into all the rooms; they were cold, bare, and empty. They
descended into the passage, and thence into the cellars below. The
green damp hung upon the low walls, and the tracks of the snail and
slug glistened in the light; but all was still as death.

“What do you think now?” said the Jew, when they had regained the
passage. “Besides ourselves, there’s not a creature in the house except
Toby and the boys, and they’re safe enough. See here!”

As a proof of the fact, the Jew drew forth two keys from his pocket;
and explained, that when he first went down stairs he had locked them
in, to prevent any intrusion on the conference.

This accumulated testimony effectually staggered Mr. Monks. His
protestations had gradually become less and less vehement as they
proceeded in their search without making any discovery; and now he
gave vent to several very grim laughs, and confessed it could only
have been his excited imagination. He declined any renewal of the
conversation, however, for that night, suddenly remembering that it was
past one o’clock: and so the amiable couple parted.




CHAPTER XXVI.

ATONES FOR THE UNPOLITENESS OF A FORMER CHAPTER, WHICH DESERTED A LADY
MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY.


AS it would be by no means seemly in an humble author to keep so mighty
a personage as a beadle waiting with his back to the fire, and the
skirts of his coat gathered up under his arms, until such time as it
might suit his pleasure to relieve him; and as it would still less
become his station, or his gallantry, to involve in the same neglect
a lady on whom that beadle had looked with an eye of tenderness and
affection, and in whose ear he had whispered sweet words, which, coming
from such a quarter, might well thrill the bosom of maid or matron of
whatsoever degree; the faithful historian whose pen traces these words,
trusting that he knows his place, and entertains a becoming reverence
for those upon earth to whom high and important authority is delegated,
hastens to pay them that respect which their position demands, and to
treat them with all that duteous ceremony which their exalted rank
and (by consequence) great virtues imperatively claim at his hands.
Towards this end, indeed, he had purposed to introduce in this place
a dissertation touching the divine right of beadles, and elucidative
of the position, that a beadle can do no wrong, which could not fail
to have been both pleasurable and profitable to the right-minded
reader, but which he is unfortunately compelled, by want of time and
space, to postpone to some more convenient and fitting opportunity;
on the arrival of which, he will be prepared to shew, that a beadle
properly constituted,—that is to say, a parochial beadle, attached
to a parochial workhouse, and attending in his official capacity the
parochial church,—is, in right and virtue of his office, possessed of
all the excellences and best qualities of humanity; and that to none
of those excellences can mere companies’ beadles, or court-of-law
beadles, or even chapel-of-ease beadles (save the last, and they in a
very lowly and inferior degree), lay the remotest sustainable claim.

Mr. Bumble had recounted the tea-spoons, re-weighed the sugar-tongs,
made a closer inspection of the milk-pot, and ascertained to a nicety
the exact condition of the furniture down to the very horse-hair seats
of the chairs; and had repeated each process full half-a-dozen times,
before he began to think that it was time for Mrs. Corney to return.
Thinking begets thinking; and, as there were no sounds of Mrs. Corney’s
approach, it occurred to Mr. Bumble that it would be an innocent and
virtuous way of spending the time, if he were further to allay his
curiosity by a cursory glance at the interior of Mrs. Corney’s chest of
drawers.

Having listened at the keyhole to assure himself that nobody was
approaching the chamber, Mr. Bumble, beginning at the bottom, proceeded
to make himself acquainted with the contents of the three long drawers,
which, being filled with various garments of good fashion and texture,
carefully preserved between two layers of old newspapers, speckled
with dried lavender, seemed to yield him exceeding satisfaction.
Arriving, in course of time, at the right-hand corner drawer (in which
was the key), and beholding therein a small padlocked box, which, being
shaken, gave forth a pleasant sound, as of the chinking of coin, Mr.
Bumble returned with a stately walk to the fireplace, and, resuming
his old attitude, said, with a grave and determined air, “I’ll do it!”
He followed up this remarkable declaration by shaking his head in a
waggish manner for ten minutes, as though he were remonstrating with
himself for being such a pleasant dog, and then took a view of his legs
in profile with much seeming pleasure and interest.

He was still placidly engaged in this latter survey, when Mrs. Corney,
hurrying into the room, threw herself, in a breathless state, on a
chair by the fireside, and covering her eyes with one hand, placed the
other over her heart, and gasped for breath.

“Mrs. Corney,” said Mr. Bumble, stooping over the matron, “what
is this, ma’am? has anything happened, ma’am? Pray answer me; I’m
on—on—” Mr. Bumble, in his alarm, could not immediately think of the
word “tenterhooks,” so he said, “broken bottles.”

“Oh, Mr. Bumble!” cried the lady, “I have been so dreadfully put out!”

“Put out, ma’am!” exclaimed Mr. Bumble; “who has dared to—? I know!”
said Mr. Bumble, checking himself, with native majesty, “this is them
wicious paupers!”

“It’s dreadful to think of!” said the lady, shuddering.

“Then _don’t_ think of it, ma’am,” rejoined Mr. Bumble.

“I can’t help it,” whimpered the lady.

“Then take something, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, soothingly. “A little of
the wine?”

“Not for the world!” replied Mrs. Corney. “I couldn’t,—oh! The top
shelf in the right-hand corner—oh!” Uttering these words, the good
lady pointed distractedly to the cupboard, and underwent a convulsion
from internal spasms. Mr. Bumble rushed to the closet, and, snatching
a pint green-glass bottle from the shelf, thus incoherently indicated,
filled a tea-cup with its contents, and held it to the lady’s lips.

“I’m better now,” said Mrs. Corney, falling back, after drinking half
of it.

Mr. Bumble raised his eyes piously to the ceiling in thankfulness, and,
bringing them down again to the brim of the cup, lifted it to his nose.

“Peppermint,” explained Mrs. Corney, in a faint voice, smiling gently
on the beadle as she spoke. “Try it; there’s a little—a little
something else in it.”

Mr. Bumble tasted the medicine with a doubtful look; smacked his lips,
took another taste, and put the cup down empty.

“It is very comforting,” said Mrs. Corney.

“Very much so indeed, ma’am,” said the beadle. As he spoke, he drew a
chair beside the matron, and tenderly inquired what had happened to
distress her.

“Nothing,” replied Mrs. Corney. “I am a foolish, excitable, weak
creetur.”

“Not weak, ma’am,” retorted Mr. Bumble, drawing his chair a little
closer. “Are you a weak creetur, Mrs. Corney?”

“We are all weak creeturs,” said Mrs. Corney, laying down a general
principle.

“So we are,” said the beadle.

Nothing was said on either side for a minute or two afterwards; and by
the expiration of that time, Mr. Bumble had illustrated the position by
removing his left arm from the back of Mrs. Corney’s chair, where it
had previously rested, to Mrs. Corney’s apron-string, round which it
gradually became intwined.

“We are all weak creeturs,” said Mr. Bumble.

Mrs. Corney sighed.

“Dont sigh, Mrs. Corney,” said Mr. Bumble.

“I can’t help it,” said Mrs. Corney. And she sighed again.

“This is a very comfortable room, ma’am,” said Mr. Bumble, looking
round. “Another room and this, ma’am, would be a complete thing.”

“It would be too much for one,” murmured the lady.

“But not for two, ma’am,” rejoined Mr. Bumble, in soft accents. “Eh,
Mrs. Corney?”

Mrs. Corney drooped her head when the beadle said this, and the beadle
drooped his to get a view of Mrs. Corney’s face. Mrs. Corney, with
great propriety, turned her head away, and released her hand to get
at her pocket-handkerchief, but insensibly replaced it in that of Mr.
Bumble.

“The board allow you coals, don’t they, Mrs. Corney?” inquired the
beadle, affectionately pressing her hand.

“And candles,” replied Mrs. Corney, slightly returning the pressure.

“Coals, candles, and house-rent free,” said Mr. Bumble. “Oh, Mrs.
Corney, what a angel you are!”

The lady was not proof against this burst of feeling. She sunk into
Mr. Bumble’s arms; and that gentleman, in his agitation, imprinted a
passionate kiss upon her chaste nose.

“Such porochial perfection!” exclaimed Mr. Bumble, rapturously. “You
know that Mr. Slout is worse to-night, my fascinator?”

“Yes,” replied Mrs. Corney, bashfully.

“He can’t live a week, the doctor says,” pursued, Mr. Bumble. “He is
the master of this establishment; his death will cause a wacancy; that
wacancy must be filled up. Oh Mrs. Corney, what a prospect this opens!
What a opportunity for a joining of hearts and housekeeping!”

Mrs. Corney sobbed.

“The little word?” said Mr. Bumble, bending over the bashful
beauty—“the one little, little, little word, my blessed Corney?”

“Ye—ye—yes!” sighed out the matron.

“One more,” pursued the beadle; “compose your darling feelings for only
one more. When is it to come off?”

Mrs. Corney twice essayed to speak, and twice failed. At length,
summoning up courage, she threw her arms round Mr. Bumble’s neck,
and said, it might be as soon as ever he pleased, and that he was “a
irresistible duck.”

Matters being thus amicably and satisfactorily arranged, the contract
was solemnly ratified in another tea-cupful of the peppermint mixture,
which was rendered the more necessary by the flutter and agitation of
the lady’s spirits. While it was being disposed of, she acquainted Mr.
Bumble with the old woman’s decease.

“Very good,” said that gentleman, sipping his peppermint “I’ll call at
Sowerberry’s as I go home, and tell him to send to-morrow morning. Was
it that as frightened you, love?”

“It wasn’t anything particular, dear,” said the lady, evasively.

“It must have been something, love,” urged Mr. Bumble. “Wont you tell
your own B.?”

“Not now,” rejoined the lady; “one of these days,—after we’re married,
dear.”

“After we’re married!” exclaimed Mr. Bumble. “It wasn’t any impudence
from any of them male paupers as——”

“No, no, love!” interposed the lady, hastily.

“If I thought it was,” continued Mr. Bumble,—“if I thought any one of
’em had dared to lift his wulgar eyes to that lovely countenance——”

“They wouldn’t have dared to do it, love,” responded the lady.

“They had better not!” said Mr. Bumble, clenching his fist. “Let me see
any man, porochial, or extra-porochial, as would presume to do it, and
I can tell him that he wouldn’t do it a second time!”

Unembellished by any violence of gesticulation, this might have sounded
as no very high compliment to the lady’s charms; but, as Mr. Bumble
accompanied the threat with many warlike gestures, she was much touched
with this proof of his devotion, and protested, with great admiration,
that he was indeed a dove.

The dove then turned up his coat-collar, and put on his cocked-hat,
and having exchanged a long and affectionate embrace with his future
partner, once again braved the cold wind of the night; merely pausing
for a few minutes in the male paupers’ ward to abuse them a little,
with the view of satisfying himself that he could fill the office of
workhouse-master with needful acerbity. Assured of his qualifications,
Mr. Bumble left the building with a light heart and bright visions of
his future promotion, which served to occupy his mind until he reached
the shop of the undertaker.

Now, Mr. and Mrs. Sowerberry having gone out to tea and supper, and
Noah Claypole not being at any time disposed to take upon himself a
greater amount of physical exertion than is necessary to a convenient
performance of the two functions of eating and drinking, the shop
was not closed, although it was past the usual hour of shutting-up.
Mr. Bumble tapped with his cane on the counter several times; but,
attracting no attention, and beholding a light shining through the
glass-window of the little parlour, at the back of the shop, he made
bold to peep in and see what was going forward; and, when he saw what
_was_ going forward, he was not a little surprised.

The cloth was laid for supper, and the table was covered with bread
and butter, plates, and glasses, a porter-pot, and a wine-bottle.
At the upper end of the table, Mr. Noah Claypole lolled negligently
in an easy-chair, with his legs thrown over one of the arms, an open
clasp-knife in one hand, and a mass of buttered bread in the other;
close beside him stood Charlotte, opening oysters from a barrel, which
Mr. Claypole condescended to swallow with remarkable avidity. A more
than ordinary redness in the region of the young gentleman’s nose, and
a kind of fixed wink in his right eye, denoted that he was in a slight
degree intoxicated; and these symptoms were confirmed by the intense
relish with which he took his oysters, for which nothing but a strong
appreciation of their cooling properties, in cases of internal fever,
could have sufficiently accounted.

[Illustration: _Mr. Claypole as he appeared when his master was out._

London, Richard Bentley, March 1, 1838.]

“Here’s a delicious fat one, Noah, dear!” said Charlotte; “try him, do;
only this one.”

“What a delicious thing is a oyster!” remarked Mr. Claypole, after he
had swallowed it. “What a pity it is a number of ’em should ever make
you feel uncomfortable, isn’t it, Charlotte?”

“It’s quite a cruelty,” said Charlotte.

“So it is,” acquiesced Mr. Claypole. “A’n’t yer fond of oysters?”

“Not overmuch,” replied Charlotte. “I like to see you eat ’em, Noah
dear, better than eating them myself.”

“Lor’!” said Noah, reflectively; “how queer!”

“Have another,” said Charlotte. “Here’s one with such a beautiful,
delicate beard!”

“I can’t manage any more,” said Noah. “I’m very sorry. Come here,
Charlotte, and I’ll kiss yer.”

“What!” said Mr. Bumble, bursting into the room. “Say that again, sir.”

Charlotte uttered a scream, and hid her face in her apron; while Mr.
Claypole, without making any further change in his position than
suffering his legs to reach the ground, gazed at the beadle in drunken
terror.

“Say it again, you vile, owdacious fellow!” said Mr. Bumble. “How dare
you mention such a thing, sir? And how dare you encourage him, you
insolent minx? Kiss her!” exclaimed Mr. Bumble, in strong indignation.
“Faugh!”

“I didn’t mean to do it!” said Noah, blubbering. “She’s always
a-kissing of me, whether I like it, or not.”

“Oh, Noah!” cried Charlotte, reproachfully.

“Yer are, yer know yer are!” retorted Noah. “She’s always a-doing of
it, Mr. Bumble, sir; she chucks me under the chin, please sir, and
makes all manner of love!”

“Silence!” cried Mr. Bumble, sternly. “Take yourself down stairs,
ma’am. Noah, you shut up the shop, and say another word till your
master comes home at your peril; and, when he does come home, tell him
that Mr. Bumble said he was to send a old woman’s shell after breakfast
to-morrow morning. Do you hear, sir? Kissing!” cried Mr. Bumble,
holding up his hands. “The sin and wickedness of the lower orders in
this porochial district is frightful; if parliament don’t take their
abominable courses under consideration, this country’s ruined, and the
character of the peasantry gone for ever!” With these words, the beadle
strode, with a lofty and gloomy air, from the undertaker’s premises.

And now that we have accompanied him so far on his road home, and have
made all necessary preparations for the old woman’s funeral, let us set
on foot a few inquiries after young Oliver Twist, and ascertain whether
he be still lying in the ditch where Toby Crackit left him.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

LOOKS AFTER OLIVER, AND PROCEEDS WITH HIS ADVENTURES.


“WOLVES tear your throats!” muttered Sikes, grinding his teeth. “I wish
I was among some of you; you’d howl the hoarser for it.”

As Sikes growled forth this imprecation, with the most desperate
ferocity that his desperate nature was capable of, he rested the body
of the wounded boy across his bended knee, and turned his head for an
instant to look back at his pursuers.

There was little to be made out in the mist and darkness; but the
loud shouting of men vibrated through the air, and the barking of the
neighbouring dogs, roused by the sound of the alarm-bell, resounded in
every direction.

“Stop, you white-livered hound!” cried the robber, shouting after
Toby Crackit, who, making the best use of his long legs, was already
ahead,—“stop!”

The repetition of the word brought Toby to a dead stand-still, for he
was not quite satisfied that he was beyond the range of pistol-shot,
and Sikes was in no mood to be played with.

“Bear a hand with the boy,” roared Sikes, beckoning furiously to his
confederate. “Come back!”

Toby made a show of returning, but ventured, in a low voice, broken for
want of breath, to intimate considerable reluctance as he came slowly
along.

“Quicker!” cried Sikes, laying the boy in a dry ditch at his feet, and
drawing a pistol from his pocket. “Dont play the booby with me.”

At this moment the noise grew louder, and Sikes, again looking round,
could discern that the men who had given chase were already climbing
the gate of the field in which he stood, and that a couple of dogs were
some paces in advance of them.

“It’s all up, Bill,” cried Toby; “drop the kid, and show ’em your
heels.” With this parting advice, Mr. Crackit, preferring the chance
of being shot by his friend to the certainty of being taken by his
enemies, fairly turned tail, and darted off at full speed. Sikes
clenched his teeth, took one look round, threw over the prostrate form
of Oliver the cape in which he had been hurriedly muffled, ran along
the front of the hedge, as if to distract the attention of those behind
from the spot where the boy lay, paused for a second before another
hedge which met it at right angles, and whirling his pistol high into
the air, cleared it at a bound, and was gone.

“Ho, ho, there!” cried a tremulous voice in the rear. “Pincher,
Neptune, come here, come here!”

The dogs, which, in common with their masters, seemed to have no
particular relish for the sport in which they were engaged, readily
answered to this command: and three men, who had by this time advanced
some distance into the field, stopped to take counsel together.

“My advice, or, leastways, I should say, my _orders_, is,” said the
fattest man of the party, “that we ’mediately go home again.”

“I am agreeable to anything which is agreeable to Mr. Giles,” said a
shorter man, who was by no means of a slim figure, and who was very
pale in the face, and very polite, as frightened men frequently are.

“I shouldn’t wish to appear ill-mannered, gentlemen,” said the third,
who had called the dogs back, “Mr. Giles ought to know.”

“Certainly,” replied the shorter man; “and whatever Mr. Giles says it
isn’t our place to contradict him. No, no, I know my sitiwation,—thank
my stars, I know my sitiwation.” To tell the truth, the little man
_did_ seem to know his situation, and to know perfectly well that it
was by no means a desirable one, for his teeth chattered in his head as
he spoke.

“You are afraid, Brittles,” said Mr. Giles.

“I a’n’t,” said Brittles.

“You are,” said Giles.

“You’re a falsehood, Mr. Giles,” said Brittles.

“You’re a lie, Brittles,” said Mr. Giles.

Now, these four retorts arose from Mr. Giles’s taunt, and Mr. Giles’s
taunt had arisen from his indignation at having the responsibility of
going home again imposed upon himself under cover of a compliment. The
third man brought the dispute to a close most philosophically.

“I’ll tell you what it is, gentlemen,” said he, “we’re all afraid.”

“Speak for yourself, sir,” said Mr. Giles, who was the palest of the
party.

“So I do,” replied the man. “It’s natural and proper to be afraid,
under such circumstances. _I_ am.”

“So am I,” said Brittles; “only there’s no call to tell a man he is, so
bounceably.”

These frank admissions softened Mr. Giles, who at once owned that
_he_ was afraid; upon which they all three faced about and ran back
again with the completest unanimity, till Mr. Giles (who had the
shortest wind of the party, and was encumbered with a pitchfork) most
handsomely insisted upon stopping to make an apology for his hastiness
of speech.

“But it’s wonderful,” said Mr. Giles, when he had explained, “what a
man will do when his blood is up. I should have committed murder, I
know I should, if we’d caught one of the rascals.”

As the other two were impressed with a similar presentiment, and their
blood, like his, had all gone down again, some speculation ensued upon
the cause of this sudden change in their temperament.

“I know what it was,” said Mr. Giles; “it was the gate.”

“I shouldn’t wonder if it was,” exclaimed Brittles, catching at the
idea.

“You may depend upon it,” said Giles, “that that gate stopped the
flow of the excitement. I felt all mine suddenly going away as I was
climbing over it.”

By a remarkable coincidence the other two had been visited with the
same unpleasant sensation at that precise moment; so that it was quite
conclusive that it was the gate, especially as there was no doubt
regarding the time at which the change had taken place, because all
three remembered that they had come in sight of the robbers at the very
instant of its occurrence.

This dialogue was held between the two men who had surprised the
burglars, and a travelling tinker, who had been sleeping in an
outhouse, and who had been roused, together with his two mongrel curs,
to join in the pursuit. Mr. Giles acted in the double capacity of
butler and steward to the old lady of the mansion, and Brittles was
a lad of all-work, who, having entered her service a mere child, was
treated as a promising young boy still, though he was something past
thirty.

Encouraging each other with such converse as this, but keeping very
close together notwithstanding, and looking apprehensively round
whenever a fresh gust rattled through the boughs, the three men hurried
back to a tree behind which they had left their lantern, lest its
light should inform the thieves in what direction to fire. Catching
up the light, they made the best of their way home, at a good round
trot; and long after their dusky forms had ceased to be discernible,
it might have been seen twinkling and dancing in the distance, like
some exhalation of the damp and gloomy atmosphere through which it was
swiftly borne.

The air grew colder as day came slowly on, and the mist rolled along
the ground like a dense cloud of smoke; the grass was wet, the pathways
and low places were all mire and water, and the damp breath of an
unwholesome wind went languidly by with a hollow moaning. Still Oliver
lay motionless and insensible on the spot where Sikes had left him.

Morning drew on apace; the air became more sharp and piercing, as
its first dull hue—the death of night rather than the birth of
day—glimmered faintly in the sky. The objects which had looked dim
and terrible in the darkness grew more and more defined, and gradually
resolved into their familiar shapes. The rain came down thick and fast,
and pattered noisily among the leafless bushes. But Oliver felt it
not, as it beat against him, for he still lay stretched, helpless and
unconscious, on his bed of clay.

At length, a low cry of pain broke the stillness that prevailed, and
uttering it, the boy awoke. His left arm, rudely bandaged in a shawl,
hung heavy and useless at his side, and the bandage was saturated with
blood. He was so weak that he could scarcely raise himself into a
sitting posture, and when he had done so, he looked feebly round for
help, and groaned with pain. Trembling in every joint, from cold and
exhaustion, he made an effort to stand upright, but, shuddering from
head to foot, fell prostrate on the ground.

After a short return of the stupor in which he had been so long
plunged, Oliver, urged by a creeping sickness at his heart, which
seemed to warn him that if he lay there he must surely die, got upon
his feet and essayed to walk. His head was dizzy, and he staggered to
and fro like a drunken man; but he kept up nevertheless, and, with his
head drooping languidly on his breast, went stumbling onward, he knew
not whither.

And now, hosts of bewildering and confused ideas came crowding on his
mind. He seemed to be still walking between Sikes and Crackit, who
were angrily disputing, for the very words they said sounded in his
ears: and when he caught his own attention, as it were, by making some
violent effort to save himself from falling, he found that he was
talking to them. Then he was alone with Sikes, plodding on as they had
done the previous day, and as shadowy people passed them by, he felt
the robber’s grasp upon his wrist. Suddenly, he started back at the
report of fire-arms, and there rose into the air loud cries and shouts;
lights gleamed before his eyes, and all was noise and tumult, as some
unseen hand bore him hurriedly away. Through all these rapid visions
there ran an undefined, uneasy consciousness of pain, which wearied and
tormented him incessantly.

Thus he staggered on, creeping almost mechanically between the bars
of gates, or through hedge-gaps, as they came in his way, until he
reached a road; and here the rain began to fall so heavily that it
roused him.

He looked about, and saw that at no great distance there was a house,
which perhaps he could reach. Seeing his condition, they might have
compassion on him, and if they did not, it would be better, he thought,
to die near human beings than in the lonely open fields. He summoned
up all his strength for one last trial, and bent his faltering steps
towards it.

As he drew nearer to this house, a feeling came over him that he had
seen it before. He remembered nothing of its details, but the shape and
aspect of the building seemed familiar to him.

That garden-wall! On the grass inside he had fallen on his knees last
night, and prayed the two men’s mercy. It was the very same house they
had attempted to rob.

Oliver felt such fear come over him when he recognised the place, that,
for the instant, he forgot the agony of his wound, and thought only
of flight. Flight! He could scarcely stand; and if he were in full
possession of all the best powers of his slight and youthful frame,
where could he fly to? He pushed against the garden-gate; it was
unlocked, and swung open on its hinges. He tottered across the lawn,
climbed the steps, knocked faintly at the door, and his whole strength
failing him, sunk down against one of the pillars of the little portico.

It happened that about this time, Mr. Giles, Brittles, and the tinker,
were recruiting themselves after the fatigues and terrors of the
night, with tea and sundries, in the kitchen. Not that it was Mr.
Giles’s habit to admit to too great familiarity the humbler servants,
towards whom it was rather his wont to deport himself with a lofty
affability, which, while it gratified, could not fail to remind them of
his superior position in society. But death, fires, and burglary make
all men equals; and Mr. Giles sat with his legs stretched out before
the kitchen fender, leaning his left arm on the table, while, with
his right, he illustrated a circumstantial and minute account of the
robbery, to which his hearers (but especially the cook and housemaid,
who were of the party) listened with breathless interest.

“It was about half-past two,” said Mr. Giles, “or I wouldn’t swear
that it mightn’t have been a little nearer three, when I woke up, and,
turning round in my bed, as it might be so, (here Mr. Giles turned
round in his chair, and pulled the corner of the table-cloth over him
to imitate bedclothes,) I fancied I heerd a noise.”

At this point of the narrative, the cook turned pale, and asked the
housemaid to shut the door, who asked Brittles, who asked the tinker,
who pretended not to hear.

“—Heerd a noise,” continued Mr. Giles. “I says, at first, ‘This is
illusion;’ and was composing myself off to sleep, when I heerd the
noise again, distinct.”

“What sort of a noise?” asked the cook.

“A kind of a busting noise,” replied Mr. Giles, looking round him.

“More like the noise of powdering an iron bar on a nutmeg-grater,”
suggested Brittle.

“It was, when _you_ heerd, sir,” rejoined Mr. Giles; “but, at this
time, it had a busting sound. I turned down the clothes,” continued
Giles, rolling back the table-cloth, “sat up in bed, and listened.”

The cook and housemaid simultaneously ejaculated, “Lor!” and drew their
chairs closer together.

“I heerd it now, quite apparent,” resumed Mr. Giles. “‘Somebody,’ I
says, ‘is forcing of a door, or window; what’s to be done? I’ll call up
that poor lad, Brittles, and save him from being murdered in his bed,
or his throat,’ I says, ‘may be cut from his right ear to his left,
without his ever knowing it.’”

Here all eyes were turned upon Brittles, who fixed his upon the
speaker, and stared at him, with his mouth wide open, and his face
expressive of the most unmitigated horror.

“I tossed off the clothes,” said Giles, throwing away the table-cloth,
and looking very hard at the cook and housemaid, “got softly out of
bed, drew on a pair of—”

“Ladies present, Mr. Giles,” murmured the tinker.

“—Of _shoes_, sir,” said Giles, turning upon him, and laying great
emphasis on the word, “seized the loaded pistol that always goes up
stairs with the plate-basket, and walked on tiptoes to his room.
‘Brittles,’ I says, when I had woke him, ‘don’t be frightened!’”

“So you did,” observed Brittles, in a low voice.

“‘We’re dead men, I think, Brittles,’ I says,” continued Giles; “‘but
don’t be under any alarm.’”

“_Was_ he frightened?” asked the cook.

“Not a bit of it,” replied Mr. Giles. “He was as firm—ah! pretty near
as firm as I was.”

“I should have died at once, I’m sure, if it had been me,” observed the
housemaid.

“You’re a woman,” retorted Brittles, plucking up a little.

“Brittles is right,” said Mr. Giles, nodding his head, approvingly;
“from a woman nothing else was to be expected. We, being men, took a
dark lantern, that was standing on Brittles’s hob, and groped our way
down stairs in the pitch dark,—as it might be so.”

Mr. Giles had risen from his seat, and taken two steps with his eyes
shut, to accompany his description with appropriate action, when he
started violently, in common with the rest of the company, and hurried
back to his chair. The cook and housemaid screamed.

“It was a knock,” said Mr. Giles, assuming perfect serenity; “open the
door, somebody.”

Nobody moved.

“It seems a strange sort of thing, a knock coming at such a time in the
morning,” said Mr. Giles, surveying the pale faces which surrounded
him, and looking very blank himself; “but the door must be opened. Do
you hear, somebody?”

Mr. Giles, as he spoke, looked at Brittles; but that young man being
naturally modest, probably considered himself nobody, and so held
that the inquiry could not have any application to him: at all events,
he tendered no reply. Mr. Giles directed an appealing glance at the
tinker, but he had suddenly fallen asleep. The women were out of the
question.

[Illustration: _Oliver Twist at Mrs. Maylie’s door._]

“If Brittles would rather open the door in the presence of witnesses,”
said Mr. Giles, after a short silence, “I am ready to make one.”

“So am I,” said the tinker, waking up as suddenly as he had fallen
asleep.

Brittles capitulated on these terms; and the party being somewhat
reassured by the discovery (made on throwing open the shutters) that it
was now broad day, took their way up stairs, with the dogs in front,
and the two women, who were afraid to stop below, bringing up the rear.
By the advice of Mr. Giles, they all talked very loud, to warn any
evil-disposed person outside that they were strong in numbers; and by a
master-stroke of policy, originating in the brain of the same ingenious
gentleman, the dogs’ tails were well pinched in the hall to make them
bark savagely.

These precautions having been taken, Mr. Giles held on fast by the
tinker’s arm (to prevent his running away, as he pleasantly said),
and gave the word of command to open the door. Brittles obeyed, and
the group, peeping timorously over each other’s shoulders, beheld
no more formidable object than poor little Oliver Twist, speechless
and exhausted, who raised his heavy eyes, and mutely solicited their
compassion.

“A boy!” exclaimed Mr. Giles, valiantly pushing the tinker into the
background. “What’s the matter with the—eh?—Why—Brittles—look
here—don’t you know?”

Brittles, who had got behind the door to open it, no sooner saw Oliver,
than he uttered a loud cry. Mr. Giles, seizing the boy by one leg and
one arm—fortunately not the broken limb—lugged him straight into the
hall, and deposited him at full length on the ground thereof.

“Here he is!” bawled Giles, calling, in a great state of excitement,
up the staircase; “here’s one of the thieves, ma’am! Here’s a thief,
miss—wounded, miss! I shot him, miss; and Brittles held the light.”

“In a lantern, miss,” cried Brittles, applying one hand to the side of
his mouth, so that his voice might travel the better.

The two women-servants ran up stairs to carry the intelligence that
Mr. Giles had captured a robber; and the tinker busied himself in
endeavouring to restore Oliver, lest he should die before he could be
hung. In the midst of all this noise and commotion, there was heard a
sweet female voice, which quelled it in an instant.

“Giles!” whispered the voice from the stair-head.

“I’m here, miss,” replied Mr. Giles. “Don’t be frightened, miss; I
ain’t much injured. He didn’t make a very desperate resistance, miss; I
was soon too many for him.”

“Hush!” replied the young lady; “you frighten my aunt as much as the
thieves did. Is the poor creature much hurt?”

“Wounded desperate, miss,” replied Giles, with indescribable
complacency.

“He looks as if he was a-going, miss,” bawled Brittles, in the same
manner as before. “Wouldn’t you like to come and look at him, miss, in
case he should—?”

“Hush, pray, there’s a good man!” rejoined the young lady. “Wait
quietly one instant, while I speak to aunt.”

With a footstep as soft and gentle as the voice, the speaker tripped
away, and soon retained, with the direction that the wounded person
was to be carried carefully up stairs to Mr. Giles’s room, and that
Brittles was to saddle the pony and betake himself instantly to
Chertsey, from which place he was to despatch, with all speed, a
constable and doctor.

“But won’t you take one look at him, first, miss?” asked Mr. Giles,
with as much pride as if Oliver were some bird of rare plumage that he
had skilfully brought down. “Not one little peep, miss?”

“Not now for the world,” replied the young lady. “Poor fellow! oh!
treat him kindly, Giles, if it is only for my sake!”

The old servant looked up at the speaker, as she turned away, with a
glance as proud and admiring as if she had been his own child. Then
bending over Oliver, he helped to carry him up stairs with the care and
solicitude of a woman.




CHAPTER XXIX.

HAS AN INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNT OF THE INMATES OF THE HOUSE TO WHICH OLIVER
RESORTED, AND RELATES WHAT THEY THOUGHT OF HIM.


IN a handsome room—though its furniture had rather the air of
old-fashioned comfort than of modern elegance—there sat two ladies at
a well-spread breakfast-table. Mr. Giles, dressed with scrupulous care
in a full suit of black, was in attendance upon them. He had taken his
station some half-way between the sideboard and the breakfast-table,
and with his body drawn up to its full height, his head thrown back,
and inclined the merest trifle on one side, his left leg advanced, and
his right hand thrust into his waistcoat, while his left hung down by
his side, grasping a waiter, looked like one who laboured under a very
agreeable sense of his own merits and importance.

Of the two ladies, one was well advanced in years, but the high-backed
oaken chair in which she sat was not more upright than she. Dressed
with the utmost nicety and precision, in a quaint mixture of by-gone
costume, with some slight concessions to the prevailing taste, which
rather served to point the old style pleasantly than to impair its
effect, she sat in a stately manner with her hands folded on the table
before her, and her eyes, of which age had dimmed but little of their
brightness, attentively fixed upon her young companion.

The younger lady was in the lovely bloom and spring-time of womanhood;
at that age when, if ever angels be for God’s good purposes enthroned
in mortal forms, they may be, without impiety, supposed to abide in
such as hers.

She was not past seventeen. Cast in so slight and exquisite a mould;
so mild and gentle, so pure and beautiful, that earth seemed not
her element, nor its rough creatures her fit companions. The very
intelligence that shone in her deep blue eye, and was stamped upon
her noble head, seemed scarcely of her age or of the world; and yet
the changing expression of sweetness and good humour, the thousand
lights that played about the face and left no shadow there; above all,
the smile—the cheerful, happy smile—were intwined with the best
sympathies and affections of our nature.

She was busily engaged in the little offices of the table, and chancing
to raise her eyes as the elder lady was regarding her, playfully put
back her hair, which was simply braided on her forehead, and threw into
one beaming look such a gush of affection and artless loveliness, that
blessed spirits might have smiled to look upon her.

The elder lady smiled; but her heart was full, and she brushed away a
tear as she did so.

“And Brittles has been gone upwards of an hour, has he?” asked the old
lady, after a pause.

“An hour and twelve minutes, ma’am,” replied Mr. Giles, referring to a
silver watch, which he drew forth by a black ribbon.

“He is always slow,” remarked the old lady.

“Brittles always was a slow boy, ma’am,” replied the attendant. And
seeing, by-the-by, that Brittles had been a slow boy for upwards of
thirty years, there appeared no great probability of his ever being a
fast one.

“He gets worse instead of better, I think,” said the elder lady.

“It is very inexcusable in him if he stops to play with any other
boys,” said the young lady, smiling.

Mr. Giles was apparently considering the propriety of indulging in a
respectful smile himself, when a gig drove up to the garden-gate, out
of which there jumped a fat gentleman, who ran straight up to the door,
and getting quickly into the house by some mysterious process, burst
into the room, and nearly overturned Mr. Giles and the breakfast-table
together.

“I never heard of such a thing!” exclaimed the fat gentleman. “My dear
Mrs. Maylie—bless my soul—in the silence of night, too—I _never_
heard of such a thing!”

With these expressions of condolence, the fat gentleman shook hands
with both ladies, and drawing up a chair, inquired how they found
themselves.

“You ought to be dead—positively dead with the fright,” said the fat
gentleman. “Why didn’t you send? Bless me, my man should have come in
a minute, and so would I, and my assistant would have been delighted,
or anybody, I’m sure, under such circumstances; dear, dear—so
unexpected—in the silence of night, too!”

The doctor seemed especially troubled by the fact of the robbery having
been unexpected, and attempted in the night-time, as if it were the
established custom of gentlemen in the housebreaking way to transact
business at noon, and to make an appointment, by the twopenny post, a
day or two previous.

“And you, Miss Rose,” said the doctor, turning to the young lady,
“I——”

“Oh! very much so, indeed,” said Rose, interrupting him; “but there is
a poor creature up stairs, whom aunt wishes you to see.”

“Ah! to be sure,” replied the doctor, “so there is. That was your
handiwork, Giles, I understand.”

Mr. Giles, who had been feverishly putting the tea-cups to rights,
blushed very red, and said that he had had that honour.

“Honour, eh?” said the doctor; “well, I don’t know; perhaps it’s as
honourable to hit a thief in a back kitchen as to hit your man at
twelve paces. Fancy that he fired in the air, and you’ve fought a duel,
Giles.”

Mr. Giles, who thought this light treatment of the matter an unjust
attempt at diminishing his glory, answered respectfully, that it was
not for the like of him to judge about that, but he rather thought it
was no joke to the opposite party.

“‘Gad, that’s true!” said the doctor. “Where is he? Shew me the way.
I’ll look in again as I come down, Mrs. Maylie. That’s the little
window that he got in at, eh? Well, I couldn’t have believed it.”
Talking all the way, he followed Mr. Giles up stairs; and while he
is going up stairs, the reader may be informed, that Mr. Losberne, a
surgeon in the neighbourhood, known through a circuit of ten miles
round as “the doctor,” had grown fat more from goodhumour than from
good living, and was as kind and hearty, and withal as eccentric an old
bachelor, as will be found in five times that space by any explorer
alive.

The doctor was absent much longer than either he or the ladies had
anticipated. A large flat box was fetched out of the gig, and a bedroom
bell was rung very often, and the servants ran up and down stairs
perpetually; from which tokens it was justly concluded that something
important was going on above. At length he returned; and in reply to an
anxious inquiry after his patient, looked very mysterious, and closed
the door carefully.

“This is a very extraordinary thing, Mrs. Maylie,” said the doctor,
standing with his back to the door, as if to keep it shut.

“He is not in danger, I hope?” said the old lady.

“Why, that would not be an extraordinary thing, under the
circumstances,” replied the doctor; “though I don’t think he is. Have
you seen this thief?”

“No,” rejoined the old lady.

“Nor heard anything about him?”

“No.”

“I beg your pardon, ma’am,” interposed Mr. Giles; “but I was going to
tell you about him when Doctor Losberne came in.”

The fact was, that Mr. Giles had not at first been able to bring his
mind to the avowal, that he had only shot a boy. Such commendations had
been bestowed upon his bravery that he could not, for the life of him,
help postponing the explanation for a few delicious minutes, during
which he had flourished in the very zenith of a brief reputation for
undaunted courage.

“Rose wished to see the man,” said Mrs. Maylie; “but I wouldn’t hear of
it.”

“Humph!” rejoined the doctor. “There’s nothing very alarming in his
appearance. Have you any objection to see him in my presence?”

“If it be necessary,” replied the old lady, “certainly not.”

“Then I think it is necessary,” said the doctor; “at all events, I am
quite sure that you would deeply regret not having done so, if you
postponed it. He is perfectly quiet and comfortable now. Allow me—Miss
Rose, will you permit me? Not the slightest fear, I pledge you my
honour.”

With many more loquacious assurances that they would be agreeably
surprised in the aspect of the criminal, the doctor drew the young
lady’s arm through one of his, and offering his disengaged hand to Mrs.
Maylie, led them, with much ceremony and stateliness, up stairs.

“Now,” said the doctor, in a whisper, as he softly turned the handle
of a bedroom-door, “let us hear what you think of him. He has not
been shaved very recently, but he doesn’t look at all ferocious
notwithstanding. Stop, though—let me see that he is in visiting order
first.”

Stepping before them, he looked into the room, and motioning them to
advance, closed the door when they had entered, and gently drew back
the curtains of the bed. Upon it, in lieu of the dogged, black-visaged
ruffian they had expected to behold, there lay a mere child, worn with
pain and exhaustion, and sunk into a deep sleep. His wounded arm, bound
and splintered up, was crossed upon his breast, and his head reclined
upon the other, which was half hidden by his long hair, as it streamed
over the pillow.

The honest gentleman held the curtain in his hand, and looked on, for a
minute or so, in silence. Whilst he was watching the patient thus, the
younger lady glided softly past, and seating herself in a chair by the
bedside, gathered Oliver’s hair from his face, and as she stooped over
him, her tears fell upon his forehead.

The boy stirred and smiled in his sleep, as though those marks of pity
and compassion had awakened some pleasant dream of a love and affection
he had never known; as a strain of gentle music, or the rippling of
water in a silent place, or the odour of a flower, or even the mention
of a familiar word, will sometimes call up sudden dim remembrances of
scenes that never were, in this life, which vanish like a breath, and
which some brief memory of a happier existence, long gone by, would
seem to have awakened, for no power of the human mind can ever recall
them.

“What can this mean?” exclaimed the elder lady. “This poor child can
never have been the pupil of robbers!”

“Vice,” sighed the surgeon, replacing the curtain, “takes up her abode
in many temples; and who can say that a fair outside shall not enshrine
her?”

“But at so early an age!” urged Rose.

“My dear young lady,” rejoined the surgeon, mournfully shaking his
head, “crime, like death, is not confined to the old and withered
alone. The youngest and fairest are too often its chosen victims.”

“But, can you—oh, sir! can you, really believe that this delicate boy
has been the voluntary associate of the worst outcasts of society?”
said Rose, anxiously.

The surgeon shook his head in a manner which intimated that he feared
it was very possible; and observing that they might disturb the
patient, led the way into an adjoining apartment.

“But even if he has been wicked,” pursued Rose, “think how young he
is; think that he may never have known a mother’s love, or even the
comfort of a home, and that ill-usage and blows, or the want of bread,
may have driven him to herd with the men who have forced him to guilt.
Aunt, dear aunt, for mercy’s sake, think of this before you let them
drag this sick child to a prison, which in any case must be the grave
of all his chances of amendment. Oh! as you love me, and know that I
have never felt the want of parents in your goodness and affection,
but that I might have done so, and might have been equally helpless and
unprotected with this poor child, have pity upon him before it is too
late.”

“My dear love!” said the elder lady, as she folded the weeping girl to
her bosom, “do you think I would harm a hair of his head?”

“Oh, no!” replied Rose, eagerly; “not you, aunt, not you!”

“No,” said the old lady, with a trembling lip; “my days are drawing to
their close, and may mercy be shewn to me as I shew it to others. What
can I do to save him, sir?”

“Let me think, ma’am,” said the doctor; “let me think.”

Mr. Losberne thrust his hands into his pockets, and took several turns
up and down the room, often stopping and balancing himself on his toes,
and frowning frightfully. After various exclamations of “I’ve got it
now” and “no, I haven’t,” and as many renewals of the walking and
frowning, he at length made a dead halt, and spoke as follows:—

“I think if you give me a full and unlimited commission to bully Giles
and that little boy, Brittles, I can manage it. He is a faithful fellow
and an old servant, I know; but you can make it up to him in a thousand
ways, and reward him for being such a good shot besides. You don’t
object to that?”

“Unless there is some other way of preserving the child,” replied Mrs.
Maylie.

“There is no other,” said the doctor. “No other, take my word for it.”

“Then aunt invests you with full power,” said Rose, smiling through
her tears; “but pray don’t be harder upon the poor fellows than is
indispensably necessary.”

“You seem to think,” retorted the doctor, “that every body is disposed
to be hard-hearted to-day except yourself. I only hope, for the sake of
the rising male sex generally, that you may be found in as vulnerable
and soft-hearted a mood by the very first eligible young fellow who
appeals to your compassion; and I wish I were a young fellow, that I
might avail myself on the spot of such a favourable opportunity for
doing so as the present.”

“You are as great a boy as poor Brittles himself,” returned Rose,
blushing.

“Well,” said the doctor, laughing heartily, “that is no very difficult
matter. But to return to this boy: the great point of our agreement is
yet to come. He will wake in an hour or so, I dare say; and although
I have told that thick-headed constable-fellow down stairs that he
mustn’t be moved or spoken to, on peril of his life, I think we may
converse with him without danger. Now, I make this stipulation—that I
shall examine him in your presence, and that if from what he says, we
judge, and I can shew to the satisfaction of your cool reason, that he
is a real and thorough bad one (which is more than possible), he shall
be left to his fate, without any further interference on my part, at
all events.”

“Oh no, aunt!” entreated Rose.

“Oh yes, aunt!” said the doctor. “Is it a bargain?”

“He cannot be hardened in vice,” said Rose; “it is impossible.”

“Very good,” retorted the doctor; “then so much the more reason for
acceding to my proposition.”

Finally, the treaty was entered into, and the parties thereto sat down
to wait, with some impatience, until Oliver should awake.

The patience of the two ladies was destined to undergo a longer trial
than Mr. Losberne had led them to expect, for hour after hour passed
on, and still Oliver slumbered heavily. It was evening, indeed, before
the kind-hearted doctor brought them the intelligence, that he had at
length roused sufficiently to be spoken to. The boy was very ill, he
said, and weak from the loss of blood; but his mind was so troubled
with anxiety to disclose something, that he deemed it better to give
him the opportunity, than to insist upon his remaining quiet until next
morning, which he should otherwise have done.

The conference was a long one, for Oliver told them all his simple
history, and was often compelled to stop by pain and want of strength.
It was a solemn thing to hear, in the darkened room, the feeble voice
of the sick child recounting a weary catalogue of evils and calamities
which hard men had brought upon him. Oh! if, when we oppress and
grind our fellow-creatures, we bestowed but one thought on the dark
evidences of human error, which, like dense and heavy clouds, are
rising, slowly it is true, but not less surely, to Heaven, to pour
their after-vengeance on our heads—if we heard but one instant, in
imagination, the deep testimony of dead men’s voices, which no power
can stifle, and no pride shut out, where would be the injury and
injustice, the suffering, misery, cruelty, and wrong, that each day’s
life brings with it?

Oliver’s pillow was smoothed by woman’s hands that night, and
loveliness and virtue watched him as he slept. He felt calm and happy,
and could have died without a murmur.

The momentous interview was no sooner concluded, and Oliver composed to
rest again, than the doctor, after wiping his eyes, and condemning them
for being weak all at once, betook himself down stairs to open upon
Mr. Giles. And finding nobody about the parlours, it occurred to him,
that he could perhaps originate the proceedings with better effect in
the kitchen; so into the kitchen he went.

There were assembled, in that lower house of the domestic parliament,
the women-servants, Mr. Brittles, Mr. Giles, the tinker (who had
received a special invitation to regale himself for the remainder of
the day, in consideration of his services), and the constable. The
latter gentleman had a large staff, a large head, large features, and
large half-boots, and looked as if he had been taking a proportionate
allowance of ale, as indeed he had.

The adventures of the previous night were still under discussion,
for Mr. Giles was expatiating upon his presence of mind when the
doctor entered; and Mr. Brittles, with a mug of ale in his hand, was
corroborating everything before his superior said it.

“Sit still,” said the doctor, waving his hand.

“Thank you, sir,” said Mr. Giles. “Misses wished some ale to be given
out, sir; and as I felt no ways inclined for my own little room, sir,
and disposed for company, I am taking mine among ’em here.”

Brittles headed a low murmur, by which the ladies and gentlemen
generally were understood to express the gratification they derived
from Mr. Giles’s condescension; and Mr. Giles looked round with a
patronising air, as much as to say, that so long as they behaved
properly, he would never desert them.

“How is the patient to-night, sir?” asked Giles.

“So-so;” returned the doctor. “I am afraid you have got yourself into a
scrape there, Mr. Giles.”

“I hope you don’t mean to say, sir,” said Mr. Giles, trembling, “that
he’s going to die. If I thought it, I should never be happy again. I
wouldn’t cut a boy off, no, not even Brittles here, not for all the
plate in the country, sir.”

“That’s not the point,” said the doctor, mysteriously. “Mr. Giles, are
you a Protestant?”

“Yes, sir, I hope so,” faltered Mr. Giles, who had turned very pale.

“And what are you, boy?” said the doctor, turning sharply upon Brittles.

“Lord bless me, sir!” replied Brittles, starting violently; “I’m the
same as Mr. Giles, sir.”

“Then tell me this,” said the doctor, fiercely, “both of you—both of
you; are you going to take upon yourselves to swear that that boy up
stairs is the boy that was put through the little window last night?
Out with it! Come; we are prepared for you.”

The doctor, who was universally considered one of the best-tempered
creatures on earth, made this demand in such a dreadful tone of anger,
that Giles and Brittles, who were considerably muddled by ale and
excitement, stared at each other in a state of stupefaction.

“Pay attention to the reply, constable, will you?” said the doctor,
shaking his forefinger with great solemnity of manner, and tapping the
bridge of his nose with it, to bespeak the exercise of that worthy’s
utmost acuteness. “Something may come of this before long.”

The constable looked as wise as he could, and took up his staff of
office, which had been reclining indolently in the chimney-corner.

“It’s a simple question of identity, you will observe,” said the doctor.

“That’s what it is, sir,” replied the constable, coughing with great
violence; for he had finished his ale in a hurry, and some of it had
gone the wrong way.

“Here’s a house broken into,” said the doctor, “and a couple of men
catch one moment’s glimpse of a boy in the midst of gunpowder-smoke,
and in all the distraction of alarm and darkness. Here’s a boy comes to
that very same house next morning, and because he happens to have his
arm tied up, these men lay violent hands upon him; by doing which, they
place his life in great danger, and swear he is the thief. Now, the
question is, whether these men are justified by the fact; and if not,
what situation do they place themselves in?”

The constable nodded profoundly, and said, that if that wasn’t law, he
should be glad to know what was.

“I ask you again,” thundered the doctor, “are you, on your solemn
oaths, able to identify that boy?”

Brittles looked doubtfully at Mr. Giles, Mr. Giles looked doubtfully at
Brittles; the constable put his hand behind his ear to catch the reply;
the two women and the tinker leant forward to listen; and the doctor
glanced keenly round, when a ring was heard at the gate, and at the
same moment, the sound of wheels.

“It’s the runners!” cried Brittles, to all appearance much relieved.

“The what!” exclaimed the doctor, aghast in his turn.

“The Bow-street officers, sir,” replied Brittles, taking up a candle;
“me and Mr. Giles sent for ’em this morning.”

“What!” cried the doctor.

“Yes,” replied Brittles; “I sent a message up by the coachman, and I
only wonder they weren’t here before, sir.”

“You did, did you? Then confound your —— slow coaches down here;
that’s all,” said the doctor, walking away.




CHAPTER XXX.

INVOLVES A CRITICAL POSITION.


“WHO’S that?” inquired Brittles, opening the door a little way, with
the chain up, and peeping out, shading the candle with his hand.

“Open the door,” replied a man outside; “it’s the officers from
Bow-street, as was sent to, to-day.”

Much comforted by this assurance, Brittles opened the door to its full
width, and confronted a portly man in a great-coat, who walked in
without saying anything more, and wiped his shoes on the mat as coolly
as if he lived there.

“Just send somebody out to relieve my mate, will you, young man?”
said the officer; “he’s in the gig minding the prad. Have you got a
coach’us here that you could put it up in for five or ten minutes?”

Brittles replying in the affirmative, and pointing out the building,
the portly man stepped back to the garden-gate, and helped his
companion to put up the gig, while Brittles lighted them, in a state
of great admiration. This done, they returned to the house, and, being
shewn into a parlour, took off their great-coats and hats, and shewed
like what they were. The man who had knocked at the door was a stout
personage of middle height, aged about fifty, with shiny black hair,
cropped pretty close, half-whiskers, a round face, and sharp eyes.
The other was a red-headed, bony man, in top-boots, with a rather
ill-favoured countenance, and a turned-up, sinister-looking nose.

“Tell your governor that Blathers and Duff is here, will you?” said the
stouter man, smoothing down his hair, and laying a pair of handcuffs on
the table. “Oh! good evening, master. Can I have a word or two with you
in private, if you please?”

This was addressed to Mr. Losberne, who now made his appearance; that
gentleman, motioning Brittles to retire, brought in the two ladies, and
shut the door.

“This is the lady of the house,” said Mr. Losberne, motioning towards
Mrs. Maylie.

Mr. Blathers made a bow, and being desired to sit down, put his hat
upon the floor, and, taking a chair, motioned Duff to do the same. The
latter gentleman, who did not appear quite so much accustomed to good
society, or quite so much at his ease in it, one of the two, seated
himself, after undergoing several muscular affections of the limbs, and
forced the head of his stick into his mouth, with some embarrassment.

“Now, with regard to this here robbery, master,” said Blathers. “What
are the circumstances?”

Mr. Losberne, who appeared desirous of gaining time, recounted them at
great length, and with much circumlocution: Messrs. Blathers and Duff
looking very knowing meanwhile, and occasionally exchanging a nod.

“I can’t say for certain till I see the place, of course,” said
Blathers; “but my opinion at once is,—I don’t mind committing myself
to that extent,—that this wasn’t done by a yokel—eh, Duff?”

“Certainly not,” replied Duff.

“And, translating the word yokel for the benefit of the ladies, I
apprehend your meaning to be, that this attempt was not made by a
countryman?” said Mr. Losberne, with a smile.

“That’s it, master,” replied Blathers. “This is all about the robbery,
is it?”

“All,” replied the doctor.

“Now, what is this about this here boy that the servants are talking
of?” said Blathers.

“Nothing at all,” replied the doctor. “One of the frightened servants
chose to take it into his head that he had something to do with this
attempt to break into the house; but it’s nonsense—sheer absurdity.”

“Wery easy disposed of it is,” remarked Duff.

“What he says is quite correct,” observed Blathers, nodding his head
in a confirmatory way, and playing carelessly with the handcuffs, as
if they were a pair of castanets. “Who is the boy? What account does
he give of himself? Where did he come from? He didn’t drop out of the
clouds, did he, master?”

“Of course not,” replied the doctor, with a nervous glance at the
two ladies. “I know his whole history;—but we can talk about that
presently. You would like to see the place where the thieves made their
attempt, first, I suppose?”

“Certainly,” rejoined Mr. Blathers. “We had better inspect the premises
first, and examine the servants arterwards. That’s the usual way of
doing business.”

Lights were then procured, and Messrs. Blathers and Duff, attended by
the native constable, Brittles, Giles, and everybody else in short,
went into the little room at the end of the passage and looked out at
the window, and afterwards went round by way of the lawn, and looked in
at the window, and after that, had a candle handed out to inspect the
shutter with, and after that, a lantern to trace the footsteps with,
and after that, a pitchfork to poke the bushes with. This done, amidst
the breathless interest of all beholders, they came in again, and Mr.
Giles and Brittles were put through a melodramatic representation of
their share in the previous night’s adventures, which they performed
some six times over, contradicting each other in not more than one
important respect the first time, and in not more than a dozen the
last. This consummation being arrived at, Blathers and Duff cleared
the room, and held a long council together, compared with which, for
secrecy and solemnity, a consultation of great doctors on the knottiest
point in medicine would be mere child’s play.

Meanwhile, the doctor walked up and down the next room in a very uneasy
state, and Mrs. Maylie and Rose looked on with anxious faces.

“Upon my word,” he said, making a halt, after a great number of very
rapid turns, “I hardly know what to do.”

“Surely,” said Rose, “the poor child’s story faithfully repeated to
these men will be sufficient to exonerate him.”

“I doubt it, my dear young lady,” said the doctor, shaking his head.
“I don’t think it would exonerate him either with them or with legal
functionaries of a higher grade. What is he, after all, they would
say?—a runaway. Judged by mere world considerations and probabilities,
his story is a very doubtful one.”

“You credit it, surely?” interrupted Rose, in haste.

“_I_ believe it, strange as it is, and perhaps may be an old fool for
doing so,” rejoined the doctor; “but I don’t think it is exactly the
tale for a practised police-officer, nevertheless.”

“Why not?” demanded Rose.

“Because, my pretty cross-examiner,” replied the doctor, “because,
viewed with their eyes, there are so many ugly points about it; he can
only prove the parts that look bad, and none of those that look well.
Confound the fellows, they _will_ have the why and the wherefore, and
take nothing for granted. On his own shewing, you see he has been
the companion of thieves for some time past; he has been carried to a
police-office on a charge of picking a gentleman’s pocket, and is taken
away forcibly from that gentleman’s house to a place which he cannot
describe or point out, and of the situation of which he has not the
remotest idea. He is brought down to Chertsey by men who seem to have
taken a violent fancy to him, whether he will or no, and put through
a window to rob a house, and then, just at the very moment when he is
going to alarm the inmates, and so do the very thing that would set
him all to rights, there rushes into the way that blundering dog of a
half-bred butler, and shoots him, as if on purpose to prevent his doing
any good for himself. Don’t you see all this?”

“I see it, of course,” replied Rose, smiling at the doctor’s
impetuosity; “but still I do not see anything in it to criminate the
poor child.”

“No,” replied the doctor; “of course not! Bless the bright eyes of your
sex! They never see, whether for good or bad, more than one side of
any question, and that is, invariably, the one which first presents
itself to them.”

Having given vent to this result of experience, the doctor put his
hands into his pockets, and walked up and down the room with even
greater rapidity than before.

“The more I think of it,” said the doctor, “the more I see that it
will occasion endless trouble and difficulty to put these men into
possession of the boy’s real story. I am certain it will not be
believed; and even if they can do nothing to him in the end, still the
dragging it forward, and giving publicity to all the doubts that will
be cast upon it, must interfere materially with your benevolent plan of
rescuing him from misery.”

“Oh! what is to be done?” cried Rose. “Dear, dear! why did they send
for these people?”

“Why, indeed!” exclaimed Mrs. Maylie. “I would not have had them here
for the world.”

“All I know is,” said Mr. Losberne at last, sitting down with a kind
of desperate calmness, “that we must try and carry it off with a
bold face, that’s all. The object is a good one, and that must be
the excuse. The boy has strong symptoms of fever upon him, and is in
no condition to be talked to any more; that’s one comfort. We must
make the best of it we can; and if bad is the best, it is no fault of
ours.—Come in.”

“Well, master,” said Blathers, entering the room, followed by his
colleague, and making the door fast before he said any more. “This
warn’t a put-up thing.”

“And what the devil’s a put-up thing?” demanded the doctor, impatiently.

“We call it a put-up robbery, ladies,” said Blathers, turning to them,
as if he compassioned their ignorance, but had a contempt for the
doctor’s, “when the servants is in it.”

“Nobody suspected them, in this case,” said Mrs. Maylie.

“Wery likely not, ma’am,” replied Blathers, “but they might have been
in it for all that.”

“More likely on that wery account,” said Duff.

“We find it was a town hand,” said Blathers, continuing his report;
“for the style of work is first-rate.”

“Wery pretty indeed it is,” remarked Duff, in an under tone.

“There was two of ’em in it,” continued Blathers, “and they had a boy
with ’em; that’s plain from the size of the window. That’s all to be
said at present. We’ll see this lad that you’ve got up stairs at once,
if you please.”

“Perhaps they will take something to drink first, Mrs. Maylie?” said
the doctor, his face brightening up as if some new thought had occurred
to him.

“Oh! to be sure!” exclaimed Rose, eagerly. “You shall have it
immediately, if you will.”

“Why, thank you, miss!” said Blathers, drawing his coat-sleeve across
his mouth; “it’s dry work, this sort of duty. Anything that’s handy,
miss; don’t put yourself out of the way on our accounts.”

“What shall it be?” asked the doctor, following the young lady to the
sideboard.

“A little drop of spirits, master, if it’s all the same,” replied
Blathers. “It’s a cold ride from London, ma’am; and I always find that
spirits comes home warmer to the feelings.”

This interesting communication was addressed to Mrs. Maylie, who
received it very graciously. While it was being conveyed to her, the
doctor slipped out of the room.

“Ah!” said Mr. Blathers, not holding his wine-glass by the stem, but
grasping the bottom between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand,
and placing it in front of his chest; “I have seen a good many pieces
of business like this, in my time, ladies.”

“That crack down in the back lane at Edmonton, Blathers,” said Mr.
Duff, assisting his colleague’s memory.

“That was something in this way, warn’t it?” rejoined Mr. Blathers;
“that was done by Conkey Chickweed, that was.”

“You always gave that to him,” replied Duff. “It was the Family Pet, I
tell you, and Conkey hadn’t any more to do with it than I had.”

“Get out!” retorted Mr. Blathers; “I know better. Do you mind that time
Conkey was robbed of his money, though? What a start that was! better
than any novel-book I ever see!”

“What was that?” inquired Rose, anxious to encourage any symptoms of
goodhumour in the unwelcome visiters.

“It was a robbery, miss, that hardly anybody would have been down
upon,” said Blathers. “This here Conkey Chickweed——”

“Conkey means Nosey, ma’am,” interposed Duff.

“Of course the lady knows that, don’t she?” demanded Mr. Blathers.
“Always interrupting, you are, partner. This here Conkey Chickweed,
miss, kept a public-house over Battlebridge way, and had a cellar,
where a good many young lords went to see cockfighting, and
badger-drawing, and that; and a wery intellectual manner the sports
was conducted in, for I’ve seen ’em off’en. He warn’t one of the
family at that time, and one night he was robbed of three hundred
and twenty-seven guineas in a canvass bag, that was stole out of his
bedroom in the dead of night by a tall man with a black patch over his
eye, who had concealed himself under the bed, and after committing the
robbery, jumped slap out of window, which was only a story high. He
was wery quick about it. But Conkey was quick, too; for he was woke by
the noise, and darting out of bed, fired a blunderbuss arter him, and
roused the neighbourhood. They set up a hue-and-cry directly, and when
they came to look about ’em, found that Conkey had hit the robber; for
there was traces of blood all the way to some palings a good distance
off, and there they lost ’em. However, he had made off with the blunt,
and, consequently, the name of Mr. Chickweed, licensed witler, appeared
in the Gazette among the other bankrupts; and all manner of benefits
and subscriptions, and I don’t know what all, was got up for the poor
man, who was in a wery low state of mind about his loss, and went up
and down the streets for three or four days, pulling his hair off in
such a desperate manner that many people was afraid he might be going
to make away with himself. One day he come up to the office all in a
hurry, and had a private interview with the magistrate, who, after a
good deal of talk, rings the bell, and orders Jem Spyers in (Jem was
a active officer), and tells him to go and assist Mr. Chickweed in
apprehending the man as robbed his house. ‘I see him, Spyers,’ said
Chickweed, ‘pass my house yesterday morning.’—‘Why didn’t you up, and
collar him?’ says Spyers.—‘I was so struck all of a heap that you
might have fractured my skull with a toothpick,’ says the poor man;
‘but we’re sure to have him, for between ten and eleven o’clock at
night he passed again.’ Spyers no sooner heard this than he put some
clean linen and a comb in his pocket, in case he should have to stop
a day or two; and away he goes, and sets himself down at one of the
public-house windows behind a little red curtain, with his hat on,
already to bolt at a moment’s notice. He was smoking his pipe here late
at night, when all of a sudden Chickweed roars out—‘Here he is! Stop
thief! Murder!’ Jem Spyers dashes out; and there he sees Chickweed
tearing down the street full-cry. Away goes Spyers; on keeps Chickweed;
round turns the people; everybody roars out, ‘Thieves!’ and Chickweed
himself keeps on shouting all the time, like mad. Spyers loses sight
of him a minute as he turns a corner—shoots round—sees a little
crowd—dives in. ‘Which is the man?’—‘D—me!’ says Chickweed, ‘I’ve
lost him again!’

“It was a remarkable occurrence, but he warn’t to be seen nowhere, so
they went back to the public-house; and next morning, Spyers took his
old place, and looked out from behind the curtain for a tall man with a
black patch over his eye, till his own two eyes ached again. At last,
he couldn’t help shutting ’em to ease ’em a minute, and the very moment
he did so, he hears Chickweed roaring out, ‘Here he is!’ Off he starts
once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and
after twice as long a run as the yesterday’s one, the man’s lost again!
This was done once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out
that Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks
with him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had
gone mad with grief.”

“What did Jem Spyers say?” inquired the doctor, who had returned to the
room shortly after the commencement of the story.

“Jem Spyers,” resumed the officer, “for a long time said nothing at
all, and listened to everything without seeming to, which shewed he
understood his business. But one morning he walked into the bar, and
taking out his snuff-box, said, ‘Chickweed, I’ve found out who’s done
this here robbery.’—‘Have you?’ said Chickweed. ‘Oh, my dear Spyers,
only let me have wengeance, and I shall die contented! Oh, my dear
Spyers, where is the villain?’—‘Come!’ said Spyers, offering him a
pinch of snuff, ‘none of that gammon! You did it yourself.’ So he
had; and a good bit of money he had made by it, too; and nobody would
ever have found it out, if he hadn’t been so precious anxious to keep
up appearances; that’s more!” said Mr. Blathers, putting down his
wine-glass, and clinking the handcuffs together.

“Very curious, indeed,” observed the doctor. “Now, if you please, you
can walk up stairs.”

“If _you_ please, sir,” returned Mr. Blathers; and closely following
Mr. Losberne, the two officers ascended to Oliver’s bedroom, Mr. Giles
preceding the party with a lighted candle.

Oliver had been dozing, but looked worse, and was more feverish than he
had appeared yet. Being assisted by the doctor, he managed to sit up
in bed for a minute or so, and looked at the strangers without at all
understanding what was going forward, and, in fact, without seeming to
recollect where he was, or what had been passing.

“This,” said Mr. Losberne, speaking softly, but with great vehemence
notwithstanding, “this is the lad, who, being accidentally wounded by a
spring-gun in some boyish trespass on Mr. What-d’ye-call-him’s grounds,
at the back here, comes to the house for assistance this morning, and
is immediately laid hold of and maltreated by that ingenious gentleman
with the candle in his hand, who has placed his life in considerable
danger, as I can professionally certify.”

[Illustration: _Oliver waited on by the Bow-Street Runners._

London, Richard Bentley, May 1, 1838.]

Messrs. Blathers and Duff looked at Mr. Giles, as he was thus
recommended to their notice; and the bewildered butler gazed from them
towards Oliver, and from Oliver towards Mr. Losberne, with a most
ludicrous mixture of fear and perplexity.

“You don’t mean to deny that, I suppose?” said the doctor, laying
Oliver gently down again.

“It was all done for the—for the best, sir!” answered Giles. “I am
sure I thought it was the boy, or I wouldn’t have meddled with him. I
am not of an inhuman disposition, sir.”

“Thought it was what boy?” inquired the senior officer.

“The housebreaker’s boy, sir!” replied Giles. “They—they certainly had
a boy.”

“Well, do you think so now?” inquired Blathers.

“Think what, now?” replied Giles, looking vacantly at his questioner.

“Think it’s the same boy, stupid-head?” rejoined Mr. Blathers,
impatiently.

“I don’t know; I really don’t know,” said Giles, with a rueful
countenance. “I couldn’t swear to him.”

“What do you think?” asked Mr. Blathers.

“I don’t know what to think,” replied poor Giles. “I don’t think it is
the boy; indeed, I’m almost certain that it isn’t. You know it can’t
be.”

“Has this man been a-drinking, sir?” inquired Blathers, turning to the
doctor.

“What a precious muddle-headed chap you are!” said Duff, addressing Mr.
Giles, with supreme contempt.

Mr. Losberne had been feeling the patient’s pulse during this short
dialogue; but he now rose from the chair by the bedside, and remarked,
that if the officers had any doubts upon the subject, they would
perhaps like to step into the next room, and have Brittles before them.

Acting upon this suggestion, they adjourned to a neighbouring
apartment, where Mr. Brittles, being called in, involved himself and
his respected superior in such a wonderful maze of fresh contradictions
and impossibilities as tended to throw no particular light upon any
thing, save the fact of his own strong mystification; except, indeed,
his declarations that he should’nt know the real boy if he were put
before him that instant; that he had only taken Oliver to be he,
because Mr. Giles had said he was; and that Mr. Giles had, five minutes
previously, admitted in the kitchen that he began to be very much
afraid he had been a little too hasty.

Among other ingenious surmises, the question was then raised, whether
Mr. Giles had really hit anybody, and upon examination of the fellow
pistol to that which he had fired, it turned out to have no more
destructive loading than gunpowder and brown paper,—a discovery which
made a considerable impression on every body but the doctor, who had
drawn the ball about ten minutes before. Upon no one, however, did
it make a greater impression than on Mr. Giles himself; who, after
labouring for some hours under the fear of having mortally wounded a
fellow-creature, eagerly caught at this new idea, and favoured it to
the utmost. Finally, the officers, without troubling themselves very
much about Oliver, left the Chertsey constable in the house, and took
up their rest for that night in the town, promising to return next
morning.

With the next morning there came a rumour that two men and a boy
were in the cage at Kingston, who had been apprehended overnight
under suspicious circumstances; and to Kingston Messrs. Blathers and
Duff journeyed accordingly. The suspicious circumstances, however,
resolving themselves, on investigation, into the one fact, that they
had been discovered sleeping under a haystack, which, although a great
crime, is only punishable by imprisonment, and is, in the merciful
eye of the English law, and its comprehensive love of all the king’s
subjects, held to be no satisfactory proof, in the absence of all
other evidence, that the sleeper, or sleepers, have committed burglary
accompanied with violence, and have therefore rendered themselves
liable to the punishment of death—Messrs. Blathers and Duff came back
again as wise as they went.

In short, after some more examination, and a great deal more
conversation, a neighbouring magistrate was readily induced to take the
joint bail of Mrs. Maylie and Mr. Losberne for Oliver’s appearance if
he should ever be called upon; and Blathers and Duff, being rewarded
with a couple of guineas, returned to town with divided opinions on
the subject of their expedition: the latter gentleman, on a mature
consideration of all the circumstances, inclining to the belief that
the burglarious attempt had originated with the Family Pet; and the
former being equally disposed to concede the full merit of it to the
great Mr. Conkey Chickweed.

Meanwhile, Oliver gradually throve and prospered under the united care
of Mrs. Maylie, Rose, and the kind-hearted Mr. Losberne. If fervent
prayers, gushing from hearts overcharged with gratitude, be heard in
heaven—and if they be not, what prayers are?—the blessings which the
orphan child called down upon them sunk into their souls, diffusing
peace and happiness.




CHAPTER XXXI.

OF THE HAPPY LIFE OLIVER BEGAN TO LEAD WITH HIS KIND FRIENDS.


OLIVER’S ailings were neither slight nor few. In addition to the pain
and delay attendant upon a broken limb, his exposure to the wet and
cold had brought on fever and ague, which hung about him for many
weeks, and reduced him sadly. But at length he began, by slow degrees,
to get better, and to be able to say sometimes, in a few tearful words,
how deeply he felt the goodness of the two sweet ladies, and how
ardently he hoped that, when he grew strong and well again, he could
do something to shew his gratitude; only something which would let
them see the love and duty with which his breast was full; something,
however slight, which would prove to them that their gentle kindness
had not been cast away, but that the poor boy whom their charity had
rescued from misery, or death, was eager and anxious to serve them with
all his heart and soul.

“Poor fellow!” said Rose, when Oliver had been one day feebly
endeavouring to utter the words of thankfulness that rose to his pale
lips,—“you shall have many opportunities of serving us, if you will.
We are going into the country, and my aunt intends that you shall
accompany us. The quiet place, the pure air, and all the pleasures and
beauties of spring, will restore you in a few days, and we will employ
you in a hundred ways when you can bear the trouble.”

“The trouble!” cried Oliver. “Oh! dear lady, if I could but work for
you—if I could only give you pleasure by watering your flowers, or
watching your birds, or running up and down the whole day long to make
you happy, what would I give to do it?”

“You shall give nothing at all,” said Miss Maylie, smiling; “for, as I
told you before, we shall employ you in a hundred ways; and if you only
take half the trouble to please us that you promise now, you will make
me very happy indeed.”

“Happy, ma’am!” cried Oliver; “oh, how kind of you to say so!”

“You will make me happier than I can tell you,” replied the young lady.
“To think that my dear good aunt should have been the means of rescuing
any one from such sad misery as you have described to us, would be an
unspeakable pleasure to me; but to know that the object of her goodness
and compassion was sincerely grateful, and attached in consequence,
would delight me more than you can well imagine. Do you understand me?”
she inquired, watching Oliver’s thoughtful face.

“Oh yes, ma’am, yes!” replied Oliver, eagerly; “but I was thinking that
I am ungrateful now.”

“To whom?” inquired the young lady.

“To the kind gentleman and the dear old nurse who took so much care of
me before,” rejoined Oliver. “If they knew how happy I am, they would
be pleased, I am sure.”

“I am sure they would,” rejoined Oliver’s benefactress; “and Mr.
Losberne has already been kind enough to promise that, when you are
well enough to bear the journey, he will carry you to see them.”

“Has he, ma’am?” cried Oliver, his face brightening with pleasure. “I
don’t know what I shall do for joy when I see their kind faces once
again!”

In a short time Oliver was sufficiently recovered to undergo the
fatigue of this expedition; and one morning he and Mr. Losberne set out
accordingly in a little carriage which belonged to Mrs. Maylie. When
they came to Chertsey Bridge, Oliver turned very pale, and uttered a
loud exclamation.

“What’s the matter with the boy?” cried the doctor, as usual, all in a
bustle. “Do you see anything—hear anything—feel anything—eh?”

“That, sir,” cried Oliver, pointing out of the carriage window. “That
house!”

“Yes; well, what of it? Stop, coachman. Pull up here,” cried the
doctor. “What of the house, my man—eh?”

“The thieves—the house they took me to,” whispered Oliver.

“The devil it is!” cried the doctor. “Halloa, there! let me out!” But
before the coachman could dismount from his box, he had tumbled out of
the coach, by some means or other and, running down to the deserted
tenement, began kicking at the door like a madman.

“Halloa!” said a little, ugly hump-backed man, opening the door so
suddenly that the doctor, from the very impetus of his last kick,
nearly fell forward into the passage. “What’s the matter here?”

“Matter!” exclaimed the other, collaring him, without a moment’s
reflection. “A good deal. Robbery is the matter.”

“There’ll be murder, too,” replied the hump-backed man, coolly, “if you
don’t take your hands off. Do you hear me?”

“I hear you,” said the doctor, giving his captive a hearty shake.
“Where’s—confound the fellow, what’s his rascally name—Sikes—that’s
it. Where’s Sikes, you thief?”

The hump-backed man stared as if in excess of amazement and
indignation; and twisting himself dexterously from the doctor’s grasp,
growled forth a volley of horrid oaths, and retired into the house.
Before he could shut the door, however, the doctor had passed into the
parlour, without a word of parley. He looked anxiously round: not an
article of furniture, not a vestige of anything, animate or inanimate,
not even the position of the cupboards, answered Oliver’s description!

“Now,” said the hump-backed man, who had watched him keenly, “what do
you mean by coming into my house in this violent way? Do you want to
rob me, or to murder me?—which is it?”

“Did you ever know a man come out to do either in a chariot and pair,
you ridiculous old vampire?” said the irritable doctor.

“What do you want, then?” demanded the hunchback, fiercely. “Will you
take yourself off before I do you a mischief? curse you!”

“As soon as I think proper,” said Mr. Losberne, looking into the other
parlour, which, like the first, bore no resemblance whatever to
Oliver’s account of it. “I shall find you out some day, my friend.”

“Will you?” sneered the ill-favoured cripple. “If you ever want me,
I’m here. I haven’t lived here mad, and all alone, for five-and-twenty
years, to be scared by you. You shall pay for this; you shall pay for
this.” And so saying, the mis-shapen little demon set up a hideous
yell, and danced upon the ground as if frantic with rage.

“Stupid enough, this,” muttered the doctor to himself; “the boy must
have made a mistake. There; put that in your pocket, and shut yourself
up again.” With these words he flung the hunchback a piece of money,
and returned to the carriage.

The man followed to the chariot door, uttering the wildest imprecations
and curses all the way; but as Mr. Losberne turned to speak to the
driver, he looked into the carriage, and eyed Oliver for an instant
with a glance so sharp and fierce, and at the same time so furious
and vindictive, that, waking or sleeping, he could not forget it for
months afterwards. He continued to utter the most fearful imprecations
until the driver had resumed his seat, and when they were once more on
their way, they could see him some distance behind, beating his feet
upon the ground, and tearing his hair in transports of frenzied rage.

“I am an ass!” said the doctor, after a long silence. “Did you know
that before, Oliver?”

“No, sir.”

“Then don’t forget it another time.”

“An ass,” said the doctor again, after a further silence of some
minutes. “Even if it had been the right place, and the right fellows
had been there, what could I have done single-handed? And if I had had
assistance, I see no good that I should have done, except leading to
my own exposure, and an unavoidable statement of the manner in which I
have hushed up this business. That would have served me right, though.
I am always involving myself in some scrape or other by acting upon
these impulses, and it might have done me good.”

Now the fact was, that the excellent doctor had never acted upon
anything else but impulse all through his life; and it was no bad
compliment to the nature of the impulses which governed him, that so
far from being involved in any peculiar troubles or misfortunes, he had
the warmest respect and esteem of all who knew him. If the truth must
be told, he was a little out of temper, for a minute or two, at being
disappointed in procuring corroborative evidence of Oliver’s story on
the very first occasion on which he had a chance of obtaining any. He
soon came round again, however, and finding that Oliver’s replies to
his questions were still as straightforward and consistent, and still
delivered with as much apparent sincerity and truth, as they had ever
been, he made up his mind to attach full credence to them from that
time forth.

As Oliver knew the name of the street in which Mr. Brownlow resided,
they were enabled to drive straight thither. When the coach turned into
it, his heart beat so violently that he could scarcely draw his breath.

“Now, my boy, which house is it?” inquired Mr. Losberne.

“That, that!” replied Oliver, pointing eagerly out of the window. “The
white house. Oh! make haste! Pray make haste! I feel as if I should
die: it makes me tremble so.”

“Come, come!” said the good doctor, patting him on the shoulder. “You
will see them directly, and they will be overjoyed to find you safe and
well.”

“Oh! I hope so!” cried Oliver. “They were so good to me; so very very
good to me, sir.”

The coach rolled on. It stopped. No; that was the wrong house. The next
door. It went on a few paces, and stopped again. Oliver looked up at
the windows, with tears of happy expectation coursing down his face.

Alas! the white house was empty, and there was a bill in the
window—“To Let.”

“Knock at the next door,” cried Mr. Losberne, taking Oliver’s arm
in his. “What has become of Mr. Brownlow, who used to live in the
adjoining house, do you know?”

The servant did not know; but would go and inquire. She presently
returned, and said, that Mr. Brownlow had sold off his goods, and gone
to the West Indies six weeks before. Oliver clasped his hands, and sank
feebly backwards.

“Has his housekeeper gone, too?” inquired Mr. Losberne, after a
moment’s pause.

“Yes, sir;” replied the servant. “The old gentleman, the housekeeper,
and a gentleman, a friend of Mr. Brownlow’s, all went together.”

“Then turn towards home again,” said Mr. Losberne to the driver, “and
don’t stop to bait the horses till you get out of this confounded
London!”

“The book-stall keeper, sir?” said Oliver. “I know the way there. See
him, pray sir! Do see him!”

“My poor boy, this is disappointment enough for one day,” said the
doctor. “Quite enough for both of us. If we go to the book-stall
keeper’s we shall certainly find that he is dead, or has set his house
on fire, or run away. No; home again straight!” And in obedience to the
doctor’s first impulse, home they went.

This bitter disappointment caused Oliver much sorrow and grief, even
in the midst of his happiness; for he had pleased himself many times
during his illness with thinking of all that Mr. Brownlow and Mrs.
Bedwin would say to him, and what delight it would be to tell them how
many long days and nights he had passed in reflecting upon what they
had done for him, and in bewailing his cruel separation from them. The
hope of eventually clearing himself with them, too, and explaining how
he had been forced away, had buoyed him up and sustained him under
many of his recent trials; and now the idea that they should have gone
so far, and carried with them the belief that he was an impostor and
a robber,—a belief which might remain uncontradicted to his dying
day,—was almost more than he could bear.

The circumstance occasioned no alteration, however, in the behaviour
of his benefactors. After another fortnight, when the fine warm weather
had fairly begun, and every tree and flower was putting forth its young
leaves and rich blossoms, they made preparations for quitting the house
at Chertsey for some months. Sending the plate which had so excited the
Jew’s cupidity to the banker’s, and leaving Giles and another servant
in care of the house, they departed for a cottage some distance in the
country, and took Oliver with them.

Who can describe the pleasure and delight, the peace of mind and soft
tranquillity, which the sickly boy felt in the balmy air, and among
the green hills and rich woods, of an inland village! Who can tell how
scenes of peace and quietude sink into the minds of pain-worn dwellers
in close and noisy places, and carry their own freshness deep into
their jaded hearts! Men who have lived in crowded, pent-up streets,
through whole lives of toil, and never wished for change; men, to whom
custom has indeed been second nature, and who have come almost to love
each brick and stone that formed the narrow boundaries of their daily
walks—even they, with the hand of death upon them, have been known
to yearn at last for one short glimpse of Nature’s face; and carried
far from the scenes of their old pains and pleasures, have seemed
to pass at once into a new state of being, and crawling forth from
day to day to some green sunny spot, have had such memories wakened
up within them by the mere sight of sky, and hill, and plain, and
glistening water, that a foretaste of heaven itself has soothed their
quick decline, and they have sunk into their tombs as peacefully as the
sun—whose setting they watched from their lonely chamber window but a
few hours before—faded from their dim and feeble sight! The memories
which peaceful country scenes call up are not of this world, or of its
thoughts or hopes. Their gentle influence may teach us to weave fresh
garlands for the graves of those we loved, may purify our thoughts,
and bear down before it old enmity and hatred; but beneath all this,
there lingers in the least reflective mind a vague and half-formed
consciousness of having held such feelings long before in some remote
and distant time, which calls up solemn thoughts of distant times to
come, and bends down pride and worldliness beneath it.

It was a lovely spot to which they repaired, and Oliver, whose days
had been spent among squalid crowds, and in the midst of noise and
brawling, seemed to enter upon a new existence there. The rose and
honeysuckle clung to the cottage walls, the ivy crept round the trunks
of the trees, and the garden-flowers perfumed the air with delicious
odours. Hard by, was a little churchyard: not crowded with tall,
unsightly gravestones, but full of humble mounds, covered with fresh
turf and moss, beneath which the old people of the village lay at rest.
Oliver often wandered here, and thinking of the wretched grave in which
his mother lay, would sometimes sit him down and sob unseen; but, as he
raised his eyes to the deep sky overhead, he would cease to think of
her as lying in the ground, and weep for her sadly, but without pain.

It was a happy time. The days were peaceful and serene, and the nights
brought with them no fear or care; no languishing in a wretched prison,
or associating with wretched men: nothing but pleasant and happy
thoughts. Every morning he went to a white-headed old gentleman, who
lived near the little church, who taught him to read better, and to
write, and spoke so kindly, and took such pains, that Oliver could
never try enough to please him. Then he would walk with Mrs. Maylie
and Rose, and hear them talk of books, or perhaps sit near them, in
some shady place, and listen whilst the young lady read, which he could
have done till it grew too dark to see the letters. Then he had his own
lesson for the next day to prepare, and at this he would work hard, in
a little room which looked into the garden, till evening came slowly
on, when the ladies would walk out again, and he with them; listening
with such pleasure to all they said, and so happy if they wanted a
flower that he could climb to reach, or had forgotten anything he could
run to fetch, that he could never be quick enough about it. When it
became quite dark, and they returned home, the young lady would sit
down to the piano, and play some melancholy air, or sing, in a low and
gentle voice, some old song which it pleased her aunt to hear. There
would be no candles at such times as these, and Oliver would sit by one
of the windows, listening to the sweet music, while tears of tranquil
joy stole down his face.

And when Sunday came, how differently the day was spent from any manner
in which he had ever spent it yet! and how happily, too; like all
the other days in that most happy time! There was the little church,
in the morning, with the green leaves fluttering at the windows, the
birds singing without, and the sweet-smelling air stealing in at the
low porch, and filling the homely building with its fragrance. The
poor people were so neat and clean, and knelt so reverently in prayer,
that it seemed a pleasure, not a tedious duty, their assembling there
together; and though the singing might be rude, it was real, and
sounded more musical (to Oliver’s ears at least) than any he had ever
heard in church before. Then there were the walks as usual, and many
calls at the clean houses of the labouring men; and at night, Oliver
read a chapter or two from the Bible, which he had been studying all
the week, and in the performance of which duty he felt more proud and
pleased than if he had been the clergyman himself.

In the morning, Oliver would be a-foot by six o’clock, roaming the
fields and surveying the hedges, far and wide, for nosegays of wild
flowers, with which he would return laden home, and which it took great
care and consideration to arrange, to the best advantage, for the
embellishment of the breakfast-table. There was fresh groundsel, too,
for Miss Maylie’s birds, with which Oliver—who had been studying the
subject under the able tuition of the village clerk—would decorate
the cages in the most approved taste. When the birds were made all
spruce and smart for the day, there was usually some little commission
of charity to execute in the village; or, failing that, there was
always something to do in the garden, or about the plants, to which
Oliver—who had studied this science also under the same master, who
was a gardener by trade—applied himself with hearty goodwill till Miss
Rose made her appearance, when there were a thousand commendations to
be bestowed upon all he had done, for which one of those light-hearted,
beautiful smiles was an ample recompence.

So three months glided away; three months which, in the life of
the most blessed and favoured of mortals, would have been unmixed
happiness; but which, in Oliver’s troubled and clouded dawn, were
felicity indeed. With the purest and most amiable generosity on one
side, and the truest, and warmest, and most soul-felt gratitude on the
other, it is no wonder that, by the end of that short time, Oliver
Twist had become completely domesticated with the old lady and her
niece; and that the fervent attachment of his young and sensitive
heart was repaid by their pride in, and attachment to, himself.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEREIN THE HAPPINESS OF OLIVER AND HIS FRIENDS EXPERIENCES A SUDDEN
CHECK.


SPRING flew swiftly by, and summer came; and if the village had been
beautiful at first, it was now in the full glow and luxuriance of
its richness. The great trees, which had looked shrunken and bare in
the earlier months, had now burst into strong life and health, and
stretching forth their green arms over the thirsty ground, converted
open and naked spots into choice nooks, where was a deep and pleasant
shade from which to look upon the wide prospect, steeped in sunshine,
which lay stretched out beyond. The earth had donned her mantle of
brightest green, and shed her richest perfumes abroad. It was the prime
and vigour of the year, and all things were glad and flourishing.

Still the same quiet life went on at the little cottage, and the same
cheerful serenity prevailed among its inmates. Oliver had long since
grown stout and healthy; but health or sickness made no difference in
his warm feelings to those about him, (though they do in the feelings
of a great many people,) and he was still the same gentle, attached,
affectionate creature that he had been when pain and suffering had
wasted his strength, and he was dependent for every slight attention
and comfort on those who tended him.

One beautiful night they had taken a longer walk than was customary
with them, for the day had been unusually warm, and there was a
brilliant moon, and a light wind had sprung up, which was unusually
refreshing. Rose had been in high spirits, too, and they had walked
on, in merry conversation, until they had far exceeded their ordinary
bounds. Mrs. Maylie was fatigued, and they returned more slowly home.
The young lady, merely throwing off her simple bonnet, sat down to the
piano, as usual; after running abstractedly over the keys for a few
minutes, she fell into a low and very solemn air; and as she played it,
they heard her sob as if she were weeping.

“Rose, my dear?” said the elder lady.

Rose made no reply, but played a little quicker, as though the sound
had roused her from some painful thoughts.

“Rose, my love!” cried Mrs. Maylie, rising hastily, and bending over
her. “What is this? Your face is bathed in tears. My dear child, what
distresses you?”

“Nothing, aunt,—nothing,” replied the young lady. “I don’t know what
it is; I can’t describe it; but I feel so low to-night, and——”

“Not ill, my love?” interposed Mrs. Maylie.

“No, no! Oh, not ill!” replied Rose, shuddering, as though some deadly
chillness were passing over her while she spoke; “at least, I shall be
better presently. Close the window, pray.”

Oliver hastened to comply with the request; and the young lady, making
an effort to recover her cheerfulness, strove to play some livelier
tune; but her fingers dropped powerless on the keys, and covering her
face with her hands, she sank upon a sofa, and gave vent to the tears
which she was now unable to repress.

“My child!” said the elder lady, folding her arms about her, “I never
saw you thus before.”

“I would not alarm you if I could avoid it,” rejoined Rose; “but indeed
I have tried very hard, and cannot help this. I fear I _am_ ill, aunt.”

She was, indeed; for, when candles were brought, they saw that in the
very short time which had elapsed since their return home, the hue of
her countenance had changed to a marble whiteness. Its expression had
lost nothing of its beauty, but yet it was changed, and there was an
anxious, haggard look about that gentle face which it had never worn
before. Another minute, and it was suffused with a crimson flush, and
a heavy wildness came over the soft blue eye; again this disappeared,
like the shadow thrown by a passing cloud, and she was once more deadly
pale.

Oliver, who watched the old lady anxiously, observed that she was
alarmed by these appearances, and so, in truth, was he; but seeing that
she affected to make light of them, he endeavoured to do the same; and
they so far succeeded, that when Rose was persuaded by her aunt to
retire for the night, she was in better spirits, and appeared even in
better health, and assured them that she felt certain she should wake
in the morning quite well.

“I hope, ma’am,” said Oliver, when Mrs. Maylie returned, “that nothing
serious is the matter? Miss Maylie doesn’t look well to-night, but——”

The old lady motioned him not to speak, and sitting herself down in a
dark corner of the room, remained silent for some time. At length, she
said, in a trembling voice,—

“I hope not, Oliver. I have been very happy with her for some
years—too happy, perhaps, and it may be time that I should meet with
some misfortune; but I hope it is not this.”

“What misfortune, ma’am?” inquired Oliver.

“The heavy blow,” said the old lady, almost inarticulately, “of losing
the dear girl who has so long been my comfort and happiness.”

“Oh! God forbid!” exclaimed Oliver, hastily.

“Amen to that, my child!” said the old lady, wringing her hands.

“Surely there is no danger of anything so dreadful!” said Oliver. “Two
hours ago she was quite well.”

“She is very ill now,” rejoined Mrs. Maylie, “and will be worse, I am
sure. My dear, dear Rose! Oh, what should I do without her!”

The lady sank beneath her desponding thoughts, and gave way to such
great grief that Oliver, suppressing his own emotion, ventured to
remonstrate with her, and to beg earnestly that, for the sake of the
dear young lady herself, she would be more calm.

“And consider, ma’am,” said Oliver, as the tears forced themselves into
his eyes, despite his efforts to the contrary, “Oh! consider how young
and good she is, and what pleasure and comfort she gives to all about
her. I am sure—certain—quite certain—that, for your sake, who are
so good yourself, and for her own, and for the sake of all she makes so
happy, she will not die. God will never let her die yet.”

“Hush!” said Mrs. Maylie, laying her hand on Oliver’s head. “You think
like a child, poor boy; and although what you say may be natural, it is
wrong. But you teach me my duty, notwithstanding. I had forgotten it
for a moment, Oliver, and I hope I may be pardoned, for I am old, and
have seen enough of illness and death to know the pain they leave to
those behind. I have seen enough, too, to know that it is not always
the youngest and best who are spared to those that love them; but this
should give us comfort rather than sorrow, for Heaven is just, and such
things teach us impressively that there is a far brighter world than
this, and that the passage to it is speedy. God’s will be done! but I
love her, and He alone knows how well!”

Oliver was surprised to see that as Mrs. Maylie said these words,
she checked her lamentations as though by one struggle, and drawing
herself up as she spoke, became quite composed and firm. He was still
more astonished to find that this firmness lasted, and that, under
all the care and watching which ensued, Mrs. Maylie was ever ready
and collected, performing all the duties which devolved upon her
steadily, and, to all external appearance, even cheerfully. But he was
young, and did not know what strong minds are capable of under trying
circumstances. How should he, indeed, when their possessors so seldom
know themselves?

An anxious night ensued, and when morning came, Mrs. Maylie’s
predictions were but too well verified. Rose was in the first stage of
a high and dangerous fever.

“We must be active, Oliver, and not give way to useless grief,” said
Mrs. Maylie, laying her finger on her lip, as she looked steadily into
his face; “this letter must be sent, with all possible expedition, to
Mr. Losberne. It must be carried to the market-town, which is not more
than four miles off, by the footpath across the fields, and thence
dispatched by an express on horseback straight to Chertsey. The people
at the inn will undertake to do this, and I can trust you to see it
done, I know.”

Oliver could make no reply, but looked his anxiety to be gone at once.

“Here is another letter,” said Mrs. Maylie, pausing to reflect; “but
whether to send it now, or wait until I see how Rose goes on, I
scarcely know. I would not forward it unless I feared the worst.”

“Is it for Chertsey, too, ma’am?” inquired Oliver, impatient to execute
his commission, and holding out his trembling hand for the letter.

“No,” replied the old lady, giving it him mechanically. Oliver glanced
at it, and saw that it was directed to Harry Maylie, Esquire, at some
lord’s house in the country; where, he could not make out.

“Shall it go, ma’am?” asked Oliver, looking up impatiently.

“I think not,” replied Mrs. Maylie, taking it back. “I will wait till
to-morrow.”

With these words she gave Oliver her purse, and he started off without
more delay at the greatest speed he could muster.

Swiftly he ran across the fields, and down the little lanes which
sometimes divided them, now almost hidden by the high corn on either
side, and now emerging into an open field, where the mowers and
haymakers were busy at their work; nor did he stop once, save now and
then, for a few seconds, to recover breath, until he emerged, in a
great heat, and covered with dust, on the little market-place of the
market-town.

Here he paused, and looked about for the inn. There was a white bank,
and a red brewery, and a yellow town-hall; and in one corner a large
house, with all the wood about it painted green, before which was the
sign of “The George,” to which he hastened directly it caught his eye.

Oliver spoke to a postboy who was dozing under the gateway, and who,
after hearing what he wanted, referred him to the hostler; who, after
hearing all he had to say again, referred him to the landlord, who was
a tall gentleman in a blue neckcloth, a white hat, drab breeches,
and boots with tops to match, and was leaning against a pump by the
stable-door, picking his teeth with a silver toothpick.

This gentleman walked with much deliberation to the bar to make out the
bill, which took a long time making out, and after it was ready, and
paid, a horse had to be saddled, and a man to be dressed, which took up
ten good minutes more; meanwhile, Oliver was in such a desperate state
of impatience and anxiety, that he felt as if he could have jumped
upon the horse himself, and galloped away full tear to the next stage.
At length, all was ready, and the little parcel having been handed
up, with many injunctions and entreaties for its speedy delivery,
the man set spurs to his horse, and rattling over the uneven paving
of the market-place, was out of the town, and galloping along the
turnpike-road, in a couple of minutes.

It was something to feel certain that assistance was sent for, and that
no time had been lost. Oliver hurried up the inn-yard with a somewhat
lighter heart, and was turning out of the gateway when he accidentally
stumbled against a tall man, wrapped in a cloak, who was that moment
coming out at the inn-door.

“Hah!” cried the man, fixing his eyes on Oliver, and suddenly
recoiling. “What the devil’s this?”

“I beg your pardon, sir,” said Oliver; “I was in a great hurry to get
home, and didn’t see you were coming.”

“Death!” muttered the man to himself, glaring at the boy with his large
dark eyes. “Who’d have thought it! Grind him to ashes! He’d start up
from a marble coffin to come in my way!”

“I am sorry, sir,” stammered Oliver, confused by the strange man’s wild
look. “I hope I have not hurt you?”

“Rot his bones!” murmured the man, in a horrible passion, between his
clenched teeth; “if I had only had the courage to say the word, I might
have been free of him in a night. Curses light upon your head, and
black death upon your heart, you imp! What are you doing here?”

The man shook his fist, and gnashed his teeth, as he uttered these
words incoherently; and advancing towards Oliver, as if with the
intention of aiming a blow at him, fell violently on the ground,
writhing and foaming, in a fit.

Oliver gazed for a moment at the fearful struggles of the madman (for
such he supposed him to be), and then darted into the house for help.
Having seen him safely carried into the hotel, he turned his face
homewards, running as fast as he could, to make up for lost time,
and recalling, with a great deal of astonishment and some fear, the
extraordinary behaviour of the person from whom he had just parted.

The circumstance did not dwell in his recollection long, however; for
when he reached the cottage, there was enough to occupy his mind, and
to drive all considerations of self completely from his memory.

Rose Maylie had rapidly grown worse, and before midnight was delirious.
A medical practitioner, who resided on the spot, was in constant
attendance upon her, and after first seeing the patient, he had taken
Mrs. Maylie aside, and pronounced her disorder to be one of a most
alarming nature. “In fact,” he said, “it would be little short of a
miracle if she recovered.”

How often did Oliver start from his bed that night, and stealing out,
with noiseless footstep, to the staircase, listen for the slightest
sound from the sick chamber! How often did a tremble shake his frame,
and cold drops of terror start upon his brow, when a sudden trampling
of feet caused him to fear that something too dreadful to think of had
even then occurred. And what had been the fervency of all the prayers
he had ever uttered, compared with those he poured forth now, in the
agony and passion of his supplication, for the life and health of the
gentle creature who was tottering on the deep grave’s verge!

The suspense, the fearful, acute suspense, of standing idly by while
the life of one we dearly love is trembling in the balance—the racking
thoughts that crowd upon the mind, and make the heart beat violently,
and the breath come thick, by the force of the images they conjure up
before it—the desperate anxiety _to be doing something_ to relieve
the pain, or lessen the danger, which we have no power to alleviate;
and the sinking of soul and spirit, which the sad remembrance of
our helplessness produces,—what tortures can equal these, and what
reflections or efforts can, in the full tide and fever of the time,
allay them!

Morning came, and the little cottage was lonely and still. People spoke
in whispers; anxious faces appeared at the gate from time to time,
and women and children went away in tears. All the livelong day, and
for hours after it had grown dark, Oliver paced softly up and down
the garden, raising his eyes every instant to the sick chamber, and
shuddering to see the darkened window looking as if death lay stretched
inside. Late at night, Mr. Losberne arrived. “It is hard,” said the
good doctor, turning away as he spoke; “so young—so much beloved—but
there is very little hope.”

Another morning, the sun shone brightly,—as brightly as if it looked
upon no misery or care; and, with every leaf and flower in full bloom
about her,—with life, and health, and sounds and sights of joy,
surrounding her on every side, the fair young creature lay wasting
fast. Oliver crept away to the old churchyard, and sitting down on one
of the green mounds, wept for her in silence.

There was such peace and beauty in the scene, so much of brightness
and mirth in the sunny landscape, such blithesome music in the songs
of the summer birds, such freedom in the rapid flight of the rook,
careering overhead, so much of life and joyousness in all, that
when the boy raised his aching eyes, and looked about, the thought
instinctively occurred to him, that this was not a time for death; that
Rose could surely never die when humbler things were all so glad and
gay; that graves were for cold and cheerless winter, not for sunlight
and fragrance. He almost thought that shrouds were for the old and
shrunken, and never wrapped the young and graceful form within their
ghastly folds.

A knell from the church bell broke harshly on these youthful thoughts.
Another—again! It was tolling for the funeral service. A group of
humble mourners entered the gate, and they wore white favours, for
the corpse was young. They stood uncovered by a grave; and there was
a mother—a mother once—among the weeping train. But the sun shone
brightly, and the birds sang on.

Oliver turned homewards, thinking on the many kindnesses he had
received from the young lady, and wishing that the time could come over
again, that he might never cease shewing her how grateful and attached
he was. He had no cause for self-reproach on the score of neglect,
or want of thought, for he had been devoted to her service; and yet
a hundred little occasions rose up before him on which he fancied he
might have been more zealous and more earnest, and wished he had been.
We need be careful how we deal with those about us, for every death
carries with it to some small circle of survivors thoughts of so much
omitted, and so little done—of so many things forgotten, and so many
more which might have been repaired, that such recollections are among
the bitterest we can have. There is no remorse so deep as that which
is unavailing; if we would be spared its tortures, let us remember this
in time.

When he reached home, Mrs. Maylie was sitting in the little parlour.
Oliver’s heart sank at sight of her, for she had never left the bedside
of her niece, and he trembled to think what change could have driven
her away. He learnt that she had fallen into a deep sleep, from which
she would waken either to recovery and life, or to bid them farewell,
and die.

They sat, listening, and afraid to speak, for hours. The untasted
meal was removed; and with looks which shewed that their thoughts
were elsewhere, they watched the sun as he sank lower and lower, and,
at length, cast over sky and earth those brilliant hues which herald
his departure. Their quick ears caught the sound of an approaching
footstep, and they both involuntarily darted towards the door, as Mr.
Losberne entered.

“What of Rose?” cried the old lady. “Tell me at once! I can bear it;
anything but suspense! Oh, tell me! in the name of Heaven!”

“You must compose yourself,” said the doctor, supporting her. “Be calm,
my dear ma’am, pray.”

“Let me go, in God’s name!” gasped Mrs. Maylie. “My dear child! She is
dead! She is dying!”

“No!” cried the doctor, passionately. “As He is good and merciful, she
will live to bless us all for years to come.”

The lady fell upon her knees, and tried to fold her hands together;
but the energy which had supported her so long fled to Heaven with her
first thanksgiving, and she sank back into the friendly arms which were
extended to receive her.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

    CONTAINS SOME INTRODUCTORY PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO A
    YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO NOW ARRIVES UPON THE SCENE, AND A NEW
    ADVENTURE WHICH HAPPENED TO OLIVER.


IT was almost too much happiness to bear. Oliver felt stunned and
stupified by the unexpected intelligence; he could not weep, or speak,
or rest. He had scarcely the power of understanding anything that had
passed, until, after a long ramble in the quiet evening air, a burst
of tears came to his relief, and he seemed to awaken all at once to
a full sense of the joyful change that had occurred, and the almost
insupportable load of anguish which had been taken from his breast.

The night was fast closing in when he returned homewards, laden with
flowers which he had culled with peculiar care for the adornment of
the sick chamber. As he walked briskly along the road, he heard behind
him the noise of some vehicle approaching at a furious pace. Looking
round, he saw that it was a post-chaise, driven at great speed; and as
the horses were galloping, and the road was narrow, he stood leaning
against a gate until it should have passed him by.

As it dashed on, Oliver caught a glimpse of a man in a white nightcap,
whose face seemed familiar to him, although his view was so brief
that he could not identify the person. In another second or two, the
nightcap was thrust out of the chaise-window, and a stentorian voice
bellowed to the driver to stop, which he did as soon as he could pull
up his horses, when the nightcap once again appeared, and the same
voice called Oliver by his name.

“Here!” cried the voice. “Master Oliver, what’s the news? Miss
Rose—Master O-li-ver.”

“Is it you, Giles?” cried Oliver, running up to the chaise-door.

Giles popped out his nightcap again, preparatory to making some reply,
when he was suddenly pulled back by a young gentleman who occupied the
other corner of the chaise, and who eagerly demanded what was the news.

“In a word,” cried the gentleman, “better or worse?”

“Better—much better!” replied Oliver, hastily.

“Thank Heaven!” exclaimed the gentleman. “You are sure?”

“Quite, sir,” replied Oliver; “the change took place only a few hours
ago, and Mr. Losberne says, that all danger is at an end.”

The gentleman said not another word, but, opening the chaise-door,
leaped out, and taking Oliver hurriedly by the arm, led him aside.

“This is quite certain?—there is no possibility of any mistake on your
part, my boy, is there?” demanded the gentleman, in a tremulous voice.
“Pray do not deceive me by awakening any hopes that are not to be
fulfilled.”

“I would not for the world, sir,” replied Oliver. “Indeed you may
believe me. Mr. Losberne’s words were, that she would live to bless us
all for many years to come. I heard him say so.”

The tears stood in Oliver’s eyes as he recalled the scene which was
the beginning of so much happiness, and the gentleman turned his face
away, and remained silent for some minutes. Oliver thought he heard
him sob more than once, but he feared to interrupt him by any further
remark—for he could well guess what his feelings were—and so stood
apart, feigning to be occupied with his nosegay.

All this time, Mr. Giles, with the white nightcap on, had been sitting
upon the steps of the chaise, supporting an elbow on each knee, and
wiping his eyes with a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief dotted with
white spots. That the honest fellow had not been feigning emotion was
abundantly demonstrated by the very red eyes with which he regarded the
young gentleman, when he turned round and addressed him.

“I think you had better go on to my mother’s in the chaise, Giles,”
said he. “I would rather walk slowly on, so as to gain a little time
before I see her. You can say I am coming.”

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Harry,” said Giles, giving a final polish to
his ruffled countenance with the handkerchief; “but if you would leave
the postboy to say that, I should be very much obliged to you. It
wouldn’t be proper for the maids to see me in this state, sir; I should
never have any more authority with them if they did.”

“Well,” rejoined Harry Maylie, smiling, “you can do as you like. Let
him go on with the portmanteaus, if you wish it, and do you follow
with us. Only first exchange that nightcap for some more appropriate
covering, or we shall be taken for madmen.”

Mr. Giles, reminded of his unbecoming costume, snatched off and
pocketed his nightcap, and substituted a hat of grave and sober shape,
which he took out of the chaise. This done, the postboy drove off, and
Giles, Mr. Maylie, and Oliver, followed at their leisure.

As they walked along, Oliver glanced from time to time with
much interest and curiosity at the new-comer. He seemed about
five-and-twenty years of age, and was of the middle height; his
countenance was frank and handsome, and his demeanour singularly easy
and prepossessing. Notwithstanding the differences between youth and
age, he bore so strong a likeness to the old lady that Oliver would
have had no great difficulty in imagining their relationship, even if
he had not already spoken of her as his mother.

Mrs. Maylie was anxiously waiting to receive her son when he reached
the cottage, and the meeting did not take place without great emotion
on both sides.

“Oh, mother!” whispered the young man, “why did you not write before?”

“I did write,” replied Mrs. Maylie; “but, on reflection, I determined
to keep back the letter until I had heard Mr. Losberne’s opinion.”

“But why,” said the young man, “why run the chance of that occurring
which so nearly happened? If Rose had—I cannot utter that word
now—if this illness had terminated differently, how could you ever
have forgiven yourself, or I been happy again?”

“If that _had_ been the case, Harry,” said Mrs. Maylie, “I fear your
happiness would have been effectually blighted, and that your arrival
here a day sooner or later would have been of very, very little import.”

“And who can wonder if it be so, mother?” rejoined the young man; “or
why should I say, _if_?—It is—it is—you know it, mother—you must
know it!”

“I know that she well deserves the best and purest love that the heart
of man can offer,” said Mrs. Maylie; “I know that the devotion and
affection of her nature require no ordinary return, but one that shall
be deep and lasting. If I did not feel this, and know, besides, that
a changed behaviour in one she loved would break her heart, I should
not feel my task so difficult of performance, or have to encounter so
many struggles in my own bosom, when I take what seems to me to be the
strict line of duty.”

“This is unkind, mother,” said Harry. “Do you still suppose that I am
so much a boy as not to know my own mind, or to mistake the impulses of
my own soul?”

“I think, my dear fellow,” returned Mrs. Maylie, laying her hand upon
his shoulder, “that youth has many generous impulses which do not last;
and that among them are some which, being gratified, become only the
more fleeting. Above all, I think,” said the lady, fixing her eyes on
her son’s face, “that if an enthusiastic, ardent, ambitious young man
has a wife on whose name is a stain, which, though it originate in no
fault of hers, may be visited by cold and sordid people upon her, and
upon his children also, and, in exact proportion to his success in the
world, be cast in his teeth, and made the subject of sneers against
him, he may—no matter how generous and good his nature—one day repent
of the connexion he formed in early life, and she may have the pain and
torture of knowing that he does so.”

“Mother,” said the young man, impatiently, “he would be a mere selfish
brute, unworthy alike of the name of man and of the woman you describe,
who acted thus.”

“You think so now, Harry,” replied his mother.

“And ever will!” said the young man. “The mental agony I have suffered
during the last two days wrings from me the undisguised avowal to you
of a passion which, as you well know, is not one of yesterday, nor one
I have lightly formed. On Rose, sweet, gentle girl! my heart is set as
firmly as ever heart of man was set on woman. I have no thought, or
view, or hope, in life beyond her; and if you oppose me in this great
stake, you take my peace and happiness in your hands, and cast them to
the wind. Mother, think better of this, and of me, and do not disregard
the warm feelings of which you seem to think so little.”

“Harry,” said Mrs. Maylie, “it is because I think so much of warm and
sensitive hearts, that I would spare them from being wounded. But we
have said enough, and more than enough, on this matter just now.”

“Let it rest with Rose, then,” interposed Harry. “You will not press
these overstrained opinions of yours so far as to throw any obstacle in
my way?”

“I will not,” rejoined Mrs. Maylie; “but I would have you consider——”

“I _have_ considered!” was the impatient reply,—“I have considered
for years—considered almost since I have been capable of serious
reflection. My feelings remain unchanged, as they ever will; and why
should I suffer the pain of a delay in giving them vent, which can be
productive of no earthly good? No! Before I leave this place, Rose
shall hear me.”

“She shall,” said Mrs. Maylie.

“There is something in your manner which would almost imply that she
will hear me coldly, mother,” said the young man, anxiously.

“Not coldly,” rejoined the old lady; “far from it.”

“How then?” urged the young man. “She has formed no other attachment?”

“No, indeed,” replied his mother; “you have, or I mistake, too strong
a hold on her affections already.”

“What I would say,” resumed the old lady, stopping her son as he
was about to speak, “is this: Before you stake your all on this
chance,—before you suffer yourself to be carried to the highest point
of hope, reflect for a few moments, my dear child, on Rose’s history,
and consider what effect the knowledge of her doubtful birth may have
on her decision,—devoted as she is to us, with all the intensity
of her noble mind, and that perfect sacrifice of self which, in all
matters, great or trifling, has always been her characteristic.”

“What do you mean?”

“That I leave to you to discover,” replied Mrs. Maylie. “I must go back
to Rose. God bless you!”

“I shall see you again to-night?” said the young man, eagerly.

“By and by,” replied the lady; “when I leave Rose.”

“You will tell her I am here?” said Harry.

“Of course,” replied Mrs. Maylie.

“And say how anxious I have been, and how much I have suffered, and how
I long to see her—you will not refuse to do this, mother?”

“No,” said the old lady; “I will tell her that,” and pressing her son’s
hand affectionately, she hastened from the room.

Mr. Losberne and Oliver had remained at another end of the apartment
while this hurried conversation was proceeding. The former now held out
his hand to Harry Maylie, and hearty salutations were exchanged between
them. The doctor then communicated, in reply to multifarious questions
from his young friend, a precise account of his patient’s situation,
which was quite as consolatory and full of promise as Oliver’s
statement had encouraged him to hope; and to the whole of which, Mr.
Giles, who affected to be busy about the luggage, listened with greedy
ears.

“Have you shot anything particular lately, Giles?” inquired the doctor,
when he had concluded.

“Nothing particular, sir,” replied Mr. Giles, colouring up to the eyes.

“Nor catching any thieves, nor identifying any housebreakers?” said the
doctor, maliciously.

“None at all, sir,” replied Mr. Giles, with much gravity.

“Well,” said the doctor, “I am sorry to hear it, because you do that
sort of thing so well. Pray, how is Brittles?”

“The boy is very well, sir,” said Mr. Giles, recovering his usual tone
of patronage; “and sends his respectful duty, sir.”

“That’s well,” said the doctor. “Seeing you here, reminds me, Mr.
Giles, that on the day before that on which I was called away so
hurriedly, I executed, at the request of your good mistress, a small
commission in your favour. Just step into this corner a moment, will
you?”

Mr. Giles walked into the corner with much importance, and some
wonder, and was honoured with a short whispering conference with the
doctor; on the termination of which, he made a great many bows, and
retired with steps of unusual stateliness. The subject matter of
this conference was not disclosed in the parlour, but the kitchen was
speedily enlightened concerning it; for Mr. Giles walked straight
thither, and having called for a mug of ale, announced, with an air of
majestic majesty, which was highly effective, that it had pleased his
mistress, in consideration of his gallant behaviour on the occasion of
that attempted robbery, to deposit in the local savings-bank the sum
of twenty-five pounds for his sole use and benefit. At this, the two
women-servants lifted up their hands and eyes, and supposed that Mr.
Giles would begin to be quite proud now; whereunto Mr. Giles, pulling
out his shirt-frill, replied, “No, no,”—and that if they observed that
he was at all haughty to his inferiors, he would thank them to tell him
so. And then he made a great many other remarks, no less illustrative
of his humility, which were received with equal favour and applause,
and were withal as original, and as much to the purpose, as the remarks
of great men commonly are.

Above stairs, the remainder of the evening passed cheerfully away, for
the doctor was in high spirits, and however fatigued or thoughtful
Harry Maylie might have been at first, he was not proof against the
worthy gentleman’s good humour, which displayed itself in a great
variety of sallies and professional recollections, and an abundance of
small jokes, which struck Oliver as being the drollest things he had
ever heard, and caused him to laugh proportionately, to the evident
satisfaction of the doctor, who laughed immoderately at himself, and
made Harry laugh almost as heartily, by the very force of sympathy.
So they were as pleasant a party as, under the circumstances, they
could well have been, and it was late before they retired, with light
and thankful hearts, to take that rest of which, after the doubt and
suspense they had recently undergone, they stood so much in need.

Oliver rose next morning in better heart, and went about his usual
early occupations with more hope and pleasure than he had known for
many days. The birds were once more hung out to sing in their old
places, and the sweetest wild flowers that could be found were once
more gathered to gladden Rose with their beauty and fragrance. The
melancholy which had seemed to the sad eyes of the anxious boy to
hang for days past over every object, beautiful as they all were, was
dispelled by magic. The dew seemed to sparkle more brightly on the
green leaves, the air to rustle among them with a sweeter music, and
the sky itself to look more blue and bright. Such is the influence
which the condition of our own thoughts exercises even over the
appearance of external objects. Men who look on nature and their
fellow-men, and cry that all is dark and gloomy, are in the right; but
the sombre colours are reflections from their own jaundiced eyes and
hearts. The real hues are delicate, and require a clearer vision.

It is worthy of remark, and Oliver did not fail to note it at the time,
that his morning expeditions were no longer made alone. Harry Maylie,
after the very first morning when he met Oliver coming laden home, was
seized with such a passion for flowers, and displayed such a taste in
their arrangement, as left his young companion far behind. If Oliver
were behind-hand in these respects, however, he knew where the best
were to be found, and morning after morning they scoured the country
together, and brought home the fairest that blossomed. The window of
the young lady’s chamber was opened now, for she loved to feel the
rich summer air stream in and revive her with its freshness; but there
always stood in water, just inside the lattice, one particular little
bunch which was made up with great care every morning. Oliver could
not help noticing that the withered flowers were never thrown away,
although the little vase was regularly replenished; nor could he help
observing, that whenever the doctor came into the garden he invariably
cast his eyes up to that particular corner, and nodded his head most
expressively, as he set forth on his morning’s walk. Pending these
observations, the days were flying by, and Rose was rapidly and surely
recovering.

Nor did Oliver’s time hang heavy upon his hands, although the
young lady had not yet left her chamber, and there were no evening
walks, save now and then for a short distance with Mrs. Maylie.
He applied himself with redoubled assiduity to the instructions of
the white-headed old gentleman, and laboured so hard that his quick
progress surprised even himself. It was while he was engaged in
this pursuit that he was greatly startled and distressed by a most
unexpected occurrence.

The little room in which he was accustomed to sit, when busy at his
books, was on the ground-floor, at the back of the house. It was quite
a cottage-room, with a lattice-window, around which were clusters of
jessamine and honeysuckle, that crept over the casement, and filled
the place with their delicious perfume. It looked into a garden,
whence a wicket-gate opened into a small paddock; all beyond was
fine meadow-land and wood. There was no other dwelling near in that
direction, and the prospect it commanded was very extensive.

One beautiful evening, when the first shades of twilight were beginning
to settle upon the earth, Oliver sat at this window, intent upon his
books. He had been poring over them for some time; and as the day had
been uncommonly sultry, and he had exerted himself a great deal, it is
no disparagement to the authors, whoever they may have been, to say,
that gradually and by slow degrees he fell asleep.

There is a kind of sleep that steals upon us sometimes, which, while
it holds the body prisoner, does not free the mind from a sense of
things about it, and enable it to ramble as it pleases. So far as
an overpowering heaviness, a prostration of strength, and an utter
inability to control our thoughts or power of motion, can be called
sleep, this is it; and yet we have a consciousness of all that is going
on about us, and even if we dream, words which are really spoken, or
sounds which really exist at the moment, accommodate themselves with
surprising readiness to our visions, until reality and imagination
become so strangely blended that it is afterwards almost a matter
of impossibility to separate the two. Nor is this the most striking
phenomenon incidental to such a state. It is an ascertained fact, that
although our senses of touch and sight be for the time dead, yet our
sleeping thoughts, and the visionary scenes that pass before us, will
be influenced, and materially influenced, by the _mere silent presence_
of some external object, which may not have been near us when we closed
our eyes, and of whose vicinity we have had no waking consciousness.

[Illustration: _Monks and the Jew._]

Oliver knew perfectly well that he was in his own little room, that his
books were lying on the table before him, and that the sweet air was
stirring among the creeping plants outside,—and yet he was asleep.
Suddenly, the scene changed, the air became close and confined, and he
thought, with a glow of terror, that he was in the Jew’s house again.
There sat the hideous old man, in his accustomed corner, pointing at
him, and whispering to another man with his face averted who sat beside
him.

“Hush, my dear!” he thought he heard the Jew say; “it is him, sure
enough. Come away.”

“He!” the other man seemed to answer; “could I mistake him, think you?
If a crowd of devils were to put themselves into his exact shape,
and he stood amongst them, there is something that would tell me how to
point him out. If you buried him fifty feet deep, and took me across
his grave, I should know, if there wasn’t a mark above it, that he lay
buried there. Wither his flesh, I should!”

The man seemed to say this with such dreadful hatred that Oliver awoke
with the fear, and started up.

Good God! what was that which sent the blood tingling to his heart,
and deprived him of voice, or power to move! There—there—at the
window—close before him—so close, that he could have almost touched
him before he started back—with his eyes peering into the room, and
meeting his—there stood the Jew! and beside him, white with rage,
or fear, or both, were the scowling features of the very man who had
accosted him at the inn-yard.

It was but an instant, a glance, a flash, before his eyes, and they
were gone. But they had recognised him, and he them; and their look was
as firmly impressed upon his memory as if it had been deeply carved
in stone, and set before him from his birth. He stood transfixed for
a moment, and then, leaping from the window into the garden, called
loudly for help.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

    CONTAINING THE UNSATISFACTORY RESULT OF OLIVER’S ADVENTURE,
    AND A CONVERSATION OF SOME IMPORTANCE BETWEEN HARRY MAYLIE
    AND ROSE.


WHEN the inmates of the house, attracted by Oliver’s cries, hurried to
the spot from which they proceeded, they found him, pale and agitated,
pointing in the direction of the meadows behind the house, and scarcely
able to articulate the words, “The Jew! the Jew!”

Mr. Giles was at a loss to comprehend what this outcry meant; but Harry
Maylie, whose perceptions were something quicker, and who had heard
Oliver’s history from his mother, understood it at once.

“What direction did he take?” he asked, catching up a heavy stick which
was standing in a corner.

“That,” replied Oliver, pointing out the course the men had taken; “I
missed them all in an instant.”

“Then they are in the ditch!” said Harry. “Follow, and keep as near me
as you can.” So saying, he sprang over the hedge, and darted off with a
speed which rendered it matter of exceeding difficulty for the others
to keep near him.

Giles followed as well as he could, and Oliver followed too; and in
the course of a minute or two, Mr. Losberne, who had been out walking,
and just then returned, tumbled over the hedge after them, and picking
himself up with more agility than he could have been supposed to
possess, struck into the same course at no contemptible speed, shouting
all the while most prodigiously to know what was the matter.

On they all went; nor stopped they once to breathe, until the leader,
striking off into an angle of the field indicated by Oliver, began to
search narrowly the ditch and hedge adjoining; which afforded time for
the remainder of the party to come up, and for Oliver to communicate
to Mr. Losberne the circumstances that had led to so vigorous a pursuit.

The search was all in vain. There were not even the traces of recent
footsteps to be seen. They stood now on the summit of a little hill,
commanding the open fields in every direction for three or four miles.
There was the village in the hollow on the left; but, in order to
gain that, after pursuing the track Oliver had pointed out, the men
must have made a circuit of open ground, which it was impossible they
could have accomplished in so short a time. A thick wood skirted the
meadow-land in another direction; but they could not have gained that
covert for the same reason.

“It must have been a dream, Oliver?” said Harry Maylie, taking him
aside.

“Oh no, indeed, sir,” replied Oliver, shuddering at the very
recollection of the old wretch’s countenance; “I saw him too plainly
for that. I saw them both as plainly as I see you now.”

“Who was the other?” inquired Harry and Mr. Losberne, together.

“The very same man that I told you of who came so suddenly upon me at
the inn,” said Oliver. “We had our eyes fixed full upon each other, and
I could swear to him.”

“They took this way?” demanded Harry; “are you certain of that?”

“As I am that the men were at the window,” replied Oliver, pointing
down, as he spoke, to the hedge which divided the cottage-garden from
the meadow. “The tall man leaped over just there; and the Jew, running
a few paces to the right, crept through that gap.”

The two gentlemen watched Oliver’s earnest face as he spoke, and
looking from him to each other, seemed to feel satisfied of the
accuracy of what he said. Still, in no direction were there any
appearances of the trampling of men in hurried flight. The grass was
long, but it was trodden down nowhere, save where their own feet had
crushed it. The sides and brinks of the ditches were of damp clay,
but in no one place could they discern the print of men’s shoes, or
the slightest mark which would indicate that any feet had pressed the
ground for hours before.

“This is strange!” said Harry.

“Strange!” echoed the doctor. “Blathers and Duff themselves could make
nothing of it.”

Notwithstanding the evidently inefficacious nature of their search,
however, they did not desist until the coming on of night rendered
its farther prosecution hopeless, and even then they gave it up with
reluctance. Giles was dispatched to the different alehouses in the
village, furnished with the best description Oliver could give of the
appearance and dress of the strangers; of whom the Jew was, at all
events, sufficiently remarkable to be remembered, supposing he had
been seen drinking, or loitering about; but he returned without any
intelligence calculated to dispel or lessen the mystery.

On the next day, further search was made, and the inquiries renewed,
but with no better success. On the day following, Oliver and Mr. Maylie
repaired to the market-town, in the hope of seeing or hearing something
of the men there; but this effort was equally fruitless; and after a
few days, the affair began to be forgotten, as most affairs are, when
wonder, having no fresh food to support it, dies away of itself.

Meanwhile, Rose was rapidly recovering. She had left her room, was able
to go out, and mixing once more with the family, carried joy into the
hearts of all.

But although this happy change had a visible effect on the little
circle, and although cheerful voices and merry laughter were once more
heard in the cottage, there was, at times, an unwonted restraint upon
some there—even upon Rose herself—which Oliver could not fail to
remark. Mrs. Maylie and her son were often closeted together for a long
time, and more than once Rose appeared with traces of tears upon her
face. After Mr. Losberne had fixed a day for his departure to Chertsey,
these symptoms increased, and it became evident that something was in
progress which affected the peace of the young lady, and of somebody
else besides.

At length, one morning, when Rose was alone in the breakfast-parlour,
Harry Maylie entered, and, with some hesitation, begged permission to
speak with her for a few moments.

“A few—a very few—will suffice, Rose,” said the young man, drawing
his chair towards her. “What I shall have to say has already presented
itself to your mind; the most cherished hopes of my heart are not
unknown to you, though from my lips you have not yet heard them stated.”

Rose had been very pale from the moment of his entrance, although that
might have been the effect of her recent illness. She merely bowed, and
bending over some plants that stood near, waited in silence for him to
proceed.

“I—I—ought to have left here before,” said Harry.

“You should, indeed,” replied Rose. “Forgive me for saying so, but I
wish you had.”

“I was brought here by the most dreadful and agonizing of all
apprehensions,” said the young man; “the fear of losing the one
dear being on whom my every wish and hope are centred. You had been
dying—trembling between earth and heaven. We know that when the
young, the beautiful, and good, are visited with sickness, their pure
spirits insensibly turn towards their bright home of lasting rest, and
hence it is, that the best and fairest of our kind so often fade in
blooming.”

There were tears in the eye of the gentle girl as these words were
spoken, and when one fell upon the flower over which she bent, and
glistened brightly in its cup, making it more beautiful, it seemed as
though the outpourings of a fresh young heart claimed common kindred
with the loveliest things in nature.

“An angel,” continued the young man, passionately, “a creature as fair
and innocent of guile as one of God’s own angels, fluttered between
life and death. Oh! who could hope, when the distant world to which
she was akin half opened to her view, that she would return to the
sorrow and calamity of this! Rose, Rose, to know that you were passing
away like some soft shadow, which a light from above casts upon the
earth—to have no hope that you would be spared to those who linger
here, and to know no reason why you should—to feel that you belonged
to that bright sphere whither so many gifted creatures, in infancy
and youth, have winged their early flight—and yet to pray, amid all
these consolations, that you might be restored to those who loved
you—these are distractions almost too great to bear. They were mine by
day and night, and with them came such a rushing torrent of fears, and
apprehensions, and selfish regrets, lest you should die and never know
how devotedly I loved you, as almost bore down sense and reason in its
course. You recovered—day by day, and almost hour by hour, some drop
of health came back, and mingling with the spent and feeble stream of
life which circulated languidly within you, swelled it again to a high
and rushing tide. I have watched you change almost from death to life,
with eyes that moistened with their own eagerness and deep affection.
Do not tell me that you wish I had lost this; for it has softened my
heart to all mankind.”

“I did not mean that,” said Rose, weeping; “I only wish you had left
here, that you might have turned to high and noble pursuits again—to
pursuits well worthy of you.”

“There is no pursuit more worthy of me—more worthy of the highest
nature that exists—than the struggle to win such a heart as yours,”
said the young man, taking her hand. “Rose, my own dear Rose, for
years—for years, I have loved you, hoping to win my way to fame, and
then come proudly home and tell you it had been sought only for you to
share; thinking in my day-dreams how I would remind you in that happy
moment of the many silent tokens I had given of a boy’s attachment, and
rally you who had blushed to mark them, and then claim your hand, as if
in redemption of some old mute contract that had been sealed between
us. That time has not arrived; but here, with no fame won, and no young
vision realized, I give to you the heart so long your own, and stake my
all upon the words with which you greet the offer.”

“Your behaviour has ever been kind and noble,” said Rose, mastering
the emotions by which she was agitated. “As you believe that I am not
insensible or ungrateful, so hear my answer.”

“It is, that I may endeavour to deserve you—is it, dear Rose?”

“It is,” replied Rose, “that you must endeavour to forget me—not as
your old and dearly-attached companion, for that would wound me deeply,
but as the object of your love. Look into the world, think how many
hearts you would be equally proud to gain are there. Confide some other
passion to me if you will, and I will be the truest, warmest, most
faithful friend you have.”

There was a pause, during which, Rose, who had covered her face with
one hand, gave free vent to her tears. Harry still retained the other.
“And your reasons, Rose,” he said, at length, in a low voice; “your
reasons for this decision—may I ask them?”

“You have a right to know them,” rejoined Rose. “You can say nothing to
alter my resolution. It is a duty that I must perform. I owe it alike
to others and to myself.”

“To yourself?”

“Yes, Harry; I owe it to myself, that I, a friendless, portionless
girl, with a blight upon my name, should not give the world reason to
suspect that I had sordidly yielded to your first passion, and fastened
myself, a clog, upon all your hopes and projects. I owe it to you and
yours, to prevent you from opposing, in the warmth of your generous
nature, this great obstacle to your progress in the world.”

“If your inclinations chime with your sense of duty——” Harry began.

“They do not,” replied Rose, colouring deeply.

“Then you return my love?” said Harry. “Say but that, Rose; say but
that, and soften the bitterness of this hard disappointment!”

“If I could have done so without doing heavy wrong to him I loved,”
rejoined Rose, “I could have——”

“Have received this declaration very differently?” said Harry, with
great eagerness. “Do not conceal that from me, at least, Rose.”

“I could,” said Rose. “Stay,” she added, disengaging her hand, “why
should we prolong this painful interview? Most painful to me, and
yet productive of lasting happiness notwithstanding; for it _will_ be
happiness to know that I once held the high place in your regard which
I now occupy, and every triumph you achieve in life will animate me
with new fortitude and firmness. Farewell, Harry! for as we have met
to-day, we meet no more: but in other relations than those in which
this conversation would have placed us, may we be long and happily
intwined; and may every blessing that the prayers of a true and earnest
heart can call down from where all is truth and sincerity, cheer and
prosper you!”

“Another word, Rose,” said Harry. “Your reason in your own words. From
your own lips let me hear it.”

“The prospect before you,” answered Rose, firmly, “is a brilliant one;
all the honours to which great talents and powerful connexions can
help men in public life are in store for you. But those connexions are
proud, and I will neither mingle with such as hold in scorn the mother
who gave me life, nor bring disgrace or failure upon the son of her
who has so well supplied that mother’s place. In a word,” said the
young lady, turning away, as her temporary firmness forsook her, “there
is a stain upon my name which the world visits on innocent heads: I
will carry it into no blood but my own, and the reproach shall rest
alone on me.”

“One word more, Rose—dear Rose! one more!” cried Harry, throwing
himself before her. “If I had been less, less fortunate, as the
world would call it,—if some obscure and peaceful life had been my
destiny,—if I had been poor, sick, helpless,—would you have turned
from me then? or has my probable advancement to riches and honour given
this scruple birth?”

“Do not press me to reply,” answered Rose, “the question does not
arise, and never will. It is unfair, unkind, to urge it.”

“If your answer be what I almost dare to hope it is,” retorted Harry,
“it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way, and light the
dreary path before me. It is not an idle thing to do so much, by
the utterance of a few brief words, for one who loves us beyond all
else. Oh, Rose! in the name of my ardent and enduring attachment,—in
the name of all I have suffered for you, and all you doom me to
undergo,—answer me that one question!”

“Then, if your lot had been differently cast,” rejoined Rose; “if you
had been even a little, but not so far, above me; if I could have been
a help and comfort to you in some humble scene of peace and retirement,
and not a blot and drawback in ambitious and distinguished crowds, I
should have been spared this trial. I have every reason to be happy,
very happy, now; but then, Harry, I own I should have been happier.”

Busy recollections of old hopes, cherished as a girl long ago, crowded
into the mind of Rose, while making this avowal; but they brought tears
with them, as old hopes will when they come back withered, and they
relieved her.

“I cannot help this weakness, and it makes my purpose stronger,” said
Rose, extending her hand. “I must leave you now, indeed.”

“I ask one promise,” said Harry. “Once, and only once more,—say within
a year, but it may be much sooner,—let me speak to you again on this
subject for the last time.”

“Not to press me to alter my right determination,” replied Rose, with a
melancholy smile; “it will be useless.”

“No,” said Harry; “to hear you repeat it, if you will; finally repeat
it. I will lay at your feet whatever of station or fortune I may
possess, and if you still adhere to your present resolution, will not
seek by word or act to change it.”

“Then let it be so,” rejoined Rose; “it is but one pang the more, and
by that time I may be enabled to bear it better.”

She extended her hand again, but the young man caught her to his bosom,
and imprinting one kiss upon her beautiful forehead, hurried from the
room.




CHAPTER XXXV.

    IS A VERY SHORT ONE, AND MAY APPEAR OF NO GREAT IMPORTANCE
    IN ITS PLACE, BUT IT SHOULD BE READ NOTWITHSTANDING, AS A
    SEQUEL TO THE LAST, AND A KEY TO ONE THAT WILL FOLLOW WHEN
    ITS TIME ARRIVES.


“AND so you are resolved to be my travelling-companion this
morning—eh?” said the doctor, as Harry Maylie joined him and Oliver at
the breakfast-table. “Why, you are not in the same mind or intention
two half-hours together.”

“You will tell me a different tale one of these days,” said Harry,
colouring without any perceptible reason.

“I hope I may have good cause to do so,” replied Mr. Losberne; “though
I confess I don’t think I shall. But yesterday morning you had made up
your mind, in a great hurry to stay here, and accompany your mother,
like a dutiful son, to the sea-side; before noon, you announce that you
are going to do me the honour of accompanying me as far as I go on your
road to London; and at night, you urge me with great mystery to start
before the ladies are stirring; the consequence of which is, that young
Oliver here is pinned down to his breakfast when he ought to be ranging
the meadows after botanical phenomena of all kinds. Too bad, isn’t it,
Oliver?”

“I should have been very sorry not to have been at home when you and
Mr. Maylie went away, sir,” rejoined Oliver.

“That’s a fine fellow,” said the doctor; “you shall come and see me
when you return. But, to speak seriously, Harry, has any communication
from the great nobs produced this sudden anxiety on your part to be
gone?”

“The great nobs,” replied Harry, “under which designation, I presume,
you include my most stately uncle, have not communicated with me at all
since I have been here, nor, at this time of the year, is it likely
that anything would occur to render necessary my immediate attendance
among them.”

“Well,” said the doctor, “you are a queer fellow. But of course they
will get you into parliament at the election before Christmas, and
these sudden shiftings and changes are no bad preparation for political
life. There’s something in that; good training is always desirable,
whether the race be for place, cup, or sweepstakes.”

Harry Maylie looked as if he could have followed up this short dialogue
by one or two remarks that would have staggered the doctor not a
little, but he contented himself with saying, “We shall see,” and
pursued the subject no further. The post-chaise drove up to the door
shortly afterwards, and Giles coming in for the luggage, the good
doctor bustled out to see it packed away.

“Oliver,” said Harry Maylie, in a low voice, “let me speak a word with
you.”

Oliver walked into the window-recess to which Mr. Maylie beckoned him;
much surprised at the mixture of sadness and boisterous spirits, which
his whole behaviour displayed.

“You can write well now,” said Harry, laying his hand upon his arm.

“I hope so, sir,” replied Oliver.

“I shall not be at home again, perhaps for some time; I wish you would
write to me—say once a fortnight, every alternate Monday, to the
General Post Office in London: will you?” said Mr. Maylie.

“Oh! certainly, sir; I shall be proud to do it,” exclaimed Oliver,
greatly delighted with the commission.

“I should like to know how—how my mother and Miss Maylie are,” said
the young man; “and you can fill up a sheet by telling me what walks
you take, and what you talk about, and whether she—they, I mean, seem
happy and quite well. You understand me?”

“Oh! quite, sir, quite,” replied Oliver.

“I would rather you did not mention it to them,” said Harry, hurrying
over his words; “because it might make my mother anxious to write to
me oftener, and it is a trouble and worry to her. Let it be a secret
between you and me, and mind you tell me every thing; I depend upon
you.”

Oliver, quite elated and honoured by a sense of his importance,
faithfully promised to be secret and explicit in his communications,
and Mr. Maylie took leave of him with many warm assurances of his
regard and protection.

The doctor was in the chaise; Giles (who, it had been arranged, should
be left behind) held the door open in his hand; and the women-servants
were in the garden looking on. Harry cast one slight glance at the
latticed window, and jumped into the carriage.

“Drive on!” he cried, “hard, fast, full gallop; nothing short of flying
will keep pace with me to-day.”

“Halloa!” cried the doctor, letting down the front glass in a great
hurry, and shouting to the postilion, “something very short of flying
will keep pace with me. Do you hear?”

Jingling and clattering, till distance rendered its noise inaudible,
and its rapid progress only perceptible to the eye, the vehicle wound
its way along the road almost hidden in a cloud of dust, now wholly
disappearing, and now becoming visible again, as intervening objects or
the intricacies of the way permitted. It was not until even the dusty
cloud was no longer to be seen that the gazers dispersed.

And there was one looker-on, who remained with eyes fixed upon the spot
where the carriage had disappeared, long after it was many miles away;
for behind the white curtain which had shrouded her from view when
Harry raised his eyes towards the window, sat Rose herself.

“He seems in high spirits and happy,” she said, at length. “I feared
for a time he might be otherwise—I was mistaken. I am very, very glad.”

Tears are signs of gladness as well as grief; but those which coursed
down Rose’s face, as she sat pensively at the window, still gazing in
the same direction, seemed to tell more of sorrow than of joy.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

    IN WHICH THE READER, IF HE OR SHE RESORT TO THE FIFTH
    CHAPTER OF THIS SECOND BOOK, WILL PERCEIVE A CONTRAST NOT
    UNCOMMON IN MATRIMONIAL CASES.


MR. BUMBLE sat in the workhouse parlour, with his eyes moodily fixed on
the cheerless grate, whence, as it was summer time, no brighter gleam
proceeded than the reflection of certain sickly rays of the sun, which
were sent back from its cold and shining surface. A paper fly-cage
dangled from the ceiling, to which he occasionally raised his eyes in
gloomy thought; and, as the heedless insects hovered round the gaudy
network, Mr. Bumble would heave a deep sigh, while a more gloomy shadow
overspread his countenance. Mr. Bumble was meditating, and it might be
that the insects brought to mind some painful passage in his own past
life.

Nor was Mr. Bumble’s gloom the only thing calculated to awaken a
pleasing melancholy in the bosom of a spectator. There were not wanting
other appearances, and those closely connected with his own person,
which announced that a great change had taken place in the position
of his affairs. The laced coat and the cocked hat, where were they?
He still wore knee-breeches and dark cotton stockings on his nether
limbs, but they were not _the_ breeches. The coat was wide-skirted, and
in that respect like _the_ coat, but, oh, how different! The mighty
cocked-hat was replaced by a modest round one. Mr. Bumble was no longer
a beadle.

There are some promotions in life which, independent of the more
substantial rewards they offer, acquire peculiar value and dignity from
the coats and waistcoats connected with them. A field-marshal has his
uniform, a bishop his silk apron, a counsellor his silk gown, a beadle
his cocked hat. Strip the bishop of his apron, or the beadle of his
cocked hat and gold lace, what are they? Men,—mere men. Dignity, and
even holiness too, sometimes, are more questions of coat and waistcoat
than some people imagine.

Mr. Bumble had married Mrs. Corney, and was master of the workhouse.
Another beadle had come into power, and on him the cocked-hat,
gold-laced coat, and staff, had all three descended.

“And to-morrow two months it was done!” said Mr. Bumble, with a sigh.
“It seems a age.”

Mr. Bumble might have meant that he had concentrated a whole existence
of happiness into the short space of eight weeks; but the sigh—there
was a vast deal of meaning in the sigh.

“I sold myself,” said Mr. Bumble, pursuing the same train of
reflection, “for six tea-spoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a milk-pot,
with a small quantity of second-hand furniter, and twenty pound in
money. I went very reasonable—cheap, dirt cheap.”

“Cheap!” cried a shrill voice in Mr. Bumble’s ear: “You would have
been dear at any price; and dear enough I paid for you, Lord above
knows that!”

Mr. Bumble turned and encountered the face of his interesting consort,
who, imperfectly comprehending the few words she had overheard of his
complaint, had hazarded the foregoing remark at a venture.

“Mrs. Bumble, ma’am!” said Mr. Bumble, with sentimental sternness.

“Well?” cried the lady.

“Have the goodness to look at me,” said Mr. Bumble, fixing his eyes
upon her.

“If she stands such a eye as that,” said Mr. Bumble to himself, “she
can stand anything. It is a eye I never knew to fail with paupers, and
if it fails with her my power is gone.”

Whether an exceedingly small expansion of eye is sufficient to quell
paupers, who, being lightly fed, are in no very high condition, or
whether the late Mrs. Corney was particularly proof against eagle
glances, are matters of opinion. The matter of fact is, that the matron
was in no way overpowered by Mr. Bumble’s scowl, but on the contrary,
treated it with great disdain, and even raised a laugh thereat, which
sounded as though it were genuine.

On hearing this most unexpected sound, Mr. Bumble looked first
incredulous, and afterwards, amazed. He then relapsed into his former
state; nor did he rouse himself until his attention was again awakened
by the voice of his partner.

“Are you going to sit snoring there all day?” inquired Mrs. Bumble.

“I am going to sit here as long as I think proper, ma’am,” rejoined Mr.
Bumble; “and although I was _not_ snoring, I shall snore, gape, sneeze,
laugh, or cry, as the humour strikes me, such being my prerogative.”

“Your prerogative!” sneered Mrs. Bumble, with ineffable contempt.

“I said the word, ma’am,” observed Mr. Bumble. “The prerogative of a
man is to command.”

“And what’s the prerogative of a woman, in the name of goodness?” cried
the relict of Mr. Corney, deceased.

“To obey, ma’am,” thundered Mr. Bumble. “Your late unfort’nate husband
should have taught it you, and then, perhaps, he might have been alive
now. I wish he was, poor man!”

Mrs. Bumble, seeing at a glance that the decisive moment had now
arrived, and that a blow struck for the mastership on one side or other
must necessarily be final and conclusive, no sooner heard this allusion
to the dead and gone, than she dropped into a chair, and with a loud
scream, that Mr. Bumble was a hard-hearted brute, fell into a paroxysm
of tears.

But tears were not the things to find their way to Mr. Bumble’s soul;
his heart was waterproof. Like washable beaver hats, that improve with
rain, his nerves were rendered stouter and more vigorous by showers of
tears, which, being tokens of weakness, and so far tacit admissions
of his own power, pleased and exalted him. He eyed his good lady with
looks of great satisfaction, and begged, in an encouraging manner, that
she should cry her hardest, the exercise being looked upon by the
faculty as strongly conducive to health.

“It opens the lungs, washes the countenance, exercises the eyes, and
softens down the temper,” said Mr. Bumble; “so cry away.”

As he discharged himself of this pleasantry, Mr. Bumble took his hat
from a peg, and putting it on rather rakishly on one side, as a man
might do who felt he had asserted his superiority in a becoming manner,
thrust his hands into his pockets, and sauntered towards the door with
much ease and waggishness depicted in his whole appearance.

Now, Mrs. Corney that was had tried the tears, because they were less
troublesome than a manual assault; but she was quite prepared to make
trial of the latter mode of proceeding, as Mr. Bumble was not long in
discovering.

The first proof he experienced of the fact was conveyed in a hollow
sound, immediately succeeded by the sudden flying off of his hat to
the opposite end of the room. This preliminary proceeding laying bare
his head, the expert lady, clasping him tight round the throat with
one hand, inflicted a shower of blows (dealt with singular vigour and
dexterity) upon it with the other. This done, she created a little
variety by scratching his face and tearing his hair off, and having, by
this time, inflicted as much punishment as she deemed necessary for the
offence, she pushed him over a chair, which was luckily well situated
for the purpose, and defied him to talk about his prerogative again if
he dared.

“Get up!” said Mrs. Bumble, in a voice of command, “and take yourself
away from here, unless you want me to do something desperate.”

Mr. Bumble rose with a very rueful countenance, wondering much what
something desperate might be, and, picking up his hat, looked towards
the door.

“Are you going?” demanded Mrs. Bumble.

“Certainly, my dear, certainly,” rejoined Mr. Bumble, making a quicker
motion towards the door. “I didn’t intend to—I’m going, my dear—you
are so very violent, that really I—”

At this instant, Mrs. Bumble stepped hastily forward to replace
the carpet, which had been kicked up in the scuffle; and Mr. Bumble
immediately darted out of the room, without bestowing another thought
on his unfinished sentence, leaving the late Mrs. Corney in full
possession of the field.

Mr. Bumble was fairly taken by surprise, and fairly beaten. He had
a decided bullying propensity, derived no inconsiderable pleasure
from the exercise of petty cruelty, and, consequently, was (it is
needless to say) a coward. This is by no means a disparagement to his
character; for many official personages, who are held in high respect
and admiration, are the victims of similar infirmities. The remark is
made, indeed, rather in his favour than otherwise, and with the view
of impressing the reader with a just sense of his qualifications for
office.

But the measure of his degradation was not yet full. After making a
tour of the house, and thinking, for the first time, that the poor-laws
really were too hard upon people, and that men who ran away from their
wives, leaving them chargeable to the parish, ought, in justice, to be
visited with no punishment at all, but rather rewarded as meritorious
individuals who had suffered much, Mr. Bumble came to a room where
some of the female paupers were usually employed in washing the parish
linen, and whence the sound of voices in conversation now proceeded.

“Hem!” said Mr. Bumble, summoning up all his native dignity “These
women at least shall continue to respect the prorogative. Hallo! hallo
there!—what do you mean by this noise, you hussies?”

With these words, Mr. Bumble opened the door, and walked in with a
very fierce and angry manner, which was at once exchanged for a most
humiliated and cowering air, as his eyes unexpectedly rested on the
form of his lady wife.

“My dear,” said Mr. Bumble, “I didn’t know you were here.”

“Didn’t know I was here!” repeated Mrs. Bumble. “What do _you_ do here?”

“I thought they were talking rather too much to be doing their work
properly, my dear,” replied Mr. Bumble, glancing distractedly at
a couple of old women at the washtub, who were comparing notes of
admiration at the workhouse-master’s humility.

[Illustration: _Mr. Bumble degraded in the eyes of the Paupers._]

“You thought they were talking too much?” said Mrs. Bumble. “What
business is it of yours?”

“Why, my dear—” urged Mr. Bumble, submissively.

“What business is it of yours?” demanded Mrs. Bumble, again.

“It’s very true, you’re matron here, my dear,” submitted Mr. Bumble;
“but I thought you mightn’t be in the way just then.”

“I’ll tell you what, Mr. Bumble,” returned his lady, “we don’t want any
of your interference, and you’re a great deal too fond of poking your
nose into things that don’t concern you, making everybody in the house
laugh the moment your back is turned, and making yourself look like a
fool every hour in the day. Be off; come!”

Mr. Bumble, seeing with excruciating feelings the delight of the two
old paupers who were tittering together most rapturously, hesitated
for an instant. Mrs. Bumble, whose patience brooked no delay, caught up
a bowl of soap-suds, and motioning him towards the door, ordered him
instantly to depart, on pain of receiving the contents upon his portly
person.

What could Mr. Bumble do? He looked dejectedly round, and slunk away;
and, as he reached the door, the titterings of the paupers broke into
a shrill chuckle of irrepressible delight It wanted but this. He was
degraded in their eyes; he had lost caste and station before the very
paupers; he had fallen from all the height and pomp of beadleship to
the lowest depth of the most snubbed hen-peckery.

“All in two months!” said Mr. Bumble, filled with dismal thoughts. “Two
months—not more than two months ago, I was not only my own master, but
everybody else’s, so far as the porochial workhouse was concerned, and
now!——”

It was too much. Mr. Bumble boxed the ears of the boy who opened the
gate for him (for he had reached the portal in his reverie), and walked
distractedly into the street.

He walked up one street and down another, until exercise had abated the
first passion of his grief, and then the revulsion of feeling made him
thirsty. He passed a great many public-houses, and at length paused
before one in a by-way, whose parlour, as he gathered from a hasty peep
over the blinds, was deserted, save by one solitary customer. It began
to rain heavily at the moment, and this determined him; Mr. Bumble
stepped in, and ordering something to drink, as he passed the bar,
entered the apartment into which he had looked from the street.

The man who was seated there was tall and dark, and wore a large cloak.
He had the air of a stranger, and seemed, by a certain haggardness in
his look, as well as by the dusty soils on his dress, to have travelled
some distance. He eyed Bumble askance as he entered, but scarcely
deigned to nod his head in acknowledgment of his salutation.

Mr. Bumble had quite dignity enough for two, supposing even that the
stranger had been more familiar, so he drank his gin-and-water in
silence, and read the paper with great show of pomp and importance.

It so happened, however—as it will happen very often, when men fall
into company under such circumstances—that Mr. Bumble felt every now
and then a powerful inducement, which he could not resist, to steal
a look at the stranger; and that whenever he did so he withdrew his
eyes in some confusion, to find that the stranger was at that moment
stealing a look at him. Mr. Bumble’s awkwardness was enhanced by the
very remarkable expression of the stranger’s eye, which was keen and
bright, but shadowed by a scowl of distrust and suspicion, unlike
anything he had ever observed before, and most repulsive to behold.

When they had encountered each other’s glance several times in this
way, the stranger, in a harsh, deep voice, broke silence.

“Were you looking for me,” he said, “when you peered in at the window?”

“Not that I am aware of, unless you’re Mr. ——” Here Mr. Bumble
stopped short, for he was curious to know the stranger’s name, and
thought, in his impatience, he might supply the blank.

“I see you were not,” said the stranger, an expression of quiet sarcasm
playing about his mouth, “or you would have known my name. You don’t
know it, and I should recommend you not to inquire.”

“I meant no harm, young man,” observed Mr. Bumble, majestically.

“And have done none,” said the stranger.

Another silence succeeded this short dialogue, which was again broken
by the stranger.

“I have seen you before, I think,” said he. “You were differently
dressed at that time, and I only passed you in the street, but I should
know you again. You were beadle here once, were you not?”

“I was,” said Mr. Bumble, in some surprise; “porochial beadle.”

“Just so,” rejoined the other, nodding his head. “It was in that
character I saw you. What are you now?”

“Master of the workhouse,” rejoined Mr. Bumble, slowly and
impressively, to check any undue familiarity the stranger might
otherwise assume. “Master of the workhouse, young man!”

“You have the same eye to your own interest that you always have had,
I doubt not?” resumed the stranger, looking keenly into Mr. Bumble’s
eyes, as he raised them in astonishment at the question. “Don’t scruple
to answer freely, man. I know you pretty well, you see.”

“I suppose, a married man,” replied Mr. Bumble, shading his eyes with
his hand, and surveying the stranger from head to foot in evident
perplexity, “is not more averse to turning an honest penny when he can
than a single one. Porochial officers are not so well paid that they
can afford to refuse any little extra fee, when it comes to them in a
civil and proper manner.”

The stranger smiled, and nodded his head again; as much as to say, he
found he had not mistaken his man: then rang the bell.

“Fill this glass again,” he said, handing Mr. Bumble’s empty tumbler to
the landlord. “Let it be strong and hot. You like it so, I suppose?”

“Not too strong,” replied Mr. Bumble, with a delicate cough.

“You understand what that means, landlord!” said the stranger, drily.

The host smiled, disappeared, and shortly afterwards returned with a
steaming jorum, of which the first gulp brought the water into Mr.
Bumble’s eyes.

“Now listen to me,” said the stranger, after closing the door and
window. “I came down to this place to-day to find you out, and, by
one of those chances which the devil throws in the way of his friends
sometimes, you walked into the very room I was sitting in while you
were uppermost in my mind. I want some information from you, and don’t
ask you to give it for nothing, slight as it is. Put up that to begin
with.”

As he spoke, he pushed a couple of sovereigns across the table to his
companion carefully, as though unwilling that the chinking of money
should be heard without; and when Mr. Bumble had scrupulously examined
the coins, to see that they were genuine, and put them up, with much
satisfaction, in his waistcoat-pocket, he went on,—

“Carry your memory back—let me see—twelve years, last winter.”

“It’s a long time,” said Mr. Bumble. “Very good. I’ve done it.”

“The scene, the workhouse.”

“Good!”

“And the time, night.”

“Yes.”

“And the place, the crazy hole, wherever it was, in which miserable
drabs brought forth the life and health so often denied to
themselves—gave birth to puling children for the parish to rear, and
hid their shame, rot ’em, in the grave!”

“The lying-in room, I suppose, that means?” said Mr. Bumble, not quite
following the stranger’s excited description.

“Yes,” said the stranger. “A boy was born there.”

“A many boys,” observed Mr. Bumble, shaking his head, despondingly.

“A murrain on the young devils!” cried the stranger, impatiently; “I
speak of one, a meek-looking, pale-faced hound, who was apprenticed
down here to a coffin-maker, (I wish he had made his coffin, and
screwed his body in it,) and who afterwards ran away to London, as it
was supposed.”

“Why, you mean Oliver—young Twist?” said Mr. Bumble; “I remember him,
of course. There wasn’t a obstinater young rascal——”

“It’s not of him I want to hear; I’ve heard enough of him,” said the
stranger, stopping Mr. Bumble in the very outset of a tirade on the
subject of poor Oliver’s vices. “It’s of a woman, the hag that nursed
his mother. Where is she?”

“Where is she?” said Mr. Bumble, whom the gin-and-water had rendered
facetious. “It would be hard to tell. There’s no midwifery there,
whichever place she’s gone to; so I suppose she’s out of employment any
way.”

“What do you mean?” demanded the stranger, sternly.

“That she died last winter,” rejoined Mr. Bumble.

The man looked fixedly at him when he had given this information, and
although he did not withdraw his eyes for some time afterwards, his
gaze gradually became vacant and abstracted, and he seemed lost in
thought. For some time, he appeared doubtful whether he ought to be
relieved or disappointed by the intelligence, but at length he breathed
more freely, and withdrawing his eyes, observed that it was no great
matter, and rose as if to depart.

Mr. Bumble was cunning enough, and he at once saw that an opportunity
was opened for the lucrative disposal of some secret in the possession
of his better half. He well remembered the night of old Sally’s
death, which the occurrences of that day had given him good reason to
recollect, as the occasion on which he had proposed to Mrs. Corney;
and although that lady had never confided to him the disclosure of
which she had been the solitary witness, he had heard enough to know
that it related to something that had occurred in the old woman’s
attendance, as workhouse nurse, upon the young mother of Oliver Twist.
Hastily calling this circumstance to mind, he informed the stranger,
with an air of mystery, that one woman had been closeted with the old
harridan shortly before she died, and that she could, as he had reason
to believe, throw some light on the subject of his inquiry.

“How can I find her?” said the stranger, thrown off his guard, and
plainly shewing that all his fears (whatever they were) were aroused
afresh by the intelligence.

“Only through me,” rejoined Mr. Bumble.

“When?” cried the stranger, hastily.

“To-morrow,” rejoined Bumble.

“At nine in the evening,” said the stranger, producing a scrap of
paper, and writing down an obscure address by the water-side upon it,
in characters that betrayed his agitation; “at nine in the evening,
bring her to me there. I needn’t tell you to be secret, for it’s your
interest.”

With these words, he led the way to the door, after stopping to pay
for the liquor that had been drunk; and shortly remarking that their
roads were different, departed, without more ceremony than an emphatic
repetition of the hour of appointment for the following night.

On glancing at the address, the parochial functionary observed that it
contained no name. The stranger had not gone far, so he made after him
to ask it.

“Who’s that?” cried the man, turning quickly round, as Bumble touched
him on the arm, “following me!”

“Only to ask a question,” said the other, pointing to the scrap of
paper. “What name am I to ask for?”

“Monks!” rejoined the man, and strode hastily away.


    END OF VOL. II.

    T.C. Savill, Printer, 107, St. Martin’s Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Apostrophe usage is not consistent in the text as in using both “dont”
and “don’t.” It also spells “visitor” as “visiter.” This was retained.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 80, “Fagan” changed to “Fagin” (Matter, Fagin)

Page 125, “beable” changed to “beadle” (beadle said this)

Page 136, "proferring" changed to "preferring" (preferring the chance)

Page 197, illustration caption, “Bon-Street” changed to “Bow-Street”
(by the Bow-Street Runners)

Page 267, “disspatched” changed to “dispatched” (Giles was dispatched)

Page 287, “i” changed to “in” (was wide-skirted, and in)





End of Project Gutenberg's Oliver Twist, Vol. II (of 3), by Charles Dickens



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLIVER TWIST, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Poirot Investigates
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Poirot Investigates

Author: Agatha Christie


        
Release date: January 28, 2020 [eBook #61262]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/61262

Credits: Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POIROT INVESTIGATES ***

  POIROT INVESTIGATES




  BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES

  THE SECRET ADVERSARY

  THE MURDER ON THE LINKS

  THE BODLEY HEAD




  POIROT INVESTIGATES

  BY AGATHA CHRISTIE




  LONDON

  JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD LIMITED




  First published in Great Britain by
  John Lane Company, The Bodley Head Limited, 1924

  Copyright © 1924 Agatha Christie Limited




  CONTENTS


  I The Adventure of “The Western Star”

  II The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor

  III The Adventure of the Cheap Flat

  IV The Mystery of Hunter’s Lodge

  V The Million Dollar Bond Robbery

  VI The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb

  VII Jewel Robbery at the _Grand Metropolitan_

  VIII The Kidnapped Prime Minister

  IX The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim

  X The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman

  XI The Case of the Missing Will




  POIROT INVESTIGATES




  POIROT INVESTIGATES


  I


  The Adventure of “The Western Star”

I was standing at the window of Poirot’s rooms looking out idly on
the street below.

“That’s queer,” I ejaculated suddenly beneath my breath.

“What is, _mon ami_?” asked Poirot placidly, from the depths of
his comfortable chair.

“Deduce, Poirot, from the following facts! Here is a young lady,
richly dressed—fashionable hat, magnificent furs. She is coming
along slowly, looking up at the houses as she goes. Unknown to her,
she is being shadowed by three men and a middle-aged woman. They
have just been joined by an errand boy who points after the girl,
gesticulating as he does so. What drama is this being played? Is
the girl a crook, and are the shadowers detectives preparing to
arrest her? Or are _they_ the scoundrels, and are they plotting to
attack an innocent victim? What does the great detective say?”

“The great detective, _mon ami_, chooses, as ever, the simplest
course. He rises to see for himself.” And my friend joined me at
the window.

In a minute he gave vent to an amused chuckle.

“As usual, your facts are tinged with your incurable romanticism.
That is Miss Mary Marvell, the film star. She is being followed by
a bevy of admirers who have recognized her. And, _en passant_, my
dear Hastings, she is quite aware of the fact!”

I laughed.

“So all is explained! But you get no marks for that, Poirot. It
was a mere matter of recognition.”

“_En vérité!_ And how many times have you seen Mary Marvell on the
screen, _mon cher_?”

I thought.

“About a dozen times perhaps.”

“And I—once! Yet _I_ recognize her, and _you_ do not.”

“She looks so different,” I replied rather feebly.

“Ah! _Sacré_!” cried Poirot. “Is it that you expect her to promenade
herself in the streets of London in a cowboy hat, or with bare
feet, and a bunch of curls, as an Irish colleen? Always with you
it is the non-essentials! Remember the case of the dancer, Valerie
Saintclair.”

I shrugged my shoulders, slightly annoyed.

“But console yourself, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, calming down. “All
cannot be as Hercule Poirot! I know it well.”

“You really have the best opinion of yourself of anyone I ever
knew!” I cried, divided between amusement and annoyance.

“What will you? When one is unique, one knows it! And others share
that opinion—even, if I mistake not, Miss Mary Marvell.”

“What?”

“Without doubt. She is coming here.”

“How do you make that out?”

“Very simply. This street, it is not aristocratic, _mon ami_! In
it there is no fashionable doctor, no fashionable dentist—still
less is there a fashionable milliner! But there _is_ a fashionable
detective. _Oui_, my friend, it is true—I am become the mode, the
_dernier cri_! One says to another: ‘_Comment?_ You have lost your
gold pencil-case? You must go to the little Belgian. He is too
marvellous! Every one goes! _Courez!’_ And they arrive! In flocks,
_mon ami_! With problems of the most foolish!” A bell rang below.
“What did I tell you? That is Miss Marvell.”

As usual, Poirot was right. After a short interval, the American
film star was ushered in, and we rose to our feet.

Mary Marvell was undoubtedly one of the most popular actresses on
the screen. She had only lately arrived in England in company with
her husband, Gregory B. Rolf, also a film actor. Their marriage
had taken place about a year ago in the States and this was their
first visit to England. They had been given a great reception.
Every one was prepared to go mad over Mary Marvell, her wonderful
clothes, her furs, her jewels, above all one jewel, the great
diamond which had been nicknamed, to match its owner, “the Western
Star.” Much, true and untrue, had been written about this famous
stone which was reported to be insured for the enormous sum of
fifty thousand pounds.

All these details passed rapidly through my mind as I joined with
Poirot in greeting our fair client.

Miss Marvell was small and slender, very fair and girlish-looking,
with the wide innocent blue eyes of a child.

Poirot drew forward a chair for her, and she commenced talking at
once.

“You will probably think me very foolish, Monsieur Poirot, but Lord
Cronshaw was telling me last night how wonderfully you cleared up
the mystery of his nephew’s death, and I felt that I just must have
your advice. I dare say it’s only a silly hoax—Gregory says so—but
it’s just worrying me to death.”

She paused for breath. Poirot beamed encouragement.

“Proceed, Madame. You comprehend, I am still in the dark.”

“It’s these letters.” Miss Marvell unclasped her handbag, and drew
out three envelopes which she handed to Poirot.

The latter scrutinized them closely.

“Cheap paper—the name and address carefully printed. Let us see
the inside.” He drew out the enclosure.

I had joined him, and was leaning over his shoulder. The writing
consisted of a single sentence, carefully printed like the envelope.
It ran as follows:

“The great diamond which is the left eye of the god must return
whence it came.”

The second letter was couched in precisely the same terms, but the
third was more explicit:

“You have been warned. You have not obeyed. Now the diamond will
be taken from you. At the full of the moon, the two diamonds which
are the left and right eye of the god shall return. So it is
written.”

“The first letter I treated as a joke,” explained Miss Marvell.
“When I got the second, I began to wonder. The third one came
yesterday, and it seemed to me that, after all, the matter might
be more serious than I had imagined.”

“I see they did not come by post, these letters.”

“No; they were left by hand—by a _Chinaman._ That is what frightens
me.”

“Why?”

“Because it was from a Chink in San Francisco that Gregory bought
the stone three years ago.”

“I see, madame, that you believe the diamond referred to to be——”

“‘The Western Star,’” finished Miss Marvell. “That’s so. At the
time, Gregory remembers that there was some story attached to the
stone, but the Chink wasn’t handing out any information. Gregory
says he seemed just scared to death, and in a mortal hurry to get
rid of the thing. He only asked about a tenth of its value. It was
Greg’s wedding present to me.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“The story seems of an almost unbelievable romanticism. And yet—who
knows? I pray of you, Hastings, hand me my little almanac.”

I complied.

“_Voyons!_” said Poirot, turning the leaves.

“When is the date of the full moon? Ah, Friday next. That is in
three days’ time. _Eh bien_, madame, you seek my advice—I give it
to you. This _belle histoire_ may be a hoax—but it may not!
Therefore I counsel you to place the diamond in my keeping until
after Friday next. Then we can take what steps we please.”

A slight cloud passed over the actress’s face, and she replied
constrainedly:

“I’m afraid that’s impossible.”

“You have it with you—_hein_?” Poirot was watching her narrowly.

The girl hesitated a moment, then slipped her hand into the bosom
of her gown, drawing out a long thin chain. She leaned forward,
unclosing her hand. In the palm, a stone of white fire, exquisitely
set in platinum, lay and winked at us solemnly.

Poirot drew in his breath with a long hiss.

“_Épatant!_” he murmured. “You permit, madame?” He took the jewel
in his own hand and scrutinized it keenly, then restored it to her
with a little bow. “A magnificent stone—without a flaw. Ah, _cent
tonnerres!_ and you carry it about with you, _comme ça_!”

“No, no, I’m very careful really, Monsieur Poirot. As a rule it’s
locked up in my jewel-case, and left in the hotel safe deposit.
We’re staying at the _Magnificent_, you know. I just brought it
along to-day for you to see.”

“And you will leave it with me, _n’est-ce pas_? You will be advised
by Papa Poirot?”

“Well, you see, it’s this way, Monsieur Poirot. On Friday we’re
going down to Yardly Chase to spend a few days with Lord and Lady
Yardly.”

Her words awoke a vague echo of remembrance in my mind. Some
gossip—what was it now? A few years ago Lord and Lady Yardly had
paid a visit to the States, rumour had it that his lordship had
rather gone the pace out there with the assistance of some lady
friends—but surely there was something more, some gossip which
coupled Lady Yardly’s name with that of a “movie” star in
California—why! it came to me in a flash—of course it was none
other than Gregory B. Rolf.

“I’ll let you into a little secret, Monsieur Poirot,” Miss Marvell
was continuing. “We’ve got a deal on with Lord Yardly. There’s some
chance of our arranging to film a play down there in his ancestral
pile.”

“At Yardly Chase?” I cried, interested. “Why, it’s one of the show
places of England.”

Miss Marvell nodded.

“I guess it’s the real old feudal stuff all right. But he wants a
pretty stiff price, and of course I don’t know yet whether the deal
will go through, but Greg and I always like to combine business
with pleasure.”

“But—I demand pardon if I am dense, madame—surely it is possible
to visit Yardly Chase without taking the diamond with you?”

A shrewd, hard look came into Miss Marvell’s eyes which belied
their childlike appearance. She looked suddenly a good deal older.

“I want to wear it down there.”

“Surely” I said suddenly, “there are some very famous jewels in
the Yardly collection, a large diamond amongst them?”

“That’s so,” said Miss Marvell briefly.

I heard Poirot murmur beneath his breath: “Ah, _c’est comme ça_!”
Then he said aloud, with his usual uncanny luck in hitting the
bull’s-eye (he dignifies it by the name of psychology): “Then you
are without doubt already acquainted with Lady Yardly, or perhaps
your husband is?”

“Gregory knew her when she was out West three years ago,” said Miss
Marvell. She hesitated a moment, and then added abruptly: “Do
either of you ever see _Society Gossip_?”

We both pleaded guilty rather shamefacedly.

“I ask because in this week’s number there is an article on famous
jewels, and it’s really very curious——” She broke off.

I rose, went to the table at the other side of the room and returned
with the paper in question in my hand. She took it from me, found
the article, and began to read aloud:

“. . . Amongst other famous stones may be included the Star of the
East, a diamond in the possession of the Yardly family. An ancestor
of the present Lord Yardly brought it back with him from China,
and a romantic story is said to attach to it. According to this,
the stone was once the right eye of a temple god. Another diamond,
exactly similar in form and size, formed the left eye, and the
story goes that this jewel, too, would in course of time be stolen.
‘One eye shall go West, the other East, till they shall meet once
more. Then, in triumph shall they return to the god.’ It is a
curious coincidence that there is at the present time a stone
corresponding closely in description with this one, and known as
‘the Star of the West,’ or ‘the Western Star.’ It is the property
of the celebrated film actress, Miss Mary Marvell. A comparison of
the two stones would be interesting.”

She stopped.

“_Épatant!_” murmured Poirot. “Without doubt a romance of the first
water.” He turned to Mary Marvell. “And you are not afraid, madame?
You have no superstitious terrors? You do not fear to introduce
these two Siamese twins to each other lest a Chinaman should appear
and, hey presto! whisk them both back to China?”

His tone was mocking, but I fancied that an undercurrent of
seriousness lay beneath it.

“I don’t believe that Lady Yardly’s diamond is anything like as
good a stone as mine,” said Miss Marvell. “Anyway, I’m going to
see.”

What more Poirot would have said I do not know, for at that moment
the door flew open, and a splendid-looking man strode into the
room. From his crisply curling black head, to the tips of his
patent-leather boots, he was a hero fit for romance.

“I said I’d call round for you, Mary,” said Gregory Rolf, “and here
I am. Well, what does Monsieur Poirot say to our little problem?
Just one big hoax, same as I do?”

Poirot smiled up at the big actor. They made a ridiculous contrast.

“Hoax or no hoax, Mr. Rolf,” he said dryly, “I have advised Madame
your wife not to take the jewel with her to Yardly Chase on Friday.”

“I’m with you there, sir. I’ve already said so to Mary. But there!
She’s a woman through and through, and I guess she can’t bear to
think of another woman outshining her in the jewel line.”

“What nonsense, Gregory!” said Mary Marvell sharply. But she
flushed angrily.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Madame, I have advised. I can do no more. _C’est fini_.”

He bowed them both to the door.

“Ah! _la la_,” he observed, returning. “_Histoire de femmes!_ The
good husband, he hit the nail on the head—_tout de même_, he was
not tactful! Assuredly not.”

I imparted to him my vague remembrances, and he nodded vigorously.

“So I thought. All the same, there is something curious underneath
all this. With your permission, _mon ami_, I will take the air.
Await my return, I beg of you. I shall not be long.”

I was half asleep in my chair when the landlady tapped on the door,
and put her head in.

“It’s another lady to see Mr. Poirot, sir. I’ve told her he was
out, but she says as how she’ll wait, seeing as she’s come up from
the country.”

“Oh, show her in here, Mrs. Murchison. Perhaps I can do something
for her.”

In another moment the lady had been ushered in. My heart gave a
leap as I recognized her. Lady Yardly’s portrait had figured too
often in the Society papers to allow her to remain unknown.

“Do sit down, Lady Yardly,” I said, drawing forward a chair. “My
friend Poirot is out, but I know for a fact that he’ll be back very
shortly.”

She thanked me and sat down. A very different type, this, from Miss
Mary Marvell. Tall, dark, with flashing eyes, and a pale proud
face—yet something wistful in the curves of the mouth.

I felt a desire to rise to the occasion. Why not? In Poirot’s
presence I have frequently felt a difficulty—I do not appear at my
best. And yet there is no doubt that I, too, possess the deductive
sense in a marked degree. I leant forward on a sudden impulse.

“Lady Yardly,” I said, “I know why you have come here. You have
received blackmailing letters about the diamond.”

There was no doubt as to my bolt having shot home. She stared at
me open-mouthed, all colour banished from her cheeks.

“You know?” she gasped. “How?”

I smiled.

“By a perfectly logical process. If Miss Marvell has had warning
letters——”

“Miss Marvell? She has been here?”

“She has just left. As I was saying, if she, as the holder of one
of the twin diamonds, has received a mysterious series of warnings,
you, as the holder of the other stone, must necessarily have done
the same. You see how simple it is? I am right, then, you have
received these strange communications also?”

For a moment she hesitated, as though in doubt whether to trust me
or not, then she bowed her head in assent with a little smile.

“That is so,” she acknowledged.

“Were yours, too, left by hand—by a Chinaman?”

“No, they came by post; but, tell me, has Miss Marvell undergone
the same experience, then?”

I recounted to her the events of the morning. She listened
attentively.

“It all fits in. My letters are the duplicates of hers. It is true
that they came by post, but there is a curious perfume impregnating
them—something in the nature of joss-stick—that at once suggested
the East to me. What does it all mean?”

I shook my head.

“That is what we must find out. You have the letters with you? We
might learn something from the postmarks.”

“Unfortunately I destroyed them. You understand, at the time I
regarded it as some foolish joke. Can it be true that some Chinese
gang are really trying to recover the diamonds? It seems too
incredible.”

We went over the facts again and again, but could get no further
towards the elucidation of the mystery. At last Lady Yardly rose.

“I really don’t think I need wait for Monsieur Poirot. You can tell
him all this, can’t you? Thank you so much, Mr.——”

She hesitated, her hand outstretched.

“Captain Hastings.”

“Of course! How stupid of me. You’re a friend of the Cavendishes,
aren’t you? It was Mary Cavendish who sent me to Monsieur Poirot.”

When my friend returned, I enjoyed telling him the tale of what
had occurred during his absence. He cross-questioned me rather
sharply over the details of our conversation and I could read
between the lines that he was not best pleased to have been absent.
I also fancied that the dear old fellow was just the least inclined
to be jealous. It had become rather a pose with him to consistently
belittle my abilities, and I think he was chagrined at finding no
loophole for criticism. I was secretly rather pleased with myself,
though I tried to conceal the fact for fear of irritating him. In
spite of his idiosyncrasies, I was deeply attached to my quaint
little friend.

“_Bien!_” he said at length, with a curious look on his face. “The
plot develops. Pass me, I pray you, that ‘Peerage’ on the top shelf
there.” He turned the leaves. “Ah, here we are! ‘Yardly . . . 10th
viscount, served South African War’ . . . _tout ça n’a pas
d’importance_ . . . ‘mar. 1907 Hon. Maude Stopperton, fourth
daughter of 3rd Baron Cotteril’ . . . um, um, um, . . . ‘has iss.
two daughters, born 1908, 1910. . . . Clubs . . . residences.’ . . .
_Voilà_, that does not tell us much. But to-morrow morning we see
this _milord_!”

“What?”

“Yes. I telegraphed to him.”

“I thought you had washed your hands of the case?”

“I am not acting for Miss Marvell since she refuses to be guided
by my advice. What I do now is for my own satisfaction—the
satisfaction of Hercule Poirot! Decidedly, I must have a finger in
this pie.”

“And you calmly wire Lord Yardly to dash up to town just to suit
your convenience. He won’t be pleased.”

“_Au contraire_, if I preserve for him his family diamond, he ought
to be very grateful.”

“Then you really think there is a chance of it being stolen?” I
asked eagerly.

“Almost a certainty,” replied Poirot placidly. “Everything points
that way.”

“But how——”

Poirot stopped my eager questions with an airy gesture of the hand.

“Not now, I pray you. Let us not confuse the mind. And observe that
‘Peerage’—how you have replaced him! See you not that the tallest
books go in the top shelf, the next tallest in the row beneath,
and so on. Thus we have order, _method_, which, as I have often
told you, Hastings——”

“Exactly,” I said hastily, and put the offending volume in its
proper place.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


Lord Yardly turned out to be a cheery, loud-voiced sportsman with
a rather red face, but with a good-humoured bonhomie about him that
was distinctly attractive and made up for any lack of mentality.

“Extraordinary business this, Monsieur Poirot. Can’t make head or
tail of it. Seems my wife’s been getting odd kind of letters, and
that this Miss Marvell’s had ’em too. What does it all mean?”

Poirot handed him the copy of _Society Gossip_.

“First, _milord_, I would ask you if these facts are substantially
correct?”

The peer took it. His face darkened with anger as he read.

“Damned nonsense!” he spluttered. “There’s never been any romantic
story attaching to the diamond. It came from India originally, I
believe. I never heard of all this Chinese god stuff.”

“Still, the stone _is_ known as ‘The Star of the East.’”

“Well, what if it is?” he demanded wrathfully.

Poirot smiled a little, but made no direct reply. “What I would
ask you to do, _milord_, is to place yourself in my hands. If you
do so unreservedly, I have great hopes of averting the catastrophe.”

“Then you think there’s actually something in these wild-cat
tales?”

“Will you do as I ask you?”

“Of course I will, but——”

“_Bien!_ Then permit that I ask you a few questions. This affair
of Yardly Chase, is it, as you say, all fixed up between you and
Mr. Rolf?”

“Oh, he told you about it, did he? No, there’s nothing settled.”
He hesitated, the brick-red colour of his face deepening. “Might
as well get the thing straight. I’ve made rather an ass of myself
in many ways, Monsieur Poirot—and I’m head over ears in debt—but
I want to pull up. I’m fond of the kids, and I want to straighten
things up, and be able to live on at the old place. Gregory Rolf
is offering me big money—enough to set me on my feet again. I don’t
want to do it—I hate the thought of all that crowd play-acting
round the Chase—but I may have to, unless——” He broke off.

Poirot eyed him keenly. “You have, then, another string to your
bow? Permit that I make a guess? It is to sell the Star of the
East?”

Lord Yardly nodded. “That’s it. It’s been in the family for some
generations, but it’s not entailed. Still, it’s not the easiest
thing in the world to find a purchaser. Hoffberg, the Hatton Garden
man, is on the look-out for a likely customer, but he’ll have to
find one soon, or it’s a washout.”

“One more question, _permettez_—Lady Yardly, which plan does she
approve?”

“Oh, she’s bitterly opposed to my selling the jewel. You know what
women are. She’s all for this film stunt.”

“I comprehend,” said Poirot. He remained a moment or so in thought,
then rose briskly to his feet. “You return to Yardly Chase at once?
_Bien!_ Say no word to anyone—to _anyone_ mind—but expect us there
this evening. We will arrive shortly after five.”

“All right, but I don’t see——”

“_Ça n’a pas d’importance_,” said Poirot kindly. “You will that I
preserve for you your diamond, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“Yes, but——”

“Then do as I say.”

A sadly bewildered nobleman left the room.

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

It was half-past five when we arrived at Yardly Chase, and followed
the dignified butler to the old panelled hall with its fire of
blazing logs. A pretty picture met our eyes: Lady Yardly and her
two children, the mother’s proud dark head bent down over the two
fair ones. Lord Yardly stood near, smiling down on them.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings,” announced the butler.

Lady Yardly looked up with a start, her husband came forward
uncertainly, his eyes seeking instruction from Poirot. The little
man was equal to the occasion.

“All my excuses! It is that I investigate still this affair of Miss
Marvell’s. She comes to you on Friday, does she not? I make a
little tour first to make sure that all is secure. Also I wanted
to ask of Lady Yardly if she recollected at all the postmarks on
the letters she received?”

Lady Yardly shook her head regretfully. “I’m afraid I don’t. It is
stupid of me. But, you see, I never dreamt of taking them
seriously.”

“You’ll stay the night?” said Lord Yardly.

“Oh, _milord_, I fear to incommode you. We have left our bags at
the inn.”

“That’s all right.” Lord Yardly had his cue. “We’ll send down for
them. No, no—no trouble, I assure you.”

Poirot permitted himself to be persuaded, and sitting down by Lady
Yardly, began to make friends with the children. In a short time
they were all romping together, and had dragged me into the game.

“_Vous êtes bonne mère_,” said Poirot, with a gallant little bow,
as the children were removed reluctantly by a stern nurse.

Lady Yardly smoothed her ruffled hair.

“I adore them,” she said with a little catch in her voice.

“And they you—with reason!” Poirot bowed again.

A dressing-gong sounded, and we rose to go up to our rooms. At that
moment the butler entered with a telegram on a salver which he
handed to Lord Yardly. The latter tore it open with a brief word
of apology. As he read it he stiffened visibly.

With an ejaculation, he handed it to his wife. Then he glanced at
my friend.

“Just a minute, Monsieur Poirot. I feel you ought to know about
this. It’s from Hoffberg. He thinks he’s found a customer for the
diamond—an American, sailing for the States to-morrow. They’re
sending down a chap to-night to vet the stone. By Jove, though, if
this goes through——” Words failed him.

Lady Yardly had turned away. She still held the telegram in her
hand.

“I wish you wouldn’t sell it, George,” she said, in a low voice.
“It’s been in the family so long.” She waited, as though for a
reply, but when none came her face hardened. She shrugged her
shoulders. “I must go and dress. I suppose I had better display
‘the goods.’” She turned to Poirot with a slight grimace. “It’s
one of the most hideous necklaces that was ever designed! George
has always promised to have the stones reset for me, but it’s never
been done.” She left the room.

Half an hour later, we three were assembled in the great drawing-room
awaiting the lady. It was already a few minutes past the dinner
hour.

Suddenly there was a low rustle, and Lady Yardly appeared framed
in the doorway, a radiant figure in a long white shimmering dress.
Round the column of her neck was a rivulet of fire. She stood there
with one hand just touching the necklace.

“Behold the sacrifice,” she said gaily. Her ill-humour seemed to
have vanished. “Wait while I turn the big light on and you shall
feast your eyes on the ugliest necklace in England.”

The switches were just outside the door. As she stretched out her
hand to them, the incredible thing happened. Suddenly without any
warning, every light was extinguished, the door banged, and from
the other side of it came a long-drawn piercing woman’s scream.

“My God!” cried Lord Yardly. “That was Maude’s voice! What has
happened?”

We rushed blindly for the door, cannoning into each other in the
darkness. It was some minutes before we could find it. What a sight
met our eyes! Lady Yardly lay senseless on the marble floor, a
crimson mark on her white throat where the necklace had been
wrenched from her neck.

As we bent over her, uncertain for the moment whether she were dead
or alive, her eyelids opened.

“The Chinaman,” she whispered painfully. “The Chinaman—the side
door.”

Lord Yardly sprang up with an oath. I accompanied him, my heart
beating wildly. The Chinaman again! The side door in question was
a small one in the angle of the wall, not more than a dozen yards
from the scene of the tragedy. As we reached it, I gave a cry.
There, just short of the threshold, lay the glittering necklace,
evidently dropped by the thief in the panic of his flight. I
swooped joyously down on it. Then I uttered another cry which Lord
Yardly echoed. For in the middle of the necklace was a great gap.
The Star of the East was missing!

“That settles it,” I breathed. “These were no ordinary thieves.
This one stone was all they wanted.”

“But how did the fellow get in?”

“Through this door.”

“But it’s always locked.”

I shook my head. “It’s not locked now. See.” I pulled it open as
I spoke.

As I did so something fluttered to the ground. I picked it up. It
was a piece of silk, and the embroidery was unmistakable. It had
been torn from a Chinaman’s robe.

“In his haste it caught in the door,” I explained. “Come, hurry.
He cannot have gone far as yet.”

But in vain we hunted and searched. In the pitch darkness of the
night, the thief had found it easy to make his getaway. We returned
reluctantly, and Lord Yardly sent off one of the footmen post-haste
to fetch the police.

Lady Yardly, aptly ministered to by Poirot, who is as good as a
woman in these matters, was sufficiently recovered to be able to
tell her story.

“I was just going to turn on the other light,” she said, “when a
man sprang on me from behind. He tore my necklace from my neck with
such force that I fell headlong to the floor. As I fell I saw him
disappearing through the side door. Then I realized by the pig-tail
and the embroidered robe that he was a Chinaman.” She stopped with
a shudder.

The butler reappeared. He spoke in a low voice to Lord Yardly.

“A gentleman from Mr. Hoffberg’s, m’lord. He says you expect him.”

“Good heavens!” cried the distracted nobleman. “I must see him, I
suppose. No, not here, Mullings, in the library.”

I drew Poirot aside.

“Look here, my dear fellow, hadn’t we better get back to London?”

“You think so, Hastings? Why?”

“Well”—I coughed delicately—“things haven’t gone very well, have
they? I mean, you tell Lord Yardly to place himself in your hands
and all will be well—and then the diamond vanishes from under your
very nose!”

“True,” said Poirot, rather crestfallen. “It was not one of my most
striking triumphs.”

This way of describing events almost caused me to smile, but I
stuck to my guns.

“So, having—pardon the expression—rather made a mess of things,
don’t you think it would be more graceful to leave immediately?”

“And the dinner, the without doubt excellent dinner, that the
_chef_ of Lord Yardly has prepared?”

“Oh, what’s dinner!” I said impatiently.

Poirot held up his hands in horror.

“_Mon Dieu!_ It is that in this country you treat the affairs
gastronomic with a criminal indifference.”

“There’s another reason why we should get back to London as soon
as possible,” I continued.

“What is that, my friend?”

“The other diamond,” I said, lowering my voice. “Miss Marvell’s.”

“_Eh bien_, what of it?”

“Don’t you see?” His unusual obtuseness annoyed me. What had
happened to his usually keen wits? “They’ve got one, now they’ll
go for the other.”

“_Tiens!_” cried Poirot, stepping back a pace and regarding me with
admiration. “But your brain marches to a marvel, my friend! Figure
to yourself that for the moment I had not thought of that! But
there is plenty of time. The full of the moon, it is not until
Friday.”

I shook my head dubiously. The full of the moon theory left me
entirely cold. I had my way with Poirot, however, and we departed
immediately, leaving behind us a note of explanation and apology
for Lord Yardly.

My idea was to go at once to the _Magnificent_, and relate to Miss
Marvell what had occurred, but Poirot vetoed the plan, and insisted
that the morning would be time enough. I gave in rather grudgingly.

In the morning Poirot seemed strangely disinclined to stir out. I
began to suspect that, having made a mistake to start with, he was
singularly loath to proceed with the case. In answer to my
persuasions, he pointed out, with admirable common sense, that as
the details of the affair at Yardly Chase were already in the
morning papers the Rolfs would know quite as much as we could tell
them. I gave way unwillingly.

Events proved my forebodings to be justified. About two o’clock,
the telephone rang. Poirot answered it. He listened for some
moments, then with a brief “_Bien, j’y serai_” he rang off, and
turned to me.

“What do you think, _mon ami_?” He looked half ashamed, half
excited. “The diamond of Miss Marvell, it has been stolen.”

“What?” I cried, springing up. “And what about the ‘full of the
moon’ now?” Poirot hung his head. “When did this happen?”

“This morning, I understand.”

I shook my head sadly. “If only you had listened to me. You see I
was right.”

“It appears so, _mon ami_,” said Poirot cautiously. “Appearances
are deceptive, they say, but it certainly appears so.”

As we hurried in a taxi to the _Magnificent_, I puzzled out the
true inwardness of the scheme.

“That ‘full of the moon’ idea was clever. The whole point of it
was to get us to concentrate on the Friday, and so be off our guard
beforehand. It is a pity you did not realize that.”

“_Ma foi!_” said Poirot airily, his nonchalance quite restored
after its brief eclipse. “One cannot think of everything!”

I felt sorry for him. He did so hate failure of any kind.

“Cheer up,” I said consolingly. “Better luck next time.”

At the _Magnificent_, we were ushered at once into the manager’s
office. Gregory Rolf was there with two men from Scotland Yard. A
pale-faced clerk sat opposite them.

Rolf nodded to us as we entered.

“We’re getting to the bottom of it,” he said. “But it’s almost
unbelievable. How the guy had the nerve I can’t think.”

A very few minutes sufficed to give us the facts. Mr. Rolf had gone
out of the hotel at 11.15. At 11.30, a gentleman, so like him in
appearance as to pass muster, entered the hotel and demanded the
jewel-case from the safe deposit. He duly signed the receipt,
remarking carelessly as he did so: “Looks a bit different from my
ordinary one, but I hurt my hand getting out of the taxi.” The
clerk merely smiled and remarked that he saw very little difference.
Rolf laughed and said: “Well, don’t run me in as a crook this time,
anyway. I’ve been getting threatening letters from a Chinaman, and
the worst of it is I look rather like a Chink myself—it’s something
about the eyes.”

“I looked at him,” said the clerk who was telling us this, “and I
saw at once what he meant. The eyes slanted up at the corners like
an Oriental’s. I’d never noticed it before.”

“Darn it all, man,” roared Gregory Rolf, leaning forward, “do you
notice it now?”

The man looked up at him and started.

“No, sir,” he said. “I can’t say I do.” And indeed there was
nothing even remotely Oriental about the frank brown eyes that
looked into ours.

The Scotland Yard man grunted. “Bold customer. Thought the eyes
might be noticed, and took the bull by the horns to disarm
suspicion. He must have watched you out of the hotel, sir, and
nipped in as soon as you were well away.”

“What about the jewel-case?” I asked.

“It was found in a corridor of the hotel. Only one thing had been
taken—‘the Western Star.’”

We stared at each other—the whole thing was so bizarre, so unreal.

Poirot hopped briskly to his feet. “I have not been of much use,
I fear,” he said regretfully. “Is it permitted to see Madame?”

“I guess she’s prostrated with the shock,” explained Rolf.

“Then perhaps I might have a few words alone with you, monsieur?”

“Certainly.”

In about five minutes Poirot reappeared.

“Now, my friend,” he said gaily. “To a post office. I have to send
a telegram.”

“Who to?”

“Lord Yardly.” He discounted further inquiries by slipping his arm
through mine. “Come, come, _mon ami_. I know all that you feel
about this miserable business. I have not distinguished myself!
You, in my place, might have distinguished yourself! _Bien!_ All
is admitted. Let us forget it and have lunch.”

It was about four o’clock when we entered Poirot’s rooms. A figure
rose from a chair by the window. It was Lord Yardly. He looked
haggard and distraught.

“I got your wire and came up at once. Look here, I’ve been round
to Hoffberg, and they know nothing about that man of theirs last
night, or the wire either. Do you think that——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“My excuses! I sent that wire, and hired the gentleman in question.”

“_You_—but why? What?” The nobleman spluttered impotently.

“My little idea was to bring things to a head,” explained Poirot
placidly.

“Bring things to a head! Oh, my God!” cried Lord Yardly.

“And the ruse succeeded,” said Poirot cheerfully. “Therefore,
_milord_, I have much pleasure in returning you—this!” With a
dramatic gesture he produced a glittering object. It was a great
diamond.

“The Star of the East,” gasped Lord Yardly. “But I don’t
understand——”

“No?” said Poirot. “It makes no matter. Believe me, it was necessary
for the diamond to be stolen. I promised you that it should be
preserved to you, and I have kept my word. You must permit me to
keep my little secret. Convey, I beg of you, the assurances of my
deepest respect to Lady Yardly, and tell her how pleased I am to
be able to restore her jewel to her. What _beau temps_, is it not?
Good day, _milord_.”

And smiling and talking, the amazing little man conducted the
bewildered nobleman to the door. He returned gently rubbing his
hands.

“Poirot,” I said. “Am I quite demented?”

“No, _mon ami_, but you are, as always, in a mental fog.”

“How did you get the diamond.”

“From Mr. Rolf.”

“Rolf?”

“_Mais oui!_ The warning letters, the Chinaman, the article in
_Society Gossip_, all sprang from the ingenious brain of Mr. Rolf!
The two diamonds, supposed to be so miraculously alike—bah! they
did not exist. There was only _one_ diamond, my friend! Originally
in the Yardly collection, for three years it has been in the
possession of Mr. Rolf. He stole it this morning with the assistance
of a touch of grease paint at the corner of each eye! Ah, I must
see him on the film, he is indeed an artist, _celui-là_!

“But why should he steal his own diamond?” I asked, puzzled.

“For many reasons. To begin with, Lady Yardly was getting restive.”

“Lady Yardly?”

“You comprehend she was left much alone in California. Her husband
was amusing himself elsewhere. Mr. Rolf was handsome, he had an
air about him of romance. But _au fond_, he is very business-like,
_ce monsieur_! He made love to Lady Yardly, and then he blackmailed
her. I taxed the lady with the truth the other night, and she
admitted it. She swore that she had only been indiscreet, and I
believe her. But, undoubtedly, Rolf had letters of hers that could
be twisted to bear a different interpretation. Terrified by the
threat of a divorce, and the prospect of being separated from her
children, she agreed to all he wished. She had no money of her own,
and she was forced to permit him to substitute a paste replica for
the real stone. The coincidence of the date of the appearance of
‘the Western Star’ struck me at once. All goes well. Lord Yardly
prepares to range himself—to settle down. And then comes the menace
of the possible sale of the diamond. The substitution will be
discovered. Without doubt she writes off frantically to Gregory
Rolf who has just arrived in England. He soothes her by promising
to arrange all—and prepares for a double robbery. In this way he
will quiet the lady, who might conceivably tell all to her husband,
an affair which would not suit our blackmailer at all, he will have
£50,000 insurance money (aha, you had forgotten that!), and he will
still have the diamond! At this point I put my finger in the pie.
The arrival of a diamond expert is announced. Lady Yardly, as I
felt sure she would, immediately arranges a robbery—and does it
very well too! But Hercule Poirot, he sees nothing but facts. What
happens in actuality? The lady switches off the light, bangs the
door, throws the necklace down the passage, and screams. She has
already wrenched out the diamond with pliers upstairs——”

“But we saw the necklace round her neck!” I objected.

“I demand pardon, my friend. Her hand concealed the part of it
where the gap would have shown. To place a piece of silk in the
door beforehand is child’s play! Of course, as soon as Rolf read
of the robbery, he arranged his own little comedy. And very well
he played it!”

“What did you say to him?” I asked with lively curiosity.

“I said to him that Lady Yardly had told her husband all, that I
was empowered to recover the jewel, and that if it were not
immediately handed over proceedings would be taken. Also a few more
little lies which occurred to me. He was as wax in my hands!”

I pondered the matter.

“It seems a little unfair on Mary Marvell. She has lost her diamond
through no fault of her own.”

“Bah!” said Poirot brutally. “She has a magnificent advertisement.
That is all she cares for, that one! Now the other, she is
different. _Bonne mère, très femme!_”

“Yes,” I said doubtfully, hardly sharing Poirot’s views on
femininity. “I suppose it was Rolf who sent her the duplicate
letters.”

“_Pas du tout_,” said Poirot briskly. “She came by the advice of
Mary Cavendish to seek my aid in her dilemma. Then she heard that
Mary Marvell, whom she knew to be her enemy, had been here, and
she changed her mind, jumping at a pretext that _you_, my friend,
offered her. A very few questions sufficed to show me that _you_
told her of the letters, not she you! She jumped at the chance your
words offered.”

“I don’t believe it,” I cried, stung.

“_Si, si, mon ami_, it is a pity that you study not the psychology.
She told you that the letters were destroyed? Oh, la la, _never_
does a woman destroy a letter if she can avoid it! Not even if it
would be more prudent to do so!”

“It’s all very well,” I said, my anger rising, “but you’ve made a
perfect fool of me! From beginning to end! No, it’s all very well
to try and explain it away afterwards. There really is a limit!”

“But you were so enjoying yourself, my friend. I had not the heart
to shatter your illusions.”

“It’s no good. You’ve gone a bit too far this time.”

“_Mon Dieu!_ but how you enrage yourself for nothing, _mon ami_!”

“I’m fed up!” I went out, banging the door. Poirot had made an
absolute laughing-stock of me. I decided that he needed a sharp
lesson. I would let some time elapse before I forgave him. He had
encouraged me to make a perfect fool of myself!




  II


  The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor


I had been called away from town for a few days, and on my return
found Poirot in the act of strapping up his small valise.

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. I feared you would not have returned
in time to accompany me.”

“You are called away on a case, then?”

“Yes, though I am bound to admit that, on the face of it, the
affair does not seem promising. The Northern Union Insurance
Company have asked me to investigate the death of a Mr. Maltravers
who a few weeks ago insured his life with them for the large sum
of fifty thousand pounds.”

“Yes?” I said, much interested.

“There was, of course, the usual suicide clause in the policy. In
the event of his committing suicide within a year the premiums
would be forfeited. Mr. Maltravers was duly examined by the
Company’s own doctor, and although he was a man slightly past the
prime of life was passed as being in quite sound health. However,
on Wednesday last—the day before yesterday—the body of Mr.
Maltravers was found in the grounds of his house in Essex, Marsdon
Manor, and the cause of his death is described as some kind of
internal hæmorrhage. That in itself would be nothing remarkable,
but sinister rumours as to Mr. Maltravers’ financial position have
been in the air of late, and the Northern Union have ascertained
beyond any possible doubt that the deceased gentleman stood upon
the verge of bankruptcy. Now that alters matters considerably.
Maltravers had a beautiful young wife, and it is suggested that he
got together all the ready money he could for the purpose of paying
the premiums on a life insurance for his wife’s benefit, and then
committed suicide. Such a thing is not uncommon. In any case, my
friend Alfred Wright, who is a director of the Northern Union, has
asked me to investigate the facts of the case, but, as I told him,
I am not very hopeful of success. If the cause of the death had
been heart failure, I should have been more sanguine. Heart failure
may always be translated as the inability of the local G.P. to
discover what his patient really did die of, but a hæmorrhage seems
fairly definite. Still, we can but make some necessary inquiries.
Five minutes to pack your bag, Hastings, and we will take a taxi
to Liverpool Street.”

About an hour later, we alighted from a Great Eastern train at the
little station of Marsdon Leigh. Inquiries at the station yielded
the information that Marsdon Manor was about a mile distant. Poirot
decided to walk, and we betook ourselves along the main street.

“What is our plan of campaign?” I asked.

“First I will call upon the doctor. I have ascertained that there
is only one doctor in Marsdon Leigh, Dr. Ralph Bernard. Ah, here
we are at his house.”

The house in question was a kind of superior cottage, standing back
a little from the road. A brass plate on the gate bore the doctor’s
name. We passed up the path and rang the bell.

We proved to be fortunate in our call. It was the doctor’s
consulting hour, and for the moment there were no patients waiting
for him. Dr. Bernard was an elderly man, high-shouldered and
stooping, with a pleasant vagueness of manner.

Poirot introduced himself and explained the purpose of our visit,
adding that Insurance Companies were bound to investigate fully in
a case of this kind.

“Of course, of course,” said Dr. Bernard vaguely. “I suppose, as
he was such a rich man, his life was insured for a big sum?”

“You consider him a rich man, doctor?”

The doctor looked rather surprised.

“Was he not? He kept two cars, you know, and Marsdon Manor is a
pretty big place to keep up, although I believe he bought it very
cheap.”

“I understand that he had had considerable losses of late,” said
Poirot, watching the doctor narrowly.

The latter, however, merely shook his head sadly.

“Is that so? Indeed. It is fortunate for his wife, then, that there
is this life insurance. A very beautiful and charming young
creature, but terribly unstrung by this sad catastrophe. A mass of
nerves, poor thing. I have tried to spare her all I can, but of
course the shock was bound to be considerable.”

“You had been attending Mr. Maltravers recently?”

“My dear sir, I never attended him.”

“What?”

“I understand Mr. Maltravers was a Christian Scientist—or something
of that kind.”

“But you examined the body?”

“Certainly. I was fetched by one of the under-gardeners.”

“And the cause of death was clear?”

“Absolutely. There was blood on the lips, but most of the bleeding
must have been internal.”

“Was he still lying where he had been found?”

“Yes, the body had not been touched. He was lying at the edge of
a small plantation. He had evidently been out shooting rooks, a
small rook rifle lay beside him. The hæmorrhage must have occurred
quite suddenly. Gastric ulcer, without a doubt.”

“No question of his having been shot, eh?”

“My dear sir!”

“I demand pardon,” said Poirot humbly. “But, if my memory is not
at fault, in the case of a recent murder, the doctor first gave a
verdict of heart failure—altering it when the local constable
pointed out that there was a bullet wound through the head!”

“You will not find any bullet wounds on the body of Mr. Maltravers,”
said Dr. Bernard dryly. “Now, gentlemen, if there is nothing
further——”

We took the hint.

“Good morning, and many thanks to you, doctor, for so kindly
answering our questions. By the way, you saw no need for an
autopsy?”

“Certainly not.” The doctor became quite apoplectic. “The cause of
death was clear, and in my profession we see no need to distress
unduly the relatives of a dead patient.”

And, turning, the doctor slammed the door sharply in our faces.

“And what do you think of Dr. Bernard, Hastings?” inquired Poirot,
as we proceeded on our way to the Manor.

“Rather an old ass.”

“Exactly. Your judgments of character are always profound, my
friend.”

I glanced at him uneasily, but he seemed perfectly serious. A
twinkle, however, came into his eye, and he added slyly:

“That is to say, when there is no question of a beautiful woman!”

I looked at him coldly.

On our arrival at the manor-house, the door was opened to us by a
middle-aged parlourmaid. Poirot handed her his card, and a letter
from the Insurance Company for Mrs. Maltravers. She showed us into
a small morning-room, and retired to tell her mistress. About ten
minutes elapsed, and then the door opened, and a slender figure in
widow’s weeds stood upon the threshold.

“Monsieur Poirot?” she faltered.

“Madame!” Poirot sprang gallantly to his feet and hastened towards
her. “I cannot tell you how I regret to derange you in this way.
But what will you? _Les affaires_—they know no mercy.”

Mrs. Maltravers permitted him to lead her to a chair. Her eyes were
red with weeping, but the temporary disfigurement could not conceal
her extraordinary beauty. She was about twenty-seven or eight, and
very fair, with large blue eyes and a pretty pouting mouth.

“It is something about my husband’s insurance, is it? But must I
be bothered _now_—so soon?”

“Courage, my dear Madame. Courage! You see, your late husband
insured his life for rather a large sum, and in such a case the
Company always has to satisfy itself as to a few details. They have
empowered me to act for them. You can rest assured that I will do
all in my power to render the matter not too unpleasant for you.
Will you recount to me briefly the sad events of Wednesday?”

“I was changing for tea when my maid came up—one of the gardeners
had just run to the house. He had found——”

Her voice trailed away. Poirot pressed her hand sympathetically.

“I comprehend. Enough! You had seen your husband earlier in the
afternoon?”

“Not since lunch. I had walked down to the village for some stamps,
and I believe he was out pottering round the grounds.”

“Shooting rooks, eh?”

“Yes, he usually took his little rook rifle with him, and I heard
one or two shots in the distance.”

“Where is this little rook rifle now?”

“In the hall, I think.”

She led the way out of the room and found and handed the little
weapon to Poirot, who examined it cursorily.

“Two shots fired, I see,” he observed, as he handed it back. “And
now, madame, if I might see——”

He paused delicately.

“The servant shall take you,” she murmured, averting her head.

The parlourmaid, summoned, led Poirot upstairs. I remained with
the lovely and unfortunate woman. It was hard to know whether to
speak or remain silent. I essayed one or two general reflections
to which she responded absently, and in a very few minutes Poirot
rejoined us.

“I thank you for all your courtesy, madame. I do not think you need
be troubled any further with this matter. By the way, do you know
anything of your husband’s financial position?”

She shook her head.

“Nothing whatever. I am very stupid over business things.”

“I see. Then you can give us no clue as to why he suddenly decided
to insure his life? He had not done so previously, I understand.”

“Well, we had only been married a little over a year. But, as to
why he insured his life, it was because he had absolutely made up
his mind that he would not live long. He had a strong premonition
of his own death. I gather that he had had one hæmorrhage already,
and that he knew that another one would prove fatal. I tried to
dispel these gloomy fears of his, but without avail. Alas, he was
only too right!”

Tears in her eyes, she bade us a dignified farewell. Poirot made
a characteristic gesture as we walked down the drive together.

“_Eh bien_, that is that! Back to London, my friend, there appears
to be no mouse in this mouse-hole. And yet——”

“Yet what?”

“A slight discrepancy, that is all! You noticed it? You did not?
Still, life is full of discrepancies, and assuredly the man cannot
have taken his own life—there is no poison that would fill his
mouth with blood. No, no, I must resign myself to the fact that
all here is clear and above-board—but who is this?”

A tall young man was striding up the drive towards us. He passed
us without making any sign, but I noted that he was not ill-looking,
with a lean, deeply bronzed face that spoke of life in a tropic
clime. A gardener who was sweeping up leaves had paused for a
minute in his task, and Poirot ran quickly up to him.

“Tell me, I pray you, who is that gentleman? Do you know him?”

“I don’t remember his name, sir, though I did hear it. He was
staying down here last week for a night. Tuesday, it was.”

“Quick, _mon ami_, let us follow him.”

We hastened up the drive after the retreating figure. A glimpse of
a black-robed figure on the terrace at the side of the house, and
our quarry swerved and we after him, so that we were witnesses of
the meeting.

Mrs. Maltravers almost staggered where she stood, and her face
blanched noticeably.

“You,” she gasped. “I thought you were on the sea—on your way to
East Africa?”

“I got some news from my lawyers that detained me,” explained the
young man. “My old uncle in Scotland died unexpectedly and left me
some money. Under the circumstances I thought it better to cancel
my passage. Then I saw this bad news in the paper and I came down
to see if there was anything I could do. You’ll want some one to
look after things for you a bit perhaps.”

At that moment they became aware of our presence. Poirot stepped
forward, and with many apologies explained that he had left his
stick in the hall. Rather reluctantly, it seemed to me, Mrs.
Maltravers made the necessary introduction.

“Monsieur Poirot, Captain Black.”

A few minutes’ chat ensued, in the course of which Poirot elicited
the fact that Captain Black was putting up at the Anchor Inn. The
missing stick not having been discovered (which was not surprising),
Poirot uttered more apologies and we withdrew.

We returned to the village at a great pace, and Poirot made a bee
line for the Anchor Inn.

“Here we establish ourselves until our friend the Captain returns,”
he explained. “You notice that I emphasized the point that we were
returning to London by the first train? Possibly you thought I
meant it. But no—you observed Mrs. Maltravers’ face when she caught
sight of this young Black? She was clearly taken aback, and he—_eh
bien_, he was very devoted, did you not think so? And he was here
on Tuesday night—the day before Mr. Maltravers died. We must
investigate the doings of Captain Black, Hastings.”

In about half an hour we espied our quarry approaching the inn.
Poirot went out and accosted him and presently brought him up to
the room we had engaged.

“I have been telling Captain Black of the mission which brings us
here,” he explained. “You can understand, _monsieur le capitaine_,
that I am anxious to arrive at Mr. Maltravers’ state of mind
immediately before his death, and that at the same time I do not
wish to distress Mrs. Maltravers unduly by asking her painful
questions. Now, you were here just before the occurrence, and can
give us equally valuable information.”

“I’ll do anything I can to help you, I’m sure,” replied the young
soldier; “but I’m afraid I didn’t notice anything out of the
ordinary. You see, although Maltravers was an old friend of my
people’s, I didn’t know him very well myself.”

“You came down—when?”

“Tuesday afternoon. I went up to town early Wednesday morning, as
my boat sailed from Tilbury about twelve o’clock. But some news I
got made me alter my plans, as I dare say you heard me explain to
Mrs. Maltravers.”

“You were returning to East Africa, I understand?”

“Yes. I’ve been out there ever since the War—a great country.”

“Exactly. Now what was the talk about at dinner on Tuesday night?”

“Oh, I don’t know. The usual odd topics. Maltravers asked after my
people, and then we discussed the question of German reparations,
and then Mrs. Maltravers asked a lot of questions about East
Africa, and I told them one or two yarns, that’s about all, I
think.”

“Thank you.”

Poirot was silent for a moment, then he said gently: “With your
permission, I should like to try a little experiment. You have told
us all that your conscious self knows, I want now to question your
subconscious self.”

“Psychoanalysis, what?” said Black, with visible alarm.

“Oh, no,” said Poirot reassuringly. “You see, it is like this, I
give you a word, you answer with another, and so on. Any word, the
first one you think of. Shall we begin?”

“All right,” said Black slowly, but he looked uneasy.

“Note down the words, please, Hastings,” said Poirot. Then he took
from his pocket his big turnip-faced watch and laid it on the table
beside him. “We will commence. Day.”

There was a moment’s pause, and then Black replied:

“_Night_.”

As Poirot proceeded, his answers came quicker.

“Name,” said Poirot.

“_Place_.”

“Bernard.”

“_Shaw_.”

“Tuesday.”

“_Dinner_.”

“Journey.”

“_Ship_.”

“Country.”

“_Uganda_.”

“Story.”

“_Lions_.”

“Rook Rifle.”

“_Farm_.”

“Shot.”

“_Suicide_.”

“Elephant.”

“_Tusks_.”

“Money.”

“_Lawyers_.”

“Thank you, Captain Black. Perhaps you could spare me a few minutes
in about half an hour’s time?”

“Certainly.” The young soldier looked at him curiously and wiped
his brow as he got up.

“And now, Hastings,” said Poirot, smiling at me as the door closed
behind him. “You see it all, do you not?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“Does that list of words tell you nothing?”

I scrutinized it, but was forced to shake my head.

“I will assist you. To begin with, Black answered well within the
normal time limit, with no pauses, so we can take it that he
himself has no guilty knowledge to conceal. ‘Day’ to ‘Night’ and
‘Place’ to ‘Name’ are normal associations. I began work with
‘Bernard’ which might have suggested the local doctor had he come
across him at all. Evidently he had not. After our recent
conversation, he gave ‘Dinner’ to my ‘Tuesday,’ but ‘Journey’ and
‘Country’ were answered by ‘Ship’ and ‘Uganda,’ showing clearly
that it was his journey abroad that was important to him and not
the one which brought him down here. ‘Story’ recalls to him one of
the ‘Lion’ stories he told at dinner. I proceed to ‘Rook Rifle’
and he answered with the totally unexpected word ‘Farm.’ When I
say ‘Shot,’ he answers at once ‘Suicide.’ The association seems
clear. A man he knows committed suicide with a rook rifle on a farm
somewhere. Remember, too, that his mind is still on the stories he
told at dinner, and I think you will agree that I shall not be far
from the truth if I recall Captain Black and ask him to repeat the
particular suicide story which he told at the dinner-table on
Tuesday evening.”

Black was straightforward enough over the matter.

“Yes, I did tell them that story now that I come to think of it.
Chap shot himself on a farm out there. Did it with a rook rifle
through the roof of the mouth, bullet lodged in the brain. Doctors
were no end puzzled over it—there was nothing to show except a
little blood on the lips. But what——”

“What has it got to do with Mr. Maltravers? You did not know, I
see, that he was found with a rook rifle by his side.”

“You mean my story suggested to him—oh, but that is awful!”

“Do not distress yourself—it would have been one way or another.
Well, I must get on the telephone to London.”

Poirot had a lengthy conversation over the wire, and came back
thoughtful. He went off by himself in the afternoon, and it was
not till seven o’clock that he announced that he could put it off
no longer, but must break the news to the young widow. My sympathy
had already gone out to her unreservedly. To be left penniless,
and with the knowledge that her husband had killed himself to
assure her future was a hard burden for any woman to bear. I
cherished a secret hope, however, that young Black might prove
capable of consoling her after her first grief had passed. He
evidently admired her enormously.

Our interview with the lady was painful. She refused vehemently to
believe the facts that Poirot advanced, and when she was at last
convinced broke down into bitter weeping. An examination of the
body turned our suspicions into certainty. Poirot was very sorry
for the poor lady, but, after all, he was employed by the Insurance
Company, and what could he do? As he was preparing to leave he said
gently to Mrs. Maltravers:

“Madame, you of all people should know that there are no dead!”

“What do you mean?” she faltered, her eyes growing wide.

“Have you never taken part in any spiritualistic séances? You are
mediumistic, you know.”

“I have been told so. But you do not believe in Spiritualism,
surely?”

“Madame, I have seen some strange things. You know that they say
in the village that this house is haunted?”

She nodded, and at that moment the parlourmaid announced that
dinner was ready.

“Won’t you just stay and have something to eat?”

We accepted gratefully, and I felt that our presence could not but
help distract her a little from her own griefs.

We had just finished our soup, when there was a scream outside the
door, and the sound of breaking crockery. We jumped up. The
parlourmaid appeared, her hand to her heart.

“It was a man—standing in the passage.”

Poirot rushed out, returning quickly.

“There is no one there.”

“Isn’t there, sir?” said the parlourmaid weakly. “Oh, it did give
me a start!”

“But why?”

She dropped her voice to a whisper.

“I thought—I thought it was the master—it looked like ’im.”

I saw Mrs. Maltravers give a terrified start, and my mind flew to
the old superstition that a suicide cannot rest. She thought of it
too, I am sure, for a minute later, she caught Poirot’s arm with
a scream.

“Didn’t you hear that? Those three taps on the window? That’s how
_he_ always used to tap when he passed round the house.”

“The ivy,” I cried. “It was the ivy against the pane.”

But a sort of terror was gaining on us all. The parlourmaid was
obviously unstrung, and when the meal was over Mrs. Maltravers
besought Poirot not to go at once. She was clearly terrified to be
left alone. We sat in the little morning-room. The wind was getting
up, and moaning round the house in an eerie fashion. Twice the door
of the room came unlatched and the door slowly opened, and each
time she clung to me with a terrified gasp.

“Ah, but this door, it is bewitched!” cried

Poirot angrily at last. He got up and shut it once more, then
turned the key in the lock. “I shall lock it, so!”

“Don’t do that,” she gasped, “if it should come open now——”

And even as she spoke the impossible happened. The locked door
slowly swung open. I could not see into the passage from where I
sat, but she and Poirot were facing it. She gave one long shriek
as she turned to him.

“You saw him—there in the passage?” she cried.

He was staring down at her with a puzzled face, then shook his
head.

“I saw him—my husband—you must have seen him too?”

“Madame, I saw nothing. You are not well—unstrung——”

“I am perfectly well, I——Oh, God!”

Suddenly, without any warning, the lights quivered and went out.
Out of the darkness came three loud raps. I could hear Mrs.
Maltravers moaning.

And then—I saw!

The man I had seen on the bed upstairs stood there facing us,
gleaming with a faint ghostly light. There was blood on his lips,
and he held his right hand out, pointing. Suddenly a brilliant
light seemed to proceed from it. It passed over Poirot and me, and
fell on Mrs. Maltravers. I saw her white terrified face, and
something else!

“My God, Poirot!” I cried. “Look at her hand, her right hand. It’s
all red!”

Her own eyes fell on it, and she collapsed in a heap on the floor.

“Blood,” she cried hysterically. “Yes, it’s blood. I killed him.
I did it. He was showing me, and then I put my hand on the trigger
and pressed. Save me from him—save me! he’s come back!”

Her voice died away in a gurgle.

“Lights,” said Poirot briskly.

The lights went on as if by magic.

“That’s it,” he continued. “You heard, Hastings? And you, Everett?
Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Everett, rather a fine member of the
theatrical profession. I ’phoned to him this afternoon. His make-up
is good, isn’t it? Quite like the dead man, and with a pocket torch
and the necessary phosphorescence he made the proper impression.
I shouldn’t touch her right hand if I were you, Hastings. Red paint
marks so. When the lights went out I clasped her hand, you see. By
the way, we mustn’t miss our train. Inspector Japp is outside the
window. A bad night—but he has been able to while away the time by
tapping on the window every now and then.”

“You see,” continued Poirot, as we walked briskly through the wind
and rain, “there was a little discrepancy. The doctor seemed to
think the deceased was a Christian Scientist, and who could have
given him that impression but Mrs. Maltravers? But to us she
represented him as being in a grave state of apprehension about
his own health. Again, why was she so taken aback by the reappearance
of young Black? And lastly, although I know that convention decrees
that a woman must make a decent pretence of mourning for her
husband, I do not care for such heavily-rouged eyelids! You did
not observe them, Hastings? No? As I always tell you, you see
nothing!”

“Well, there it was. There were the two possibilities. Did Black’s
story suggest an ingenious method of committing suicide to Mr.
Maltravers, or did his other listener, the wife, see an equally
ingenious method of committing murder? I inclined to the latter
view. To shoot himself in the way indicated, he would probably have
had to pull the trigger with his toe—or at least so I imagine.
Now if Maltravers had been found with one boot off, we should
almost certainly have heard of it from some one. An odd detail like
that would have been remembered.

“No, as I say, I inclined to the view that it was a case of murder,
not suicide, but I realized that I had not a shadow of proof in
support of my theory. Hence the elaborate little comedy you saw
played to-night.”

“Even now I don’t quite see all the details of the crime?” I said.

“Let us start from the beginning. Here is a shrewd and scheming
woman who, knowing of her husband’s financial _débâcle_ and tired
of the elderly mate she has only married for his money, induces
him to insure his life for a large sum, and then seeks for the
means to accomplish her purpose. An accident gives her that—the
young soldier’s strange story. The next afternoon when _monsieur
le capitaine_, as she thinks, is on the high seas, she and her
husband are strolling round the grounds. ‘What a curious story that
was last night!’ she observes. ‘Could a man shoot himself in such
a way? Do show me if it is possible!’ The poor fool—he shows her.
He places the end of the rifle in his mouth. She stoops down, and
puts her finger on the trigger, laughing up at him. ‘And now, sir,’
she says saucily, ‘supposing I pull the trigger?’

“And then—and then, Hastings—she pulls it!”




  III


  The Adventure of the Cheap Flat


So far, in the cases which I have recorded, Poirot’s investigations
have started from the central fact, whether murder or robbery, and
have proceeded from thence by a process of logical deduction to
the final triumphant unravelling. In the events I am now about to
chronicle, a remarkable chain of circumstances led from the
apparently trivial incidents which first attracted Poirot’s
attention to the sinister happenings which completed a most unusual
case.

I had been spending the evening with an old friend of mine, Gerald
Parker. There had been, perhaps, about half a dozen people there
besides my host and myself, and the talk fell, as it was bound to
do sooner or later wherever Parker found himself, on the subject
of house-hunting in London. Houses and flats were Parker’s special
hobby. Since the end of the War, he had occupied at least half a
dozen different flats and maisonnettes. No sooner was he settled
anywhere than he would light unexpectedly upon a new find, and
would forthwith depart bag and baggage. His moves were nearly
always accomplished at a slight pecuniary gain, for he had a shrewd
business head, but it was sheer love of the sport that actuated
him, and not a desire to make money at it. We listened to Parker
for some time with the respect of the novice for the expert. Then
it was our turn, and a perfect babel of tongues was let loose.
Finally the floor was left to Mrs. Robinson, a charming little
bride who was there with her husband. I had never met them before,
as Robinson was only a recent acquaintance of Parker’s.

“Talking of flats,” she said, “have you heard of our piece of luck,
Mr. Parker? We’ve got a flat—at last! In Montagu Mansions.”

“Well,” said Parker, “I’ve always said there are plenty of flats—at
a price!”

“Yes, but this isn’t at a price. It’s dirt cheap. Eighty pounds a
year!”

“But—but Montagu Mansions is just off Knightsbridge, isn’t it? Big
handsome building. Or are you talking of a poor relation of the
same name stuck in the slums somewhere?”

“No, it’s the Knightsbridge one. That’s what makes it so wonderful.”

“Wonderful is the word! It’s a blinking miracle. But there must be
a catch somewhere. Big premium, I suppose?”

“No premium!”

“No prem—oh, hold my head, somebody!” groaned Parker.

“But we’ve got to buy the furniture,” continued Mrs. Robinson.

“Ah!” Parker brisked up. “I knew there was a catch!”

“For fifty pounds. And it’s beautifully furnished!”

“I give it up,” said Parker. “The present occupants must be lunatics
with a taste for philanthropy.”

Mrs. Robinson was looking a little troubled. A little pucker
appeared between her dainty brows.

“It _is_ queer, isn’t it? You don’t think that—that—the place is
_haunted_?”

“Never heard of a haunted flat,” declared Parker decisively.

“N-o.” Mrs. Robinson appeared far from convinced. “But there were
several things about it all that struck me as—well, queer.”

“For instance——” I suggested.

“Ah,” said Parker, “our criminal expert’s attention is aroused!
Unburden yourself to him, Mrs. Robinson. Hastings is a great
unraveller of mysteries.”

I laughed, embarrassed but not wholly displeased with the rôle
thrust upon me.

“Oh, not really queer, Captain Hastings, but when we went to the
agents, Stosser and Paul—we hadn’t tried them before because they
only have the expensive Mayfair flats, but we thought at any rate
it would do no harm—everything they offered us was four and five
hundred a year, or else huge premiums, and then, just as we were
going, they mentioned that they had a flat at eighty, but that they
doubted if it would be any good our going there, because it had
been on their books some time and they had sent so many people to
see it that it was almost sure to be taken—‘snapped up’ as the
clerk put it—only people were so tiresome in not letting them know,
and then they went on sending, and people get annoyed at being sent
to a place that had, perhaps, been let some time.”

Mrs. Robinson paused for some much needed breath, and then
continued: “We thanked him, and said that we quite
understood it would probably be no good, but that we should
like an order all the same—just in case. And we went there
straight away in a taxi, for, after all, you never know. No.
4 was on the second floor, and just as we were waiting for
the lift, Elsie Ferguson—she’s a friend of mine, Captain
Hastings, and they are looking for a flat too—came hurrying
down the stairs. ‘Ahead of you for once, my dear,’ she said.
‘But it’s no good. It’s already let.’ That seemed to finish
it, but—well, as John said, the place was very cheap, we
could afford to give more, and perhaps if we offered a
premium.——A horrid thing to do, of course, and I feel quite
ashamed of telling you, but you know what flat-hunting is.”

I assured her that I was well aware that in the struggle for
house-room the baser side of human nature frequently triumphed over
the higher, and that the well-known rule of dog eat dog always
applied.

“So we went up and, would you believe it, the flat wasn’t let at
all. We were shown over it by the maid, and then we saw the
mistress, and the thing was settled then and there. Immediate
possession and fifty pounds for the furniture. We signed the
agreement next day, and we are to move in to-morrow!” Mrs. Robinson
paused triumphantly.

“And what about Mrs. Ferguson?” asked Parker. “Let’s have your
deductions, Hastings.”

“‘Obvious, my dear Watson,’” I quoted lightly. “She went to the
wrong flat.”

“Oh, Captain Hastings, how clever of you!” cried Mrs. Robinson
admiringly.

I rather wished Poirot had been there. Sometimes I have the feeling
that he rather underestimates my capabilities.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The whole thing was rather amusing, and I propounded the thing as
a mock problem to Poirot on the following morning. He seemed
interested, and questioned me rather narrowly as to the rents of
flats in various localities.

“A curious story,” he said thoughtfully. “Excuse me, Hastings, I
must take a short stroll.”

When he returned, about an hour later, his eyes were gleaming with
a peculiar excitement. He laid his stick on the table, and brushed
the nap of his hat with his usual tender care before he spoke.

“It is as well, _mon ami_, that we have no affairs of moment on
hand. We can devote ourselves wholly to the present investigation.”

“What investigation are you talking about?”

“The remarkable cheapness of your friend’s, Mrs. Robinson’s, new
flat.”

“Poirot, you are not serious!”

“I am most serious. Figure to yourself, my friend, that the real
rent of those flats is £350. I have just ascertained that from the
landlord’s agents. And yet this particular flat is being sublet at
eighty pounds! Why?”

“There must be something wrong with it. Perhaps it is haunted, as
Mrs. Robinson suggested.”

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.

“Then again how curious it is that her friend tells her the flat
is let, and, when she goes up, behold, it is not so at all!”

“But surely you agree with me that the other woman must have gone
to the wrong flat. That is the only possible solution.”

“You may or may not be right on that point, Hastings. The fact
still remains that numerous other applicants were sent to see it,
and yet, in spite of its remarkable cheapness, it was still in the
market when Mrs. Robinson arrived.”

“That shows that there must be something wrong about it.”

“Mrs. Robinson did not seem to notice anything amiss. Very curious,
is it not? Did she impress you as being a truthful woman, Hastings?”

“She was a delightful creature!”

“_Évidemment!_ since she renders you incapable of replying to my
question. Describe her to me, then.”

“Well, she’s tall and fair; her hair’s really a beautiful shade of
auburn——”

“Always you have had a penchant for auburn hair!” murmured Poirot.
“But continue.”

“Blue eyes and a very nice complexion and—well, that’s all, I
think,” I concluded lamely.

“And her husband?”

“Oh, he’s quite a nice fellow—nothing startling.”

“Dark or fair?”

“I don’t know—betwixt and between, and just an ordinary sort of
face.”

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, there are hundreds of these average men—and, anyway, you
bring more sympathy and appreciation to your description of women.
Do you know anything about these people? Does Parker know them
well.”

“They are just recent acquaintances, I believe. But surely, Poirot,
you don’t think for an instant——”

Poirot raised his hand.

“_Tout doucement, mon ami_. Have I said that I think anything? All
I say is—it is a curious story. And there is nothing to throw light
upon it; except perhaps the lady’s name, eh, Hastings?”

“Her name is Stella,” I said stiffly, “but I don’t see——”

Poirot interrupted me with a tremendous chuckle. Something seemed
to be amusing him vastly.

“And Stella means a star, does it not? Famous!”

“What on earth——”

“And stars give light! _Voilà!_ Calm yourself, Hastings. Do not
put on that air of injured dignity. Come, we will go to Montagu
Mansions and make a few inquiries.”

I accompanied him, nothing loath. The Mansions were a handsome
block of buildings in excellent repair. A uniformed porter was
sunning himself on the threshold, and it was to him that Poirot
addressed himself:

“Pardon, but could you tell me if a Mr. and Mrs. Robinson reside
here?”

The porter was a man of few words and apparently of a sour or
suspicious disposition. He hardly looked at us and grunted out:

“No. 4. Second floor.”

“I thank you. Can you tell me how long they have been here?”

“Six months.”

I started forward in amazement, conscious as I did so of Poirot’s
malicious grin.

“Impossible,” I cried. “You must be making a mistake.”

“Six months.”

“Are you sure? The lady I mean is tall and fair with reddish gold
hair and——”

“That’s ’er,” said the porter. “Come in the Michaelmas quarter,
they did. Just six months ago.”

He appeared to lose interest in us and retreated slowly up the
hall. I followed Poirot outside.

“_Eh bien_, Hastings?” my friend demanded slyly. “Are you so sure
now that delightful women always speak the truth?”

I did not reply.

Poirot had steered his way into Brompton Road before I asked him
what he was going to do and where we were going.

“To the house agents, Hastings. I have a great desire to have a
flat in Montagu Mansions. If I am not mistaken, several interesting
things will take place there before long.”

We were fortunate in our quest. No. 8, on the fourth floor, was to
be let furnished at ten guineas a week. Poirot promptly took it
for a month. Outside in the street again, he silenced my protests:

“But I make money nowadays! Why should I not indulge a whim? By
the way, Hastings, have you a revolver?”

“Yes—somewhere,” I answered, slightly thrilled. “Do you think——”

“That you will need it? It is quite possible. The idea pleases you,
I see. Always the spectacular and romantic appeals to you.”

The following day saw us installed in our temporary home. The flat
was pleasantly furnished. It occupied the same position in the
building as that of the Robinsons, but was two floors higher.

The day after our installation was a Sunday. In the afternoon,
Poirot left the front door ajar, and summoned me hastily as a bang
reverberated from somewhere below.

“Look over the banisters. Are those your friends. Do not let them
see you.”

I craned my neck over the staircase.

“That’s them,” I declared in an ungrammatical whisper.

“Good. Wait awhile.”

About half an hour later, a young woman emerged in brilliant and
varied clothing. With a sigh of satisfaction, Poirot tiptoed back
into the flat.

“_C’est ça_. After the master and mistress, the maid. The flat
should now be empty.”

“What are we going to do?” I asked uneasily.

Poirot had trotted briskly into the scullery and was hauling at
the rope of the coal-lift.

“We are about to descend after the method of the dustbins,” he
explained cheerfully. “No one will observe us. The Sunday concert,
the Sunday ‘afternoon out,’ and finally the Sunday nap after the
Sunday dinner of England—_le rosbif_—all these will distract
attention from the doings of Hercule Poirot. Come, my friend.”

He stepped into the rough wooden contrivance and I followed him
gingerly.

“Are we going to break into the flat?” I asked dubiously.

Poirot’s answer was not too reassuring:

“Not precisely to-day,” he replied.

Pulling on the rope, we descended slowly till we reached the second
floor. Poirot uttered an exclamation of satisfaction as he perceived
that the wooden door into the scullery was open.

“You observe? Never do they bolt these doors in the daytime. And
yet anyone could mount or descend as we have done. At night
yes—though not always then—and it is against that that we are going
to make provision.”

He had drawn some tools from his pocket as he spoke, and at once
set deftly to work, his object being to arrange the bolt so that
it could be pulled back from the lift. The operation only occupied
about three minutes. Then Poirot returned the tools to his pocket,
and we reascended once more to our own domain.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


On Monday Poirot was out all day, but when he returned in the
evening he flung himself into his chair with a sigh of satisfaction.

“Hastings, shall I recount to you a little history? A story after
your own heart and which will remind you of your favourite cinema?”

“Go ahead,” I laughed. “I presume that it is a true story, not one
of your efforts of fancy.”

“It is true enough. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard will vouch for
its accuracy, since it was through his kind offices that it came
to my ears. Listen, Hastings. A little over six months ago some
important Naval plans were stolen from an American Government
department. They showed the position of some of the most important
Harbour defences, and would be worth a considerable sum to any
foreign Government—that of Japan, for example. Suspicion fell upon
a young man named Luigi Valdarno, an Italian by birth, who was
employed in a minor capacity in the Department and who was missing
at the same time as the papers. Whether Luigi Valdarno was the
thief or not, he was found two days later on the East Side in New
York, shot dead. The papers were not on him. Now for some time past
Luigi Valdarno had been going about with a Miss Elsa Hardt, a young
concert singer who had recently appeared and who lived with a
brother in an apartment in Washington. Nothing was known of the
antecedents of Miss Elsa Hardt, and she disappeared suddenly about
the time of Valdarno’s death. There are reasons for believing that
she was in reality an accomplished international spy who has done
much nefarious work under various _aliases_. The American Secret
Service, whilst doing their best to trace her, also kept an eye
upon certain insignificant Japanese gentlemen living in Washington.
They felt pretty certain that, when Elsa Hardt had covered her
tracks sufficiently, she would approach the gentlemen in question.
One of them left suddenly for England a fortnight ago. On the face
of it, therefore, it would seem that Elsa Hardt is in England.”
Poirot paused, and then added softly: “The official description of
Elsa Hardt is: Height 5 ft. 7, eyes blue, hair auburn, fair
complexion, nose straight, no special distinguishing marks.”

“Mrs. Robinson!” I gasped.

“Well, there is a chance of it, anyhow,” amended Poirot. “Also, I
learn that a swarthy man, a foreigner of some kind, was inquiring
about the occupants of No. 4 only this morning. Therefore, _mon
ami_, I fear that you must forswear your beauty sleep to-night,
and join me in my all-night vigil in the flat below—armed with that
excellent revolver of yours, _bien entendu_!”

“Rather,” I cried with enthusiasm. “When shall we start?”

“The hour of midnight is both solemn and suitable, I fancy. Nothing
is likely to occur before then.”

At twelve o’clock precisely, we crept cautiously into the coal-lift
and lowered ourselves to the second floor. Under Poirot’s
manipulation, the wooden door quickly swung inwards, and we climbed
into the flat. From the scullery we passed into the kitchen where
we established ourselves comfortably in two chairs with the door
into the hall ajar.

“Now we have but to wait,” said Poirot contentedly, closing his
eyes.

To me, the waiting appeared endless. I was terrified of going to
sleep. Just when it seemed to me that I had been there about eight
hours—and had, as I found out afterwards, in reality been exactly
one hour and twenty minutes—a faint scratching sound came to my
ears. Poirot’s hand touched mine. I rose, and together we moved
carefully in the direction of the hall. The noise came from there.
Poirot placed his lips to my ear.

“Outside the front door. They are cutting out the lock. When I give
the word, not before, fall upon him from behind and hold him fast.
Be careful, he will have a knife.”

Presently there was a rending sound, and a little circle of light
appeared through the door. It was extinguished immediately and then
the door was slowly opened. Poirot and I flattened ourselves
against the wall. I heard a man’s breathing as he passed us. Then
he flashed on his torch, and as he did so, Poirot hissed in my ear:

“_Allez_.”

We sprang together, Poirot with a quick movement enveloped the
intruder’s head with a light woollen scarf whilst I pinioned his
arms. The whole affair was quick and noiseless. I twisted a dagger
from his hand, and as Poirot brought down the scarf from his eyes,
whilst keeping it wound tightly round his mouth, I jerked up my
revolver where he could see it and understand that resistance was
useless. As he ceased to struggle Poirot put his mouth close to
his ear and began to whisper rapidly. After a minute the man
nodded. Then enjoining silence with a movement of the hand, Poirot
led the way out of the flat and down the stairs. Our captive
followed, and I brought up the rear with the revolver. When we were
out in the street, Poirot turned to me.

“There is a taxi waiting just round the corner. Give me the
revolver. We shall not need it now.”

“But if this fellow tries to escape?”

Poirot smiled.

“He will not.”

I returned in a minute with the waiting taxi. The scarf had been
unwound from the stranger’s face, and I gave a start of surprise.

“He’s not a Jap,” I ejaculated in a whisper to Poirot.

“Observation was always your strong point, Hastings! Nothing
escapes you. No, the man is not a Jap. He is an Italian.”

We got into the taxi, and Poirot gave the driver an address in St.
John’s Wood. I was by now completely fogged. I did not like to ask
Poirot where we were going in front of our captive, and strove in
vain to obtain some light upon the proceedings.

We alighted at the door of a small house standing back from the
road. A returning wayfarer, slightly drunk, was lurching along the
pavement and almost collided with Poirot, who said something
sharply to him which I did not catch. All three of us went up the
steps of the house. Poirot rang the bell and motioned us to stand
a little aside. There was no answer and he rang again and then
seized the knocker which he plied for some minutes vigorously.

A light appeared suddenly above the fanlight, and the door was
opened cautiously a little way.

“What the devil do you want?” a man’s voice demanded harshly.

“I want the doctor. My wife is taken ill.”

“There’s no doctor here.”

The man prepared to shut the door, but Poirot thrust his foot in
adroitly. He became suddenly a perfect caricature of an infuriated
Frenchman.

“What you say, there is no doctor? I will have the law of you. You
must come! I will stay here and ring and knock all night.”

“My dear sir——” The door was opened again, the man, clad in a
dressing-gown and slippers, stepped forward to pacify Poirot with
an uneasy glance round.

“I will call the police.”

Poirot prepared to descend the steps.

“No, don’t do that for Heaven’s sake!” The man dashed after him.

With a neat push Poirot sent him staggering down the steps. In
another minute all three of us were inside the door and it was
pushed to and bolted.

“Quick—in here.” Poirot led the way into the nearest room switching
on the light as he did so. “And you—behind the curtain.”

“Si, signor,” said the Italian and slid rapidly behind the full
folds of rose-coloured velvet which draped the embrasure of the
window.

Not a minute too soon. Just as he disappeared from view a woman
rushed into the room. She was tall with reddish hair and held a
scarlet kimono round her slender form.

“Where is my husband?” she cried, with a quick frightened glance.
“Who are you?”

Poirot stepped forward with a bow.

“It is to be hoped your husband will not suffer from a chill. I
observed that he had slippers on his feet, and that his dressing-gown
was a warm one.”

“Who are you? What are you doing in my house?”

“It is true that none of us have the pleasure of your acquaintance,
madame. It is especially to be regretted as one of our number has
come specially from New York in order to meet you.”

The curtains parted and the Italian stepped out. To my horror I
observed that he was brandishing my revolver, which Poirot must
doubtless have put down through inadvertence in the cab.

The woman gave a piercing scream and turned to fly, but Poirot was
standing in front of the closed door.

“Let me by,” she shrieked. “He will murder me.”

“Who was it dat croaked Luigi Valdarno?” asked the Italian hoarsely,
brandishing the weapon, and sweeping each one of us with it. We
dared not move.

“My God, Poirot, this is awful. What shall we do?” I cried.

“You will oblige me by refraining from talking so much, Hastings.
I can assure you that our friend will not shoot until I give the
word.”

“Youse sure o’ dat, eh?” said the Italian, leering unpleasantly.

It was more than I was, but the woman turned to Poirot like a
flash.

“What is it you want?”

Poirot bowed.

“I do not think it is necessary to insult Miss Elsa Hardt’s
intelligence by telling her.”

With a swift movement, the woman snatched up a big black velvet
cat which served as a cover for the telephone.

“They are stitched in the lining of that.”

“Clever,” murmured Poirot appreciatively. He stood aside from the
door. “Good evening, madame. I will detain your friend from New
York whilst you make your getaway.”

“Whatta fool!” roared the big Italian, and raising the revolver he
fired point-blank at the woman’s retreating figure just as I flung
myself upon him.

But the weapon merely clicked harmlessly and Poirot’s voice rose
in mild reproof.

“Never will you trust your old friend, Hastings. I do not care for
my friends to carry loaded pistols about with them and never would
I permit a mere acquaintance to do so. No, no, _mon ami_.” This to
the Italian who swearing hoarsely. Poirot continued to address him
in a tone of mild reproof: “See now, what I have done for you. I
have saved you from being hanged. And do not think that our
beautiful lady will escape. No, no, the house is watched, back and
front. Straight into the arms of the police they will go. Is not
that a beautiful and consoling thought? Yes, you may leave the room
now. But be careful—be very careful. I——Ah, he is gone! And my
friend Hastings looks at me with eyes of reproach. But it was all
so simple! It was clear, from the first, that out of several
hundred, probably, applicants for No. 4, Montagu Mansions only the
Robinsons were considered suitable. Why? What was there that
singled them out from the rest—at practically a glance. Their
appearance? Possibly, but it was not so unusual. Their name, then!”

“But there’s nothing unusual about the name of Robinson,” I cried.
“It’s quite a common name.”

“Ah! _Sapristi_, but exactly! That was the point. Elsa Hardt and
her husband, or brother or whatever he really is, come from New
York, and take a flat in the name of Mr. and Mrs. Robinson. Suddenly
they learn that one of these secret societies, the Mafia, or the
Camorra, to which doubtless Luigi Valdarno belonged, is on their
track. What do they do? They hit on a scheme of transparent
simplicity. Evidently they knew that their pursuers were not
personally acquainted with either of them. What then can be simpler?
They offer the flat at an absurdly low rental. Of the thousands of
young couples in London looking for flats, there cannot fail to be
several Robinsons. It is only a matter of waiting. If you will look
at the name of Robinson in the telephone directory, you will
realize that a fair-haired Mrs. Robinson was pretty sure to come
along sooner or later. Then what will happen? The avenger arrives.
He knows the name, he knows the address. He strikes! All is over,
vengeance is satisfied, and Miss Elsa Hardt has escaped by the skin
of her teeth once more. By the way, Hastings, you must present me
to the real Mrs. Robinson—that delightful and truthful creature!
What will they think when they find their flat has been broken
into! We must hurry back. Ah, that sounds like Japp and his friends
arriving.”

A mighty tattoo sounded on the knocker.

“How did you know this address?” I asked as I followed Poirot out
into the hall. “Oh, of course, you had the first Mrs. Robinson
followed when she left the other flat.”

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. You use your grey cells at last.
Now for a little surprise for Japp.”

Softly unbolting the door, he stuck the cat’s head round the edge
and ejaculated a piercing “Miaow.”

The Scotland Yard inspector, who was standing outside with another
man, jumped in spite of himself.

“Oh, it’s only Monsieur Poirot at one of his little jokes!” he
exclaimed, as Poirot’s head followed that of the cat. “Let us in,
moosior.”

“You have our friends safe and sound?”

“Yes, we’ve got the birds all right. But they hadn’t got the goods
with them.”

“I see. So you come to search. Well, I am about to depart with
Hastings, but I should like to give you a little lecture upon the
history and habits of the domestic cat.”

“For the Lord’s sake, have you gone completely balmy?”

“The cat,” declaimed Poirot, “was worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians. It is still regarded as a symbol of good luck if a black
cat crosses your path. This cat crossed your path to-night, Japp.
To speak of the interior of any animal or any person is not, I
know, considered polite in England. But the interior of this cat
is perfectly delicate. I refer to the lining.”

With a sudden grunt, the second man seized the cat from Poirot’s
hand.

“Oh, I forgot to introduce you,” said Japp. “Mr. Poirot, this is
Mr. Burt of the United States Secret Service.”

The American’s trained fingers had felt what he was looking for.
He held out his hand, and for a moment speech failed him. Then he
rose to the occasion.

“Pleased to meet you,” said Mr. Burt.




  IV


  The Mystery of Hunter’s Lodge


“After all,” murmured Poirot, “it is possible that I shall not die
this time.”

Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark
as showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first
sufferer from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He
was now sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows, his head
muffled in a woollen shawl, and was slowly sipping a particularly
noxious tisane which I had prepared according to his directions.
His eye rested with pleasure upon a neatly graduated row of medicine
bottles which adorned the mantelpiece.

“Yes, yes,” my little friend continued. “Once more shall I be
myself again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evil-doers!
Figure to yourself, _mon ami_, that I have a little paragraph to
myself in _Society Gossip_. But yes! Here it is! ‘Go it—criminals—all
out! Hercule Poirot—and believe me, girls, he’s some Hercules!—our
own pet society detective can’t get a grip on you. ’Cause why?
’Cause he’s got _la grippe_ himself’!”

I laughed.

“Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character.
And fortunately you haven’t missed anything of particular interest
during this time.”

“That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me
with any regret.”

Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.

“There’s a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see Monsieur Poirot
or you, Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do—and with all
that quite the gentleman—I brought up ’is card.”

She handed me the bit of pasteboard. “Mr. Roger Havering,” I read.

Poirot motioned with his head towards the bookcase, and I obediently
pulled forth “Who’s Who.” Poirot took it from me and scanned the
pages rapidly.

“Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth
daughter of William Crabb.”

“H’m!” I said. “I rather fancy that’s the girl who used to act at
the Frivolity—only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember
she married some young man about town just before the War.”

“Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor’s particular little trouble is? Make him all my excuses.”

Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance. His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation.

“Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur Poirot’s partner, I understand.
It is imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire to-day.”

“I’m afraid that’s impossible,” I replied. “Poirot is ill in
bed—influenza.”

His face fell.

“Dear me, that is a great blow to me.”

“The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?”

“My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.”

“Here in London?”

“No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my
wife this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake the case.”

“If you will excuse me a minute,” I said, struck by a sudden idea.

I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words acquainted Poirot with
the situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.

“I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why
not? You should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you
should report to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any
instructions I may wire you.”

To this I willingly agreed.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr. Havering in a first-class
carriage on the Midland Railway, speeding rapidly away from London.

“To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that Hunter’s
Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took place, is
only a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire moors.
Our real home is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat in town
for the season. Hunter’s Lodge is looked after by a housekeeper
who is quite capable of doing all we need when we run down for an
occasional week-end. Of course, during the shooting season, we take
down some of our own servants from Newmarket. My uncle, Mr.
Harrington Pace (as you may know, my mother was a Miss Pace of New
York), has, for the last three years, made his home with us. He
never got on well with my father, or my elder brother, and I
suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal son myself rather
increased than diminished his affection towards me. Of course I am
a poor man, and my uncle was a rich one—in other words, he paid
the piper! But, though exacting in many ways, he was not really
hard to get on with, and we all three lived very harmoniously
together. Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied with some recent
gaieties of ours in town, suggested that we should run down to
Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife telegraphed to Mrs. Middleton,
the housekeeper, and we went down that same afternoon. Yesterday
evening I was forced to return to town, but my wife and my uncle
remained on. This morning I received this telegram.” He handed it
over to me:

“Come at once uncle Harrington murdered last night bring good
detective if you can but do come—Zoe.”

“Then, as yet you know no details?”

“No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.”

It was about three o’clock when we arrived at the little station
of Elmer’s Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small
grey stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.

“A lonely place,” I observed with a shiver.

Havering nodded.

“I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.”

We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the
oak door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.

“Japp!” I ejaculated.

The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion
before addressing my companion.

“Mr. Havering, I think? I’ve been sent down from London to take
charge of this case, and I’d like a word with you, if I may, sir.”

“My wife——”

“I’ve seen your good lady, sir—and the housekeeper. I won’t keep
you a moment, but I’m anxious to get back to the village now that
I’ve seen all there is to see here.”

“I know nothing as yet as to what——”

“Ex-actly,” said Japp soothingly. “But there are just one or two
little points I’d like your opinion about all the same. Captain
Hastings here, he knows me, and he’ll go on up to the house and
tell them you’re coming. What have you done with the little man,
by the way, Captain Hastings?”

“He’s ill in bed with influenza.”

“Is he now? I’m sorry to hear that. Rather the case of the cart
without the horse, your being here without him, isn’t it?”

And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to the house. I rang
the bell, as Japp had closed the door behind him. After some
moments it was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in black.

“Mr. Havering will be here in a moment,” I explained. “He has been
detained by the inspector. I have come down with him from London
to look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred
last night.”

“Come inside, sir.” She closed the door behind me, and we stood in
the dimly-lighted hall. “It was after dinner last night, sir, that
the man came. He asked to see Mr. Pace, sir, and, seeing that he
spoke the same way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend
of Mr. Pace’s and I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to
tell Mr. Pace. He wouldn’t give any name, which, of course, was a
bit odd, now I come to think of it. I told Mr. Pace, and he seemed
puzzled like, but he said to the mistress: ‘Excuse me, Zoe, while
I just see what this fellow wants.’ He went off to the gun-room,
and I went back to the kitchen, but after a while I heard loud
voices, as if they were quarrelling, and I came out into the hall.
At the same time, the mistress she comes out too, and just then
there was a shot and then a dreadful silence. We both ran to the
gun-room door, but it was locked and we had to go round to the
window. It was open, and there inside was Mr. Pace, all shot and
bleeding.”

“What became of the man?”

“He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to
it.”

“And then?”

“Mrs. Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk it
was. They came back with me, and the constable he stayed all night,
and this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.”

“What was this man like who called to see Mr. Pace?”

The housekeeper reflected.

“He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on
a light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American
I didn’t notice much about him.”

“I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs. Havering?”

“She’s upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?”

“If you please. Tell her that Mr. Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.”

“Very good, sir.”

I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had
two or three hours’ start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made
me keen to be close at his heels.

Mrs. Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I
heard a light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a
very handsome young woman coming towards me. She wore a
flame-coloured jumper, that set off the slender boyishness of her
figure. On her dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured leather.
Even the present tragedy could not dim the vitality of her
personality.

I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.

“Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, Monsieur
Poirot. You have done some wonderful things together, haven’t you?
It was very clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now will
you ask me questions? That is the easiest way, isn’t it, of getting
to know all you want to about this dreadful affair?”

“Thank you, Mrs. Havering. Now what time was it that this man
arrived?”

“It must have been just before nine o’clock. We had finished
dinner, and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.”

“Your husband had already left for London?”

“Yes, he went up by the 6.15.”

“Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?”

“Our own car isn’t down here. One came out from the garage in
Elmer’s Dale to fetch him in time for the train.”

“Was Mr. Pace quite his usual self?”

“Absolutely. Most normal in every way.”

“Now, can you describe this visitor at all?”

“I’m afraid not. I didn’t see him. Mrs. Middleton showed him
straight into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.”

“What did your uncle say?”

“He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out
into the hall and almost collided with Mrs. Middleton. Then we
heard the shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we
had to go right round the house to the window. Of course that took
some time, and the murderer had been able to get well away. My poor
uncle”—her voice faltered—“had been shot through the head. I saw
at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs. Middleton for the police. I
was careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly
as I found it.”

I nodded approval.

“Now, as to the weapon?”

“Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of
revolvers of my husband’s were mounted upon the wall. One of them
is missing. I pointed this out to the police, and they took the
other one away with them. When they have extracted the bullet, I
suppose they will know for certain.”

“May I go to the gun-room?”

“Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.”

She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment Havering
entered the hall, and with a quick apology his wife ran to him. I
was left to undertake my investigations alone.

I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing.
In detective novels clues abound, but here I could find nothing
that struck me as out of the ordinary except a large bloodstain on
the carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined
everything with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of
the room with my little camera which I had brought with me. I also
examined the ground outside the window, but it appeared to have
been so heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was useless to
waste time over it. No, I had seen all that Hunter’s Lodge had to
show me. I must go back to Elmer’s Dale and get into touch with
Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the Haverings, and was driven
off in the car that had brought us up from the station.

I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he took me forthwith to see
the body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare clean-shaven man,
typically American in appearance. He had been shot through the back
of the head, and the revolver had been discharged at close quarters.

“Turned away for a moment,” remarked Japp, “and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs. Havering handed
over to us was fully loaded and I suppose the other one was also.
Curious what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall.”

“What do you think of the case?” I asked, as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.

“Well, I’d got my eye on Havering to begin with. Oh, yes!” noting
my exclamation of astonishment. “Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father’s cheques.
All hushed up of course. Then, he’s pretty heavily in debt now,
and they’re the kind of debts he wouldn’t like to go to his uncle
about, whereas you may be sure the uncle’s will would be in his
favour. Yes, I’d got my eye on him, and that’s why I wanted to
speak to him before he saw his wife, but their statements dovetail
all right, and I’ve been to the station and there’s no doubt
whatever that he left by the 6.15. That gets up to London about
10.30. He went straight to his club, he says, and if that’s
confirmed all right—why, he couldn’t have been shooting his uncle
here at nine o’clock in a black beard!”

“Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you thought about that
beard?”

Japp winked.

“I think it grew pretty fast—grew in the five miles from Elmer’s
Dale to Hunter’s Lodge. Americans that I’ve met are mostly
clean-shaven. Yes, it’s amongst Mr. Pace’s American associates that
we’ll have to look for the murderer. I questioned the housekeeper
first, and then her mistress, and their stories agree all right,
but I’m sorry Mrs. Havering didn’t get a look at the fellow. She’s
a smart woman, and she might have noticed something that would set
us on the track.”

I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted
the letter.

The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired
from a revolver identical with the one held by the police.
Furthermore, Mr. Havering’s movements on the night in question had
been checked and verified, and it was proved beyond doubt that he
had actually arrived in London by the train in question. And,
thirdly, a sensational development had occurred. A city gentleman,
living at Ealing, on crossing Haven Green to get to the District
Railway Station that morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found that it contained
a revolver. He handed the parcel over to the local police station,
and before night it was proved to be the one we were in search of,
the fellow to that given us by Mrs. Havering. One bullet had been
fired from it.

All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived whilst
I was at breakfast the following morning:

“Of course black bearded man was not Havering only you or Japp
would have such an idea wire me description of housekeeper and what
clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs. Havering do not waste
time taking photographs of interiors they are underexposed and not
in the least artistic.”

It seemed to me that Poirot’s style was unnecessarily facetious.
I also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot
with full facilities for handling the case. His request for a
description of the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to
be simply ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was
able to.

At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:

“Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.”

Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his
breath.

“He’s the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he says so, there’s something
in it. And I hardly noticed the woman. I don’t know that I can go
so far as arresting her, but I’ll have her watched. We’ll go up
right away, and take another look at her.”

But it was too late. Mrs. Middleton, that quiet middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into thin
air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary
wearing apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to
her whereabouts.

From Mrs. Havering we elicited all the facts we could:

“I engaged her about three weeks ago when Mrs. Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs. Selbourne’s Agency in
Mount Street—a very well-known place. I get all my servants from
there. They sent several women to see me, but this Mrs. Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged her
on the spot, and notified the Agency of the fact. I can’t believe
that there was anything wrong with her. She was such a nice quiet
woman.”

The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it was clear that the
woman herself could not have committed the crime, since at the
moment the shot was fired Mrs. Havering was with her in the hall,
nevertheless she must have some connection with the murder, or why
should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?

I wired the latest development to Poirot and suggested returning
to London and making inquiries at Selbourne’s Agency.

Poirot’s reply was prompt:

“Useless to inquire at agency they will never have heard of her
find out what vehicle took her up to hunters lodge when she first
arrived there.”

Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in Elmer’s
Dale were limited. The local garage had two battered Ford cars,
and there were two station flies. None of these had been
requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned, Mrs. Havering
explained that she had given the woman the money for her fare down
to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly to take her up
to Hunter’s Lodge. There was usually one of the Fords at the
station on the chance of its being required. Taking into
consideration the further fact that nobody at the station had
noticed the arrival of a stranger, black-bearded or otherwise, on
the fatal evening, everything seemed to point to the conclusion
that the murderer had come to the spot in a car, which had been
waiting near at hand to aid his escape, and that the same car had
brought the mysterious housekeeper to her new post. I may mention
that inquiries at the Agency in London bore out Poirot’s
prognostication. No such woman as “Mrs. Middleton” had ever been
on their books. They had received the Hon. Mrs. Havering’s
application for a housekeeper, and had sent her various applicants
for the post. When she sent them the engagement fee, she omitted
to mention which woman she had selected.

Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot
established in an arm-chair by the fire in a garish, silk
dressing-gown. He greeted me with much affection.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings! But how glad I am to see you. Veritably I have
for you a great affection. And you have enjoyed yourself? You have
run to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and
investigated to your heart’s content?”

“Poirot,” I cried, “the thing’s a dark mystery! It will never be
solved.”

“It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory
over it.”

“No, indeed. It’s a hard nut to crack.”

“Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know
well enough who killed Mr. Harrington Pace.”

“You know? How did you find out?”

“Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr. Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune
which at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew. Point No. 1.
His nephew is known to be desperately hard up. Point No. 2. His
nephew is also known to be—shall we say a man of rather loose
moral fibre? Point No. 3.”

“But Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.”

“_Précisément_—and therefore, as Mr. Havering left Elmer’s Dale at
6.15, and since Mr. Pace cannot have been killed before he left,
or the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being
given wrongly when he examined the body, we conclude quite rightly,
that Mr. Havering did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs.
Havering, Hastings.”

“Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was fired.”

“Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.”

“She will be found.”

“I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper, don’t you think so, Hastings? It struck me at once.”

“She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of
time.”

“And what was her part?”

“Well, presumably to admit her confederate, the black-bearded man.”

“Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs. Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, _mon ami_, because
she does not exist! ‘There’s no sech person,’ as your so great
Shakespeare says.”

“It was Dickens,” I murmured, unable to suppress a smile. “But what
do you mean, Poirot?”

“I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that
you and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim
middle-aged figure in black with a faint subdued voice, and finally
that neither you nor Japp, nor the local police whom the housekeeper
fetched, ever saw Mrs. Middleton and her mistress at one and the
same time. It was child’s play for that clever and daring woman.
On the pretext of summoning her mistress, she runs upstairs, slips
on a bright jumper and a hat with black curls attached which she
jams down over the grey transformation. A few deft touches, and
the make-up is removed, a slight dusting of rouge, and the brilliant
Zoe Havering comes down with her clear ringing voice. Nobody looks
particularly at the housekeeper. Why should they? There is nothing
to connect her with the crime. She, too, has an alibi.”

“But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs. Havering could
not have placed it there?”

“No, that was Roger Havering’s job—but it was a mistake on their
part. It put me on the right track. A man who has committed a
murder with a revolver which he found on the spot would fling it
away at once, he would not carry it up to London with him. No, the
motive was clear, the criminals wished to focus the interest of
the police on a spot far removed from Derbyshire they were anxious
to get the police away as soon as possible from the vicinity of
Hunter’s Lodge. Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not the
one with which Mr. Pace was shot. Roger Havering discharged one
shot from it, brought it up to London, went straight to his club
to establish his alibi, then went quickly out to Ealing by the
district, a matter of about twenty minutes only, placed the parcel
where it was found and so back to town. That charming creature,
his wife, quietly shoots Mr. Pace after dinner—you remember he was
shot from behind? Another significant point, that!—reloads the
revolver and puts it back in its place, and then starts off with
her desperate little comedy.”

“It’s incredible,” I murmured, fascinated, “and yet——”

“And yet it is true. _Bien sur_, my friend, it is true. But to
bring that precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well,
Japp must do what he can—I have written him fully—but I very much
fear, Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate, or
_le bon Dieu_, whichever you prefer.”

“The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,” I reminded him.

“But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, _croyez-moi!_”

Poirot’s forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of the
truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary
evidence to ensure a conviction.

Mr. Pace’s huge fortune passed into the hands of his murderers.
Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I read in the
paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs. Havering were amongst those
killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris I knew that Justice
was satisfied.




  V

  The Million Dollar Bond Robbery

“What a number of bond robberies there have been lately!” I observed
one morning, laying aside the newspaper. “Poirot, let us forsake
the science of detection, and take to crime instead!”

“You are on the—how do you say it?—get-rich-quick tack, eh, _mon
ami_?”

“Well, look at this last _coup_, the million dollars’ worth of
Liberty Bonds which the London and Scottish Bank were sending to
New York, and which disappeared in such a remarkable manner on
board the _Olympia_.”

“If it were not for the _mal de mer_, and the difficulty of
practising the so excellent method of Laverguier for a longer time
than the few hours of crossing the channel, I should delight to
voyage myself on one of these big liners,” murmured Poirot dreamily.

“Yes, indeed,” I said enthusiastically. “Some of them must be
perfect palaces; the swimming-baths, the lounges, the restaurant,
the palm courts—really, it must be hard to believe that one is on
the sea.”

“Me, I always know when I am on the sea,” said Poirot sadly. “And
all those bagatelles that you enumerate, they say nothing to me;
but, my friend, consider for a moment the geniuses that travel as
it were incognito! On board these floating palaces, as you so
justly call them, one would meet the élite, the _haute noblesse_
of the criminal world!”

I laughed.

“So that’s the way your enthusiasm runs! You would have liked to
cross swords with the man who sneaked the Liberty Bonds?”

The landlady interrupted us.

“A young lady as wants to see you, Mr. Poirot. Here’s her card.”

The card bore the inscription: Miss Esmée Farquhar, and Poirot,
after diving under the table to retrieve a stray crumb, and putting
it carefully in the waste-paper-basket, nodded to the landlady to
admit her.

In another minute one of the most charming girls I have ever seen
was ushered into the room. She was perhaps about five-and-twenty,
with big brown eyes and a perfect figure. She was well-dressed and
perfectly composed in manner.

“Sit down, I beg of you, mademoiselle. This is my friend, Captain
Hastings, who aids me in my little problems.”

“I am afraid it is a big problem I have brought you to-day, Monsieur
Poirot,” said the girl, giving me a pleasant bow as she seated
herself. “I dare say you have read about it in the papers. I am
referring to the theft of Liberty Bonds on the _Olympia_.” Some
astonishment must have shown itself in Poirot’s face, for she
continued quickly: “You are doubtless asking yourself what I have
to do with a grave institution like the London and Scottish Bank.
In one sense nothing, in another sense everything. You see, Monsieur
Poirot, I am engaged to Mr. Philip Ridgeway.”

“Aha! and Mr. Philip Ridgeway——”

“Was in charge of the bonds when they were stolen. Of course no
actual blame can attach to him, it was not his fault in any way.
Nevertheless, he is half distraught over the matter, and his uncle,
I know, insists that he must carelessly have mentioned having them
in his possession. It is a terrible set-back in his career.”

“Who is his uncle?”

“Mr. Vavasour, joint general manager of the London and Scottish
Bank.”

“Suppose, Miss Farquhar, that you recount to me the whole story?”

“Very well. As you know, the Bank wished to extend their credits
in America, and for this purpose decided to send over a million
dollars in Liberty Bonds. Mr. Vavasour selected his nephew, who
had occupied a position of trust in the Bank for many years and
who was conversant with all the details of the Bank’s dealings in
New York, to make the trip. The Olympia sailed from Liverpool on
the 23rd, and the bonds were handed over to Philip on the morning
of that day by Mr. Vavasour and Mr. Shaw, the two joint general
managers of the London and Scottish Bank. They were counted,
enclosed in a package, and sealed in his presence, and he then
locked the package at once in his portmanteau.”

“A portmanteau with an ordinary lock?”

“No, Mr. Shaw insisted on a special lock being fitted to it by
Hubbs’s. Philip, as I say, placed the package at the bottom of the
trunk. It was stolen just a few hours before reaching New York. A
rigorous search of the whole ship was made, but without result.
The bonds seemed literally to have vanished into thin air.”

Poirot made a grimace.

“But they did not vanish absolutely, since I gather that they were
sold in small parcels within half an hour of the docking of the
_Olympia_! Well, undoubtedly the next thing is for me to see Mr.
Ridgeway.”

“I was about to suggest that you should lunch with me at the
‘Cheshire Cheese.’ Philip will be there. He is meeting me, but does
not yet know that I have been consulting you on his behalf.”

We agreed to this suggestion readily enough, and drove there in a
taxi.

Mr. Philip Ridgeway was there before us, and looked somewhat
surprised to see his fiancée arriving with two complete strangers.
He was a nice-looking young fellow, tall and spruce, with a touch
of greying hair at the temples, though he could not have been much
over thirty.

Miss Farquhar went up to him and laid her hand on his arm.

“You must forgive my acting without consulting you, Philip,” she
said. “Let me introduce you to Monsieur Hercule Poirot, of whom
you must often have heard, and his friend, Captain Hastings.”

Ridgeway looked very astonished.

“Of course I have heard of you, Monsieur Poirot,” he said, as he
shook hands. “But I had no idea that Esmée was thinking of
consulting you about my—our trouble.”

“I was afraid you would not let me do it, Philip,” said Miss
Farquhar meekly.

“So you took care to be on the safe side,” he observed, with a
smile. “I hope Monsieur Poirot will be able to throw some light on
this extraordinary puzzle, for I confess frankly that I am nearly
out of my mind with worry and anxiety about it.”

Indeed, his face looked drawn and haggard and showed only too
clearly the strain under which he was labouring.

“Well, well,” said Poirot. “Let us lunch, and over lunch we will
put our heads together and see what can be done. I want to hear
Mr. Ridgeway’s story from his own lips.”

Whilst we discussed the excellent steak and kidney pudding of the
establishment, Philip Ridgeway narrated the circumstances leading
to the disappearance of the bonds. His story agreed with that of
Miss Farquhar in every particular. When he had finished, Poirot
took up the thread with a question.

“What exactly led you to discover that the bonds had been stolen,
Mr. Ridgeway?”

He laughed rather bitterly.

“The thing stared me in the face, Monsieur Poirot. I couldn’t have
missed it. My cabin trunk was half out from under the bunk and all
scratched and cut about where they’d tried to force the lock.”

“But I understood that it had been opened with a key?”

“That’s so. They tried to force it, but couldn’t. And, in the end,
they must have got it unlocked somehow or other.”

“Curious,” said Poirot, his eyes beginning to flicker with the
green light I knew so well. “Very curious! They waste much, much
time trying to prise it open, and then—_sapristi!_ they find that
they have the key all the time—for each of Hubbs’s locks are
unique.”

“That’s just why they couldn’t have had the key. It never left me
day or night.”

“You are sure of that?”

“I can swear to it, and besides, if they had had the key or a
duplicate, why should they waste time trying to force an obviously
unforceable lock?”

“Ah! there is exactly the question we are asking ourselves! I
venture to prophesy that the solution, if we ever find it, will
hinge on that curious fact. I beg of you not to assault me if I
ask you one more question: _Are you perfectly certain you did not
leave the trunk unlocked?_”

Philip Ridgeway merely looked at him, and Poirot gesticulated
apologetically.

“Ah, but these things can happen, I assure you! Very well, the
bonds were stolen from the trunk. What did the thief do with them?
How did he manage to get ashore with them?”

“Ah!” cried Ridgeway. “That’s just it. How? Word was passed to the
Customs authorities, and every soul that left the ship was gone
over with a toothcomb!”

“And the bonds, I gather, made a bulky package?”

“Certainly they did. They could hardly have been hidden on board—and
anyway we know they weren’t because they were offered for sale
within half an hour of the _Olympia’s_ arrival, long before I got
the cables going and the numbers sent out. One broker swears he
bought some of them even before the _Olympia_ got in. But you can’t
send bonds by wireless.”

“Not by wireless, but did any tug come alongside?”

“Only the official ones, and that was after the alarm was given
when every one was on the look-out. I was watching out myself for
their being passed over to some one that way. My God, Monsieur
Poirot, this thing will drive me mad! People are beginning to say
I stole them myself.”

“But you also were searched on landing, weren’t you?” asked Poirot
gently.

“Yes.”

The young man stared at him in a puzzled manner.

“You do not catch my meaning, I see,” said Poirot, smiling
enigmatically. “Now I should like to make a few inquiries at the
Bank.”

Ridgeway produced a card and scribbled a few words on it.

“Send this in and my uncle will see you at once.”

Poirot thanked him, bade farewell to Miss Farquhar, and together
we started out for Threadneedle Street and the head office of the
London and Scottish Bank. On production of Ridgeway’s card, we were
led through the labyrinth of counters and desks, skirting paying-in
clerks and paying-out clerks and up to a small office on the first
floor where the joint general managers received us. They were two
grave gentlemen, who had grown grey in the service of the Bank.
Mr. Vavasour had a short white beard, Mr. Shaw was clean shaven.

“I understand you are strictly a private inquiry agent?” said Mr.
Vavasour. “Quite so, quite so. We have, of course, placed ourselves
in the hands of Scotland Yard. Inspector McNeil has charge of the
case. A very able officer, I believe.”

“I am sure of it,” said Poirot politely. “You will permit a few
questions, on your nephew’s behalf? About this lock, who ordered
it from Hubbs’s?”

“I ordered it myself,” said Mr. Shaw. “I would not trust to any
clerk in the matter. As to the keys, Mr. Ridgeway had one, and the
other two are held by my colleague and myself.”

“And no clerk has had access to them?”

Mr. Shaw turned inquiringly to Mr. Vavasour. “I think I am correct
in saying that they have remained in the safe where we placed them
on the 23rd,” said Mr. Vavasour. “My colleague was unfortunately
taken ill a fortnight ago—in fact on the very day that Philip left
us. He has only just recovered.”

“Severe bronchitis is no joke to a man of my age,” said Mr. Shaw
ruefully. “But I am afraid Mr. Vavasour has suffered from the hard
work entailed by my absence, especially with this unexpected worry
coming on top of everything.”

Poirot asked a few more questions. I judged that he was endeavouring
to gauge the exact amount of intimacy between uncle and nephew.
Mr. Vavasour’s answers were brief and punctilious. His nephew was
a trusted official of the Bank, and had no debts or money
difficulties that he knew of. He had been entrusted with similar
missions in the past. Finally we were politely bowed out.

“I am disappointed,” said Poirot, as we emerged into the street.

“You hoped to discover more? They are such stodgy old men.”

“It is not their stodginess which disappoints me, _mon ami_. I do
not expect to find in a Bank manager a ‘keen financier with an
eagle glance’ as your favourite works of fiction put it. No, I am
disappointed in the case—it is too easy!”

“Easy?”

“Yes, do you not find it almost childishly simple?”

“You know who stole the bonds?”

“I do.”

“But then—we must—why——”

“Do not confuse and fluster yourself, Hastings. We are not going
to do anything at present.”

“But why? What are you waiting for?”

“For the _Olympia_. She is due on her return trip from New York on
Tuesday.”

“But if you know who stole the bonds, why wait? He may escape.”

“To a South Sea island where there is no extradition? No, _mon
ami_, he would find life very uncongenial there. As to why I
wait—_eh bien_ to the intelligence of Hercule Poirot the case is
perfectly clear, but for the benefit of others, not so greatly
gifted by the good God—the Inspector McNeil, for instance—it would
be as well to make a few inquiries to establish the facts. One must
have consideration for those less gifted than oneself.”

“Good Lord, Poirot! Do you know, I’d give a considerable sum of
money to see you make a thorough ass of yourself—just for once.
You’re so confoundedly conceited!”

“Do not enrage yourself, Hastings. In verity, I observe that there
are times when you almost detest me! Alas, I suffer the penalties
of greatness!”

The little man puffed out his chest, and sighed so comically that
I was forced to laugh.

Tuesday saw us speeding to Liverpool in a first-class carriage of
the L. & N.W.R. Poirot had obstinately refused to enlighten me as
to his suspicions—or certainties. He contented himself with
expressing surprise that I, too, was not equally _au fait_ with
the situation. I disdained to argue, and entrenched my curiosity
behind a rampart of pretended indifference.

Once arrived at the quay alongside which lay the big transatlantic
liner, Poirot became brisk and alert. Our proceedings consisted in
interviewing four successive stewards and inquiring after a friend
of Poirot’s who had crossed to New York on the 23rd.

“An elderly gentleman, wearing glasses. A great invalid, hardly
moved out of his cabin.”

The description appeared to tally with one Mr. Ventnor who had
occupied the cabin C 24 which was next to that of Philip Ridgeway.
Although unable to see how Poirot had deduced Mr. Ventnor’s
existence and personal appearance, I was keenly excited.

“Tell me,” I cried, “was this gentleman one of the first to land
when you got to New York?” The steward shook his head.

“No, indeed, sir, he was one of the last off the boat.”

I retired crestfallen, and observed Poirot grinning at me. He
thanked the steward, a note changed hands, and we took our
departure.

“It’s all very well,” I remarked heatedly, “but that last answer
must have damped your precious theory, grin as you please!”

“As usual, you see nothing, Hastings. That last answer is, on the
contrary, the coping-stone of my theory.”

I flung up my hands in despair.

“I give it up.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


When we were in the train, speeding towards London, Poirot wrote
busily for a few minutes, sealing up the result in an envelope.

“This is for the good Inspector McNeil. We will leave it at Scotland
Yard in passing, and then to the Rendezvous Restaurant, where I
have asked Miss Esmée Farquhar to do us the honour of dining with
us.”

“What about Ridgeway?”

“What about him?” asked Poirot with a twinkle.

“Why, you surely don’t think—you can’t——”

“The habit of incoherence is growing upon you, Hastings. As a
matter of fact I _did_ think. If Ridgeway had been the thief—which
was perfectly possible—the case would have been charming; a piece
of neat methodical work.”

“But not so charming for Miss Farquhar.”

“Possibly you are right. Therefore all is for the best. Now,
Hastings, let us review the case. I can see that you are dying to
do so. The sealed package is removed from the trunk and vanishes,
as Miss Farquhar puts it, into thin air. We will dismiss the thin
air theory, which is not practicable at the present stage of
science, and consider what is likely to have become of it. Every
one asserts the incredibility of its being smuggled ashore——”

“Yes, but we know——”

“_You_ may know, Hastings. I do not. I take the view that, since
it seemed incredible, it _was_ incredible. Two possibilities
remain: it was hidden on board—also rather difficult—or it was
thrown overboard.”

“With a cork on it, do you mean?”

“Without a cork.”

I stared.

“But if the bonds were thrown overboard, they couldn’t have been
sold in New York.”

“I admire your logical mind, Hastings. The bonds were sold in New
York, therefore they were not thrown overboard. You see where that
leads us?”

“Where we were when we started.”

“_Jamais de la vie!_ If the package was thrown overboard, and the
bonds were sold in New York, the package could not have contained
the bonds. Is there any evidence that the package _did_ contain
the bonds? Remember, Mr. Ridgeway never opened it from the time it
was placed in his hands in London.”

“Yes, but then——”

Poirot waved an impatient hand.

“Permit me to continue. The last moment that the bonds are seen as
bonds is in the office of the London and Scottish Bank on the
morning of the 23rd. They reappear in New York half an hour after
the _Olympia_ gets in, and according to one man, whom nobody
listens to, actually _before_ she gets in. Supposing then, that
they have never been on the _Olympia_ at all? Is there any other
way they could get to New York? Yes. The _Gigantic_ leaves
Southampton on the same day as the _Olympia_, and she holds the
record for the Atlantic. Mailed by the _Gigantic_, the bonds would
be in New York the day before the _Olympia_ arrived. All is clear,
the case begins to explain itself. The sealed packet is only a
dummy, and the moment of its substitution must be in the office in
the Bank. It would be an easy matter for any of the three men
present to have prepared a duplicate package which could be
substituted for the genuine one. _Très bien_, the bonds are mailed
to a confederate in New York, with instructions to sell as soon as
the _Olympia_ is in, but some one must travel on the _Olympia_ to
engineer the supposed moment of the robbery.”

“But why?”

“Because if Ridgeway merely opens the packet and finds it a dummy,
suspicion flies at once to London. No, the man on board in the
cabin next door does his work, pretends to force the lock in an
obvious manner so as to draw immediate attention to the theft,
really unlocks the trunk with a duplicate key, throws the package
overboard and waits until the last to leave the boat. Naturally he
wears glasses to conceal his eyes, and is an invalid since he does
not want to run the risk of meeting Ridgeway. He steps ashore in
New York and returns by the first boat available.”

“But who—which was he?”

“The man who had a duplicate key, the man who ordered the lock,
the man who has _not_ been severely ill with bronchitis at his home
in the country—_enfin_, that ‘stodgy’ old man, Mr. Shaw! There are
criminals in high places sometimes, my friend. Ah, here we are.
Mademoiselle, I have succeeded! You permit?”

And, beaming, Poirot kissed the astonished girl lightly on either
cheek!




  VI


  The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb


I have always considered that one of the most thrilling and dramatic
of the many adventures I have shared with Poirot was that of our
investigation into the strange series of deaths which followed upon
the discovery and opening of the Tomb of King Men-her-Ra.

Hard upon the discovery of the Tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen by Lord
Carnarvon, Sir John Willard and Mr. Bleibner of New York, pursuing
their excavations not far from Cairo, in the vicinity of the
Pyramids of Gizeh, came unexpectedly on a series of funeral
chambers. The greatest interest was aroused by their discovery.
The Tomb appeared to be that of King Men-her-Ra, one of those
shadowy kings of the Eighth Dynasty, when the Old Kingdom was
falling to decay. Little was known about this period, and the
discoveries were fully reported in the newspapers.

An event soon occurred which took a profound hold on the public
mind. Sir John Willard died quite suddenly of heart failure.

The more sensational newspapers immediately took the opportunity
of reviving all the old superstitious stories connected with the
ill luck of certain Egyptian treasures. The unlucky Mummy at the
British Museum, that hoary old chestnut, was dragged out with fresh
zest, was quietly denied by the Museum, but nevertheless enjoyed
all its usual vogue.

A fortnight later Mr. Bleibner died of acute blood poisoning, and
a few days afterwards a nephew of his shot himself in New York.
The “Curse of Men-her-Ra” was the talk of the day, and the magic
power of dead and gone Egypt was exalted to a fetish point.

It was then that Poirot received a brief note from Lady Willard,
widow of the dead archaeologist, asking him to go and see her at
her house in Kensington Square. I accompanied him.

Lady Willard was a tall, thin woman, dressed in deep mourning. Her
haggard face bore eloquent testimony to her recent grief.

“It is kind of you to have come so promptly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“I am at your service, Lady Willard. You wished to consult me?”

“You are, I am aware, a detective, but it is not only as a detective
that I wish to consult you. You are a man of original views, I
know, you have imagination, experience of the world, tell me,
Monsieur Poirot, what are your views on the supernatural?”

Poirot hesitated for a moment before he replied. He seemed to be
considering. Finally he said:

“Let us not misunderstand each other, Lady Willard. It is not a
general question that you are asking me there. It has a personal
application, has it not? You are referring obliquely to the death
of your late husband?”

“That is so,” she admitted.

“You want me to investigate the circumstances of his death?”

“I want you to ascertain for me exactly how much is newspaper
chatter, and how much may be said to be founded on fact? Three
deaths, Monsieur Poirot—each one explicable taken by itself, but
taken together surely an almost unbelievable coincidence, and all
within a month of the opening of the tomb! It may be mere
superstition, it may be some potent curse from the past that
operates in ways undreamed of by modern science. The fact
remains—three deaths! And I am afraid, Monsieur Poirot, horribly
afraid. It may not yet be the end.”

“For whom do you fear?”

“For my son. When the news of my husband’s death came I was ill.
My son, who has just come down from Oxford, went out there. He
brought the—the body home, but now he has gone out again, in spite
of my prayers and entreaties. He is so fascinated by the work that
he intends to take his father’s place and carry on the system of
excavations. You may think me a foolish, credulous woman, but,
Monsieur Poirot, I am afraid. Supposing that the spirit of the dead
King is not yet appeased? Perhaps to you I seem to be talking
nonsense——”

“No, indeed, Lady Willard,” said Poirot quickly. “I, too, believe
in the force of superstition, one of the greatest forces the world
has ever known.”

I looked at him in surprise. I should never have credited Poirot
with being superstitious. But the little man was obviously in
earnest.

“What you really demand is that I shall protect your son? I will
do my utmost to keep him from harm.”

“Yes, in the ordinary way, but against an occult influence?”

“In volumes of the Middle Ages, Lady Willard, you will find many
ways of counteracting black magic. Perhaps they knew more than we
moderns with all our boasted science. Now let us come to facts,
that I may have guidance. Your husband had always been a devoted
Egyptologist, hadn’t he?”

“Yes, from his youth upwards. He was one of the greatest living
authorities upon the subject.”

“But Mr. Bleibner, I understand, was more or less of an amateur?”

“Oh, quite. He was a very wealthy man who dabbled freely in any
subject that happened to take his fancy. My husband managed to
interest him in Egyptology, and it was his money that was so useful
in financing the expedition.”

“And the nephew? What do you know of his tastes? Was he with the
party at all?”

“I do not think so. In fact I never knew of his existence till I
read of his death in the paper, I do not think he and Mr. Bleibner
can have been at all intimate. He never spoke of having any
relations.”

“Who are the other members of the party?”

“Well, there is Dr. Tosswill, a minor official connected with the
British Museum; Mr. Schneider of the Metropolitan Museum in New
York; a young American secretary; Dr. Ames, who accompanies the
expedition in his professional capacity; and Hassan, my husband’s
devoted native servant.”

“Do you remember the name of the American secretary?”

“Harper, I think, but I cannot be sure. He had not been with Mr.
Bleibner very long, I know. He was a very pleasant young fellow.”

“Thank you, Lady Willard.”

“If there is anything else——?”

“For the moment, nothing. Leave it now in my hands, and be assured
that I will do all that is humanly possible to protect your son.”

They were not exactly reassuring words, and I observed Lady Willard
wince as he uttered them. Yet, at the same time, the fact that he
had not pooh-poohed her fears seemed in itself to be a relief to
her.

For my part I had never before suspected that Poirot had so deep
a vein of superstition in his nature. I tackled him on the subject
as we went homewards. His manner was grave and earnest.

“But yes, Hastings. I believe in these things. You must not
underrate the force of superstition.”

“What are we going to do about it?”

“_Toujours pratique_, the good Hastings! _Eh bien_, to begin with
we are going to cable to New York for fuller details of young Mr.
Bleibner’s death.”

He duly sent off his cable. The reply was full and precise. Young
Rupert Bleibner had been in low water for several years. He had
been a beach-comber and a remittance man in several South Sea
islands, but had returned to New York two years ago, where he had
rapidly sunk lower and lower. The most significant thing, to my
mind, was that he had recently managed to borrow enough money to
take him to Egypt. “I’ve a good friend there I can borrow from,”
he had declared. Here, however, his plans had gone awry. He had
returned to New York cursing his skinflint of an uncle who cared
more for the bones of dead and gone kings than his own flesh and
blood. It was during his sojourn in Egypt that the death of Sir
John Willard occurred. Rupert had plunged once more into his life
of dissipation in New York, and then, without warning, he had
committed suicide, leaving behind him a letter which contained some
curious phrases. It seemed written in a sudden fit of remorse. He
referred to himself as a leper and an outcast, and the letter ended
by declaring that such as he were better dead.

A shadowy theory leapt into my brain. I had never really believed
in the vengeance of a long dead Egyptian king. I saw here a more
modern crime. Supposing this young man had decided to do away with
his uncle—preferably by poison. By mistake, Sir John Willard
receives the fatal dose. The young man returns to New York, haunted
by his crime. The news of his uncle’s death reaches him. He realizes
how unnecessary his crime has been, and stricken with remorse takes
his own life.

I outlined my solution to Poirot. He was interested.

“It is ingenious what you have thought of there—decidedly it is
ingenious. It may even be true. But you leave out of count the
fatal influence of the Tomb.”

I shrugged my shoulders.

“You still think that has something to do with it?”

“So much so, _mon ami_, that we start for Egypt to-morrow.”

“What?” I cried, astonished.

“I have said it.” An expression of conscious heroism spread over
Poirot’s face. Then he groaned. “But, oh,” he lamented, “the sea!
The hateful sea!”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


It was a week later. Beneath our feet was the golden sand of the
desert. The hot sun poured down overhead. Poirot, the picture of
misery, wilted by my side. The little man was not a good traveller.
Our four days’ voyage from Marseilles had been one long agony to
him. He had landed at Alexandria the wraith of his former self,
even his usual neatness had deserted him. We had arrived in Cairo
and had driven out at once to the Mena House Hotel, right in the
shadow of the Pyramids.

The charm of Egypt had laid hold of me. Not so Poirot. Dressed
precisely the same as in London, he carried a small clothes-brush
in his pocket and waged an unceasing war on the dust which
accumulated on his dark apparel.

“And my boots,” he wailed. “Regard them, Hastings. My boots, of
the neat patent leather, usually so smart and shining. See, the
sand is inside them, which is painful, and outside them, which
outrages the eyesight. Also the heat, it causes my moustaches to
become limp—but limp!”

“Look at the Sphinx,” I urged. “Even I can feel the mystery and
the charm it exhales.”

Poirot looked at it discontentedly.

“It has not the air happy,” he declared. “How could it, half-buried
in sand in that untidy fashion. Ah, this cursed sand!”

“Come, now, there’s a lot of sand in Belgium,” I reminded him,
mindful of a holiday spent at Knocke-sur-mer in the midst of “_les
dunes impeccables_” as the guide-book had phrased it.

“Not in Brussels,” declared Poirot. He gazed at the Pyramids
thoughtfully. “It is true that they, at least, are of a shape solid
and geometrical, but their surface is of an unevenness most
unpleasing. And the palm-trees I like them not. Not even do they
plant them in rows!”

I cut short his lamentations, by suggesting that we should start
for the camp. We were to ride there on camels, and the beasts were
patiently kneeling, waiting for us to mount, in charge of several
picturesque boys headed by a voluble dragoman.

I pass over the spectacle of Poirot on a camel. He started by
groans and lamentations and ended by shrieks, gesticulations and
invocations to the Virgin Mary and every Saint in the calendar. In
the end, he descended ignominiously and finished the journey on a
diminutive donkey. I must admit that a trotting camel is no joke
for the amateur. I was stiff for several days.

At last we neared the scene of the excavations. A sunburnt man with
a grey beard, in white clothes and wearing a helmet, came to meet
us.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings? We received your cable. I’m
sorry that there was no one to meet you in Cairo. An unforeseen
event occurred which completely disorganized our plans.”

Poirot paled. His hand, which had stolen to his clothes-brush,
stayed its course.

“Not another death?” he breathed.

“Yes.”

“Sir Guy Willard?” I cried.

“No, Captain Hastings. My American colleague, Mr. Schneider.”

“And the cause?” demanded Poirot.

“Tetanus.”

I blanched. All around me I seemed to feel an atmosphere of evil,
subtle and menacing. A horrible thought flashed across me. Supposing
I were the next?

“_Mon Dieu_,” said Poirot, in a very low voice, “I do not understand
this. It is horrible. Tell me, monsieur, there is no doubt that it
was tetanus?”

“I believe not. But Dr. Ames will tell you more than I can do.”

“Ah, of course, you are not the doctor.”

“My name is Tosswill.”

This, then, was the British expert described by Lady Willard as
being a minor official at the British Museum. There was something
at once grave and steadfast about him that took my fancy.

“If you will come with me,” continued Dr. Tosswill, “I will take
you to Sir Guy Willard. He was most anxious to be informed as soon
as you should arrive.”

We were taken across the camp to a large tent. Dr. Tosswill lifted
up the flap and we entered. Three men were sitting inside.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings have arrived, Sir Guy,” said
Tosswill.

The youngest of the three men jumped up and came forward to greet
us. There was a certain impulsiveness in his manner which reminded
me of his mother. He was not nearly so sunburnt as the others, and
that fact, coupled with a certain haggardness round the eyes, made
him look older than his twenty-two years. He was clearly endeavouring
to bear up under a severe mental strain.

He introduced his two companions, Dr. Ames, a capable looking man
of thirty odd, with a touch of greying hair at the temples, and
Mr. Harper, the secretary, a pleasant lean young man wearing the
national insignia of horn-rimmed spectacles.

After a few minutes’ desultory conversation the latter went out,
and Dr. Tosswill followed him. We were left alone with Sir Guy and
Dr. Ames.

“Please ask any questions you want to ask, Monsieur Poirot,” said
Willard. “We are utterly dumbfounded at this strange series of
disasters, but it isn’t—it can’t be, anything but coincidence.”

There was a nervousness about his manner which rather belied the
words. I saw that Poirot was studying him keenly.

“Your heart is really in this work, Sir Guy?”

“Rather. No matter what happens, or what comes of it, the work is
going on. Make up your mind to that.”

Poirot wheeled round on the other.

“What have you to say to that, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“Well,” drawled the doctor, “I’m not for quitting myself.”

Poirot made one of those expressive grimaces of his.

“Then, _évidemment_, we must find out just how we stand. When did
Mr. Schneider’s death take place?”

“Three days ago.”

“You are sure it was tetanus?”

“Dead sure.”

“It couldn’t have been a case of strychnine poisoning, for
instance?”

“No, Monsieur Poirot. I see what you’re getting at. But it was a
clear case of tetanus.”

“Did you not inject anti-serum?”

“Certainly we did,” said the doctor dryly. “Every conceivable thing
that could be done was tried.”

“Had you the anti-serum with you?”

“No. We procured it from Cairo.”

“Have there been any other cases of tetanus in the camp?”

“No, not one.”

“Are you certain that the death of Mr. Bleibner was not due to
tetanus?”

“Absolutely plumb certain. He had a scratch upon his thumb which
became poisoned, and septicæmia set in. It sounds pretty much the
same to a layman, I dare say, but the two things are entirely
different.”

“Then we have four deaths—all totally dissimilar, one heart failure,
one blood poisoning, one suicide and one tetanus.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“Are you certain that there is nothing which might link the four
together?”

“I don’t quite understand you?”

“I will put it plainly. Was any act committed by those four men
which might seem to denote disrespect to the spirit of Men-her-Ra?”

The doctor gazed at Poirot in astonishment.

“You’re talking through your hat, Monsieur Poirot. Surely you’ve
not been guyed into believing all that fool talk?”

“Absolute nonsense,” muttered Willard angrily.

Poirot remained placidly immovable, blinking a little out of his
green cat’s eyes.

“So you do not believe it, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“No, sir, I do not,” declared the doctor emphatically. “I am a
scientific man, and I believe only what science teaches.”

“Was there no science then in Ancient Egypt?” asked Poirot softly.
He did not wait for a reply, and indeed Dr. Ames seemed rather at
a loss for the moment. “No, no, do not answer me, but tell me this.
What do the native workmen think?”

“I guess,” said Dr. Ames, “that, where white folk lose their heads,
natives aren’t going to be far behind. I’ll admit that they’re
getting what you might call scared—but they’ve no cause to be.”

“I wonder,” said Poirot non-committally.

Sir Guy leant forward.

“Surely,” he cried incredulously, “you cannot believe in—oh, but
the thing’s absurd! You can know nothing of Ancient Egypt if you
think that.”

For answer Poirot produced a little book from his pocket—an ancient
tattered volume. As he held it out I saw its title, _The Magic of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans_. Then, wheeling round, he strode out
of the tent. The doctor stared at me.

“What is his little idea?”

The phrase, so familiar on Poirot’s lips, made me smile as it came
from another.

“I don’t know exactly,” I confessed. “He’s got some plan of
exorcizing the evil spirits, I believe.”

I went in search of Poirot, and found him talking to the lean-faced
young man who had been the late Mr. Bleibner’s secretary.

“No,” Mr. Harper was saying, “I’ve only been six months with the
expedition. Yes, I knew Mr. Bleibner’s affairs pretty well.”

“Can you recount to me anything concerning his nephew?”

“He turned up here one day, not a bad-looking fellow. I’d never
met him before, but some of the others had—Ames, I think, and
Schneider. The old man wasn’t at all pleased to see him. They were
at it in no time, hammer and tongs. ‘Not a cent,’ the old man
shouted. ‘Not one cent now or when I’m dead. I intend to leave my
money to the furtherance of my life’s work. I’ve been talking it
over with Mr. Schneider to-day.’ And a bit more of the same. Young
Bleibner lit out for Cairo right away.”

“Was he in perfectly good health at the time?”

“The old man?”

“No, the young one.”

“I believe he did mention there was something wrong with him. But
it couldn’t have been anything serious, or I should have remembered.”

“One thing more, has Mr. Bleibner left a will?”

“So far as we know, he has not.”

“Are you remaining with the expedition, Mr. Harper?”

“No, sir, I am not. I’m for New York as soon as I can square up
things here. You may laugh if you like, but I’m not going to be
this blasted old Men-her-Ra’s next victim. He’ll get me if I stop
here.”

The young man wiped the perspiration from his brow.

Poirot turned away. Over his shoulder he said with a peculiar
smile:

“Remember, he got one of his victims in New York.”

“Oh, hell!” said Mr. Harper forcibly.

“That young man is nervous,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “He is on
the edge, but absolutely on the edge.”

I glanced at Poirot curiously, but his enigmatical smile told me
nothing. In company with Sir Guy Willard and Dr. Tosswill we were
taken round the excavations. The principal finds had been removed
to Cairo, but some of the tomb furniture was extremely interesting.
The enthusiasm of the young baronet was obvious, but I fancied that
I detected a shade of nervousness in his manner as though he could
not quite escape from the feeling of menace in the air. As we
entered the tent which had been assigned to us, for a wash before
joining the evening meal, a tall dark figure in white robes stood
aside to let us pass with a graceful gesture and a murmured greeting
in Arabic. Poirot stopped.

“You are Hassan, the late Sir John Willard’s servant?”

“I served my Lord Sir John, now I serve his son.” He took a step
nearer to us and lowered his voice. “You are a wise one, they say,
learned in dealing with evil spirits. Let the young master depart
from here. There is evil in the air around us.”

And with an abrupt gesture, not waiting for a reply, he strode
away.

“Evil in the air,” muttered Poirot. “Yes, I feel it.”

Our meal was hardly a cheerful one. The floor was left to Dr.
Tosswill, who discoursed at length upon Egyptian antiquities. Just
as we were preparing to retire to rest, Sir Guy caught Poirot by
the arm and pointed. A shadowy figure was moving amidst the tents.
It was no human one: I recognized distinctly the dog-headed figure
I had seen carved on the walls of the tomb.

My blood literally froze at the sight.

“_Mon Dieu!_” murmured Poirot, crossing himself vigorously. “Anubis,
the jackal-headed, the god of departing souls.”

“Some one is hoaxing us,” cried Dr. Tosswill, rising indignantly
to his feet.

“It went into your tent, Harper,” muttered Sir Guy, his face
dreadfully pale.

“No,” said Poirot, shaking his head, “into that of the Dr. Ames.”

The doctor stared at him incredulously; then, repeating Dr.
Tosswill’s words, he cried:

“Some one is hoaxing us. Come, we’ll soon catch the fellow.”

He dashed energetically in pursuit of the shadowy apparition. I
followed him, but, search as we would, we could find no trace of
any living soul having passed that way. We returned, somewhat
disturbed in mind, to find Poirot taking energetic measures, in
his own way, to ensure his personal safety. He was busily
surrounding our tent with various diagrams and inscriptions which
he was drawing in the sand. I recognized the five-pointed star or
Pentagon many times repeated. As was his wont, Poirot was at the
same time delivering an impromptu lecture on witchcraft and magic
in general, White Magic as opposed to Black, with various references
to the Ka and the Book of the Dead thrown in.

It appeared to excite the liveliest contempt in Dr. Tosswill, who
drew me aside, literally snorting with rage.

“Balderdash, sir,” he exclaimed angrily. “Pure balderdash. The
man’s an impostor. He doesn’t know the difference between the
superstitions of the Middle Ages and the beliefs of Ancient Egypt.
Never have I heard such a hotch-potch of ignorance and credulity.”

I calmed the excited expert, and joined Poirot in the tent. My
little friend was beaming cheerfully.

“We can now sleep in peace,” he declared happily. “And I can do
with some sleep. My head, it aches abominably. Ah, for a good
_tisane_!”

As though in answer to prayer, the flap of the tent was lifted and
Hassan appeared, bearing a steaming cup which he offered to Poirot.
It proved to be camomile tea, a beverage of which he is inordinately
fond. Having thanked Hassan and refused his offer of another cup
for myself, we were left alone once more. I stood at the door of
the tent some time after undressing, looking out over the desert.

“A wonderful place,” I said aloud, “and a wonderful work. I can
feel the fascination. This desert life, this probing into the heart
of a vanished civilization. Surely, Poirot, you, too, must feel
the charm?”

I got no answer, and I turned, a little annoyed. My annoyance was
quickly changed to concern. Poirot was lying back across the rude
couch, his face horribly convulsed. Beside him was the empty cup.
I rushed to his side, then dashed out and across the camp to Dr.
Ames’s tent.

“Dr. Ames!” I cried. “Come at once.”

“What’s the matter?” said the doctor, appearing in pyjamas.

“My friend. He’s ill. Dying. The camomile tea. Don’t let Hassan
leave the camp.”

Like a flash the doctor ran to our tent. Poirot was lying as I left
him.

“Extraordinary,” cried Ames. “Looks like a seizure—or—what did you
say about something he drank?” He picked up the empty cup.

“Only I did not drink it!” said a placid voice.

We turned in amazement. Poirot was sitting up on the bed. He was
smiling.

“No,” he said gently. “I did not drink it. While my good friend
Hastings was apostrophizing the night, I took the opportunity of
pouring it, not down my throat, but into a little bottle. That
little bottle will go to the analytical chemist. No”—as the doctor
made a sudden movement—“as a sensible man, you will understand that
violence will be of no avail. During Hastings’ brief absence to
fetch you, I have had time to put the bottle in safe keeping. Ah,
quick, Hastings, hold him!”

I misunderstood Poirot’s anxiety. Eager to save my friend, I flung
myself in front of him. But the doctor’s swift movement had another
meaning. His hand went to his mouth, a smell of bitter almonds
filled the air, and he swayed forward and fell.

“Another victim,” said Poirot gravely, “but the last. Perhaps it
is the best way. He has three deaths on his head.”

“Dr. Ames?” I cried, stupefied. “But I thought you believed in some
occult influence?”

“You misunderstood me, Hastings. What I meant was that I believe
in the terrific force of superstition. Once get it firmly
established that a series of deaths are supernatural, and you might
almost stab a man in broad daylight, and it would still be put down
to the curse, so strongly is the instinct of the supernatural
implanted in the human race. I suspected from the first that a man
was taking advantage of that instinct. The idea came to him, I
imagine, with the death of Sir John Willard. A fury of superstition
arose at once. As far as I could see, nobody could derive any
particular profit from Sir John’s death. Mr. Bleibner was a
different case. He was a man of great wealth. The information I
received from New York contained several suggestive points. To
begin with, young Bleibner was reported to have said he had a good
friend in Egypt from whom he could borrow. It was tacitly understood
that he meant his uncle, but it seemed to me that in that case he
would have said so outright. The words suggest some boon companion
of his own. Another thing, he scraped up enough money to take him
to Egypt, his uncle refused outright to advance him a penny, yet
he was able to pay the return passage to New York. Some one must
have lent him the money.”

“All that was very thin,” I objected.

“But there was more. Hastings, there occur often enough words
spoken metaphorically which are taken literally. The opposite can
happen too. In this case, words which were meant literally were
taken metaphorically. Young Bleibner wrote plainly enough: ‘I am
a leper,’ but nobody realized that he shot himself because he
believed that he had contracted the dread disease of leprosy.”

“What?” I ejaculated.

“It was the clever invention of a diabolical mind. Young Bleibner
was suffering from some minor skin trouble, he had lived in the
South Sea Islands, where the disease is common enough. Ames was a
former friend of his, and a well-known medical man, he would never
dream of doubting his word. When I arrived here, my suspicions were
divided between Harper and Dr. Ames, but I soon realized that only
the doctor could have perpetrated and concealed the crimes, and I
learnt from Harper that he was previously acquainted with young
Bleibner. Doubtless the latter at some time or another had made a
will or had insured his life in favour of the doctor. The latter
saw his chance of acquiring wealth. It was easy for him to inoculate
Mr. Bleibner with the deadly germs. Then the nephew, overcome with
despair at the dread news his friend had conveyed to him, shot
himself. Mr. Bleibner, whatever his intentions, had made no will.
His fortune would pass to his nephew and from him to the doctor.”

“And Mr. Schneider?”

“We cannot be sure. He knew young Bleibner too, remember, and may
have suspected something, or, again, the doctor may have thought
that a further death motiveless and purposeless would strengthen
the coils of superstition. Furthermore, I will tell you an
interesting psychological fact, Hastings. A murderer has always a
strong desire to repeat his successful crime, the performance of
it grows upon him. Hence my fears for young Willard. The figure of
Anubis you saw to-night was Hassan, dressed up by my orders. I
wanted to see if I could frighten the doctor. But it would take
more than the supernatural to frighten him. I could see that he
was not entirely taken in by my pretences of belief in the occult.
The little comedy I played for him did not deceive him. I suspected
that he would endeavour to make me the next victim. Ah, but in
spite of _la mer maudite_, the heat abominable, and the annoyances
of the sand, the little grey cells still functioned!”

Poirot proved to be perfectly right in his premises. Young Bleibner,
some years ago, in a fit of drunken merriment, had made a jocular
will, leaving “my cigarette case you admire so much and everything
else of which I die possessed which will be principally debts to
my good friend Robert Ames who once saved my life from drowning.”

The case was hushed up as far as possible, and, to this day, people
talk of the remarkable series of deaths in connection with the Tomb
of Men-her-Ra as a triumphal proof of the vengeance of a bygone
king upon the desecrators of his tomb—a belief which, as Poirot
pointed out to me, is contrary to all Egyptian belief and thought.




  VII

  The Jewel Robbery at the _Grand Metropolitan_

“Poirot,” I said, “a change of air would do you good.”

“You think so, _mon ami_?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Eh—eh?” said my friend, smiling. “It is all arranged, then?”

“You will come?”

“Where do you propose to take me?”

“Brighton. As a matter of fact, a friend of mine in the City put
me on to a very good thing, and—well, I have money to burn, as the
saying goes. I think a week-end at the _Grand Metropolitan_ would
do us all the good in the world.”

“Thank you, I accept most gratefully. You have the good heart to
think of an old man. And the good heart, it is in the end worth
all the little grey cells. Yes, yes, I who speak to you am in
danger of forgetting that sometimes.”

I did not quite relish the implication. I fancy that Poirot is
sometimes a little inclined to underestimate my mental capacities.
But his pleasure was so evident that I put my slight annoyance
aside.

“Then, that’s all right,” I said hastily.

Saturday evening saw us dining at the _Grand Metropolitan_ in the
midst of a gay throng. All the world and his wife seemed to be at
Brighton. The dresses were marvellous, and the jewels—worn sometimes
with more love of display than good taste—were something magnificent.

“_Hein_, it is a sight this!” murmured Poirot. “This is the home
of the Profiteer, is it not so, Hastings?”

“Supposed to be,” I replied. “But we’ll hope they aren’t all tarred
with the Profiteering brush.”

Poirot gazed round him placidly.

“The sight of so many jewels makes me wish I had turned my brains
to crime, instead of to its detection. What a magnificent
opportunity for some thief of distinction! Regard, Hastings, that
stout woman by the pillar. She is, as you would say, plastered with
gems.”

I followed his eyes.

“Why,” I exclaimed, “it’s Mrs. Opalsen.”

“You know her?”

“Slightly. Her husband is a rich stockbroker who made a fortune in
the recent Oil boom.”

After dinner we ran across the Opalsens in the lounge, and I
introduced Poirot to them. We chatted for a few minutes, and ended
by having our coffee together.

Poirot said a few words in praise of some of the costlier gems
displayed on the lady’s ample bosom, and she brightened up at once.

“It’s a perfect hobby of mine, Mr. Poirot. I just _love_ jewellery.
Ed knows my weakness, and every time things go well he brings me
something new. You are interested in precious stones?”

“I have had a good deal to do with them one time and another,
madame. My profession has brought me into contact with some of the
most famous jewels in the world.”

He went on to narrate, with discreet pseudonyms, the story of the
historic jewels of a reigning house, and Mrs. Opalsen listened with
bated breath.

“There now!” she exclaimed, as he ended. “If it isn’t just like a
play! You know, I’ve got some pearls of my own that have a history
attached to them. I believe it’s supposed to be one of the finest
necklaces in the world—the pearls are so beautifully matched and
so perfect in colour. I declare I really must run up and get it!”

“Oh, madame,” protested Poirot, “you are too amiable. Pray do not
derange yourself!”

“Oh, but I’d like to show it to you.”

The buxom dame waddled across to the lift briskly enough. Her
husband, who had been talking to me, looked at Poirot inquiringly.

“Madame your wife is so amiable as to insist on showing me her
pearl necklace,” explained the latter.

“Oh, the pearls!” Opalsen smiled in a satisfied fashion. “Well,
they _are_ worth seeing. Cost a pretty penny too! Still, the
money’s there all right; I could get what I paid for them any
day—perhaps more. May have to, too, if things go on as they are
now. Money’s confoundedly tight in the City. All this infernal
E.P.D.” He rambled on, launching into technicalities where I could
not follow him.

He was interrupted by a small page-boy who approached and murmured
something in his ear.

“Eh—what? I’ll come at once. Not taken ill, is she? Excuse me,
gentlemen.”

He left us abruptly. Poirot leaned back and lit one of his tiny
Russian cigarettes. Then, carefully and meticulously, he arranged
the empty coffee-cups in a neat row, and beamed happily on the
result.

The minutes passed. The Opalsens did not return.

“Curious,” I remarked, at length. “I wonder when they will come
back.”

Poirot watched the ascending spirals of smoke, and then said
thoughtfully:

“They will not come back.”

“Why?”

“Because, my friend, something has happened.”

“What sort of thing? How do you know?” I asked curiously.

Poirot smiled.

“A few moments ago the manager came hurriedly out of his office
and ran upstairs. He was much agitated. The lift-boy is deep in
talk with one of the pages. The lift-bell has rung three times,
but he heeds it not. Thirdly, even the waiters are _distrait_; and
to make a waiter _distrait_——” Poirot shook his head with an air
of finality. “The affair must indeed be of the first magnitude.
Ah, it is as I thought! Here come the police.”

Two men had just entered the hotel—one in uniform, the other in
plain clothes. They spoke to a page, and were immediately ushered
upstairs. A few minutes later, the same boy descended and came up
to where we were sitting.

“Mr. Opalsen’s compliments, and would you step upstairs.”

Poirot sprang nimbly to his feet. One would have said that he
awaited the summons. I followed with no less alacrity.

The Opalsens’ apartments were situated on the first floor. After
knocking on the door, the page-boy retired, and we answered the
summons, “Come in!” A strange scene met our eyes. The room was Mrs.
Opalsen’s bedroom, and in the centre of it, lying back in an
arm-chair, was the lady herself, weeping violently. She presented
an extraordinary spectacle, with the tears making great furrows in
the powder with which her complexion was liberally coated. Mr.
Opalsen was striding up and down angrily. The two police officials
stood in the middle of the room, one with a notebook in hand. An
hotel chambermaid, looking frightened to death, stood by the
fire-place; and on the other side of the room a Frenchwoman,
obviously Mrs. Opalsen’s maid, was weeping and wringing her hands,
with an intensity of grief that rivalled that of her mistress.

Into this pandemonium stepped Poirot, neat and smiling. Immediately,
with an energy surprising in one of her bulk, Mrs. Opalsen sprang
from her chair towards him.

“There now; Ed may say what he likes, but I believe in luck, I do.
It was fated I should meet you the way I did this evening, and I’ve
a feeling that if you can’t get my pearls back for me nobody can.”

“Calm yourself, I pray of you, madame.” Poirot patted her hand
soothingly. “Reassure yourself. All will be well. Hercule Poirot
will aid you!”

Mr. Opalsen turned to the police inspector.

“There will be no objection to my—er—calling in this gentleman, I
suppose?”

“None at all, sir,” replied the man civilly, but with complete
indifference. “Perhaps now your lady’s feeling better she’ll just
let us have the facts?”

Mrs. Opalsen looked helplessly at Poirot. He led her back to her
chair.

“Seat yourself, madame, and recount to us the whole history without
agitating yourself.”

Thus abjured, Mrs. Opalsen dried her eyes gingerly, and began.

“I came upstairs after dinner to fetch my pearls for Mr. Poirot
here to see. The chambermaid and Célestine were both in the room
as usual——”

“Excuse me, madame, but what do you mean by ‘as usual’?”

Mr. Opalsen explained.

“I make it a rule that no one is to come into this room unless
Célestine, the maid, is there also. The chambermaid does the room
in the morning while Célestine is present, and comes in after
dinner to turn down the beds under the same conditions; otherwise
she never enters the room.”

“Well, as I was saying,” continued Mrs. Opalsen, “I came up. I went
to the drawer here,”—she indicated the bottom right-hand drawer of
the knee-hole dressing-table—“took out my jewel-case and unlocked
it. It seemed quite as usual—but the pearls were not there!”

The inspector had been busy with his notebook. “When had you last
seen them?” he asked.

“They were there when I went down to dinner.”

“You are sure?”

“Quite sure. I was uncertain whether to wear them or not, but in
the end I decided on the emeralds, and put them back in the
jewel-case.”

“Who locked up the jewel-case?”

“I did. I wear the key on a chain round my neck.” She held it up
as she spoke.

The inspector examined it, and shrugged his shoulders.

“The thief must have had a duplicate key. No difficult matter. The
lock is quite a simple one. What did you do after you’d locked the
jewel-case?”

“I put it back in the bottom drawer where I always keep it.”

“You didn’t lock the drawer?”

“No, I never do. My maid remains in the room till I come up, so
there’s no need.”

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“Am I to understand that the jewels were there when you went down
to dinner, and that since then _the maid has not left the room_?”

Suddenly, as though the horror of her own situation for the first
time burst upon her, Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and,
flinging herself upon Poirot, poured out a torrent of incoherent
French.

The suggestion was infamous! That she should be suspected of
robbing Madame! The police were well known to be of a stupidity
incredible! But Monsieur, who was a Frenchman—

“A Belgian,” interjected Poirot, but Célestine paid no attention
to the correction.

Monsieur would not stand by and see her falsely accused, while that
infamous chambermaid was allowed to go scot-free. She had never
liked her—a bold, red-faced thing—a born thief. She had said from
the first that she was not honest. And had kept a sharp watch over
her too, when she was doing Madame’s room! Let those idiots of
policemen search her, and if they did not find Madame’s pearls on
her it would be very surprising!

Although this harangue was uttered in rapid and virulent French,
Célestine had interlarded it with a wealth of gesture, and the
chambermaid realized at least a part of her meaning. She reddened
angrily.

“If that foreign woman’s saying I took the pearls, it’s a lie!”
she declared heatedly. “I never so much as saw them.”

“Search her!” screamed the other. “You will find it is as I say.”

“You’re a liar—do you hear?” said the chambermaid, advancing upon
her. “Stole ’em yourself, and want to put it on me. Why, I was only
in the room about three minutes before the lady come up, and then
you were sitting here the whole time, as you always do, like a cat
watching a mouse.”

The inspector looked across inquiringly at Célestine. “Is that
true? Didn’t you leave the room at all?”

“I did not actually leave her alone,” admitted Célestine reluctantly,
“but I went into my own room through the door here twice—once to
fetch a reel of cotton, and once for my scissors. She must have
done it then.”

“You wasn’t gone a minute,” retorted the chambermaid angrily. “Just
popped out and in again. I’d be glad if the police _would_ search
me. _I’ve nothing to be afraid of_.”

At this moment there was a tap at the door. The inspector went to
it. His face brightened when he saw who it was.

“Ah!” he said. “That’s rather fortunate. I sent for one of our
female searchers, and she’s just arrived. Perhaps if you wouldn’t
mind going into the room next door.”

He looked at the chambermaid, who stepped across the threshold with
a toss of her head, the searcher following her closely.

The French girl had sunk sobbing into a chair. Poirot was looking
round the room, the main features of which I have made clear by a
sketch.

[A sketch of the bedroom, adjoining maid's room, and corridor.]

“Where does that door lead?” he inquired, nodding his head towards
the one by the window.

“Into the next apartment, I believe,” said the inspector. “It’s
bolted, anyway, on this side.”

Poirot walked across to it, tried it, then drew back the bolt and
tried it again.

“And on the other side as well,” he remarked. “Well, that seems to
rule out that.”

He walked over to the windows, examining each of them in turn.

“And again—nothing. Not even a balcony outside.”

“Even if there were,” said the inspector impatiently, “I don’t see
how that would help us, if the maid never left the room.”

“_Évidemment_,” said Poirot, not disconcerted. “As Mademoiselle is
positive she did not leave the room——”

He was interrupted by the reappearance of the chambermaid and the
police searcher.

“Nothing,” said the latter laconically.

“I should hope not, indeed,” said the chambermaid virtuously. “And
that French hussy ought to be ashamed of herself taking away an
honest girl’s character!”

“There, there, my girl; that’s all right,” said the inspector,
opening the door. “Nobody suspects you. You go along and get on
with your work.”

The chambermaid went unwillingly.

“Going to search _her_?” she demanded, pointing at Célestine.

“Yes, yes!” He shut the door on her and turned the key.

Célestine accompanied the searcher into the small room in her turn.
A few minutes later she also returned. Nothing had been found on
her.

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“I’m afraid I’ll have to ask you to come along with me all the
same, miss.” He turned to Mrs. Opalsen. “I’m sorry, madam, but all
the evidence points that way. If she’s not got them on her, they’re
hidden somewhere about the room.”

Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and clung to Poirot’s arm.
The latter bent and whispered something in the girl’s ear. She
looked up at him doubtfully.

“_Si, si, mon enfant_—I assure you it is better not to resist.”
Then he turned to the inspector. “You permit, monsieur? A little
experiment—purely for my own satisfaction.”

“Depends on what it is,” replied the police officer non-committally.

Poirot addressed Célestine once more.

“You have told us that you went into your room to fetch a reel of
cotton. Whereabouts was it?”

“On the top of the chest of drawers, monsieur.”

“And the scissors?”

“They also.”

“Would it be troubling you too much, mademoiselle, to ask you to
repeat those two actions? You were sitting here with your work,
you say?”

Célestine sat down, and then, at a sign from Poirot, rose, passed
into the adjoining room, took up an object from the chest of
drawers, and returned.

Poirot divided his attention between her movements and a large
turnip of a watch which he held in the palm of his hand.

“Again, if you please, mademoiselle.”

At the conclusion of the second performance, he made a note in his
pocket-book, and returned the watch to his pocket.

“Thank you, mademoiselle. And you, monsieur,”—he bowed to the
inspector—“for your courtesy.”

The inspector seemed somewhat entertained by this excessive
politeness. Célestine departed in a flood of tears, accompanied by
the woman and the plain-clothes official.

Then, with a brief apology to Mrs. Opalsen, the inspector set to
work to ransack the room. He pulled out drawers, opened cupboards,
completely unmade the bed, and tapped the floor. Mr. Opalsen looked
on sceptically.

“You really think you will find them?”

“Yes, sir. It stands to reason. She hadn’t time to take them out
of the room. The lady’s discovering the robbery so soon upset her
plans. No, they’re here right enough. One of the two must have
hidden them—and it’s very unlikely for the chambermaid to have done
so.”

“More than unlikely—impossible!” said Poirot quietly.

“Eh?” The inspector stared.

Poirot smiled modestly.

“I will demonstrate. Hastings, my good friend, take my watch in
your hand—with care. It is a family heirloom! Just now I timed
Mademoiselle’s movements—her first absence from the room was of
twelve seconds, her second of fifteen. Now observe my actions.
Madame will have the kindness to give me the key of the jewel-case.
I thank you. My friend Hastings will have the kindness to say
‘Go!’”

“Go!” I said.

With almost incredible swiftness, Poirot wrenched open the drawer
of the dressing-table, extracted the jewel-case, fitted the key in
the lock, opened the case, selected a piece of jewellery, shut and
locked the case, and returned it to the drawer, which he pushed to
again. His movements were like lightning.

“Well, _mon ami_?” he demanded of me breathlessly.

“Forty-six seconds,” I replied.

“You see?” He looked round. “There would not have been time for
the chambermaid even to take the necklace out, far less hide it.”

“Then that settles it on the maid,” said the inspector with
satisfaction, and returned to his search. He passed into the maid’s
bedroom next door.

Poirot was frowning thoughtfully. Suddenly he shot a question at
Mr. Opalsen.

“This necklace—it was, without doubt, insured?”

Mr. Opalsen looked a trifle surprised at the question.

“Yes,” he said hesitatingly, “that is so.”

“But what does that matter?” broke in Mrs. Opalsen tearfully. “It’s
my necklace I want. It was unique. No money could be the same.”

“I comprehend, madame,” said Poirot soothingly. “I comprehend
perfectly. To _la femme_ sentiment is everything—is it not so? But
monsieur, who has not the so fine susceptibility, will doubtless
find some slight consolation in the fact.”

“Of course, of course,” said Mr. Opalsen rather uncertainly.
“Still——”

He was interrupted by a shout of triumph from the inspector. He
came in dangling something from his fingers.

With a cry, Mrs. Opalsen heaved herself up from her chair. She was
a changed woman.

“Oh, oh, my necklace!”

She clasped it to her breast with both hands. We crowded round.

“Where was it?” demanded Opalsen.

“Maid’s bed. In among the springs of the wire mattress. She must
have stolen it and hidden it there before the chambermaid arrived
on the scene.”

“You permit, madame?” said Poirot gently. He took the necklace from
her and examined it closely; then handed it back with a bow.

“I’m afraid, madam, you’ll have to hand it over to us for the time
being,” said the inspector. “We shall want it for the charge. But
it shall be returned to you as soon as possible.”

Mr. Opalsen frowned.

“Is that necessary?”

“I’m afraid so, sir. Just a formality.”

“Oh, let him take it, Ed!” cried his wife. “I’d feel safer if he
did. I shouldn’t sleep a wink thinking some one else might try and
get hold of it. That wretched girl! And I would never have believed
it of her.”

“There, there, my dear, don’t take on so.”

I felt a gentle pressure on my arm. It was Poirot.

“Shall we slip away, my friend? I think our services are no longer
needed.”

Once outside, however, he hesitated, and then, much to my surprise,
he remarked:

“I should rather like to see the room next door.”

The door was not locked, and we entered. The room, which was a
large double one, was unoccupied. Dust lay about rather noticeably,
and my sensitive friend gave a characteristic grimace as he ran
his finger round a rectangular mark on a table near the window.

“The _service_ leaves to be desired,” he observed dryly.

He was staring thoughtfully out of the window, and seemed to have
fallen into a brown study.

“Well?” I demanded impatiently. “What did we come in here for?”

He started.

“_Je vous demande pardon, mon ami_. I wished to see if the door
was really bolted on this side also.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the door which communicated with the
room we had just left, “it _is_ bolted.”

Poirot nodded. He still seemed to be thinking.

“And, anyway,” I continued, “what does it matter? The case is over.
I wish you’d had more chance of distinguishing yourself. But it
was the kind of case that even a stiff-backed idiot like that
inspector couldn’t go wrong over.”

Poirot shook his head.

“The case is not over, my friend. It will not be over until we find
out who stole the pearls.”

“But the maid did!”

“Why do you say that?”

“Why,” I stammered, “they were found—actually in her mattress.”

“Ta, ta, ta!” said Poirot impatiently. “Those were not the pearls.”

“What?”

“Imitation, _mon ami_.”

The statement took my breath away. Poirot was smiling placidly.

“The good inspector obviously knows nothing of jewels. But presently
there will be a fine hullabaloo!”

“Come!” I cried, dragging at his arm.

“Where?”

“We must tell the Opalsens at once.”

“I think not.”

“But that poor woman——”

“_Eh bien_; that poor woman, as you call her, will have a much
better night believing the jewels to be safe.”

“But the thief may escape with them!”

“As usual, my friend, you speak without reflection. How do you know
that the pearls Mrs. Opalsen locked up so carefully to-night were
not the false ones, and that the real robbery did not take place
at a much earlier date?”

“Oh!” I said, bewildered.

“Exactly,” said Poirot, beaming. “We start again.”

He led the way out of the room, paused a moment as though
considering, and then walked down to the end of the corridor,
stopping outside the small den where the chambermaids and valets
of the respective floors congregated. Our particular chambermaid
appeared to be holding a small court there, and to be retailing
her late experiences to an appreciative audience. She stopped in
the middle of a sentence. Poirot bowed with his usual politeness.

“Excuse that I derange you, but I shall be obliged if you will
unlock for me the door of Mr. Opalsen’s room.”

The woman rose willingly, and we accompanied her down the passage
again. Mr. Opalsen’s room was on the other side of the corridor,
its door facing that of his wife’s room. The chambermaid unlocked
it with her pass-key, and we entered.

As she was about to depart Poirot detained her.

“One moment; have you ever seen among the effects of Mr. Opalsen
a card like this?”

He held out a plain white card, rather highly glazed and uncommon
in appearance. The maid took it and scrutinized it carefully.

“No, sir, I can’t say I have. But, anyway, the valet has most to
do with the gentlemen’s rooms.”

“I see. Thank you.”

Poirot took back the card. The woman departed. Poirot appeared to
reflect a little. Then he gave a short, sharp nod of the head.

“Ring the bell, I pray of you, Hastings. Three times, for the
valet.”

I obeyed, devoured with curiosity. Meanwhile Poirot had emptied
the waste-paper-basket on the floor, and was swiftly going through
its contents.

In a few moments the valet answered the bell. To him Poirot put
the same question, and handed him the card to examine. But the
response was the same. The valet had never seen a card of that
particular quality among Mr. Opalsen’s belongings. Poirot thanked
him, and he withdrew, somewhat unwillingly, with an inquisitive
glance at the overturned waste-paper-basket and the litter on the
floor. He could hardly have helped overhearing Poirot’s thoughtful
remark as he bundled the torn papers back again:

“And the necklace was heavily insured. . . .”

“Poirot,” I cried,  “I see——”

“You see nothing, my friend,” he replied quickly. “As usual,
nothing at all! It is incredible—but there it is. Let us return to
our own apartments.”

We did so in silence. Once there, to my intense surprise, Poirot
effected a rapid change of clothing.

“I go to London to-night,” he explained. “It is imperative.”

“What?”

“Absolutely. The real work, that of the brain (ah, those brave
little grey cells), it is done. I go to seek the confirmation. I
shall find it! Impossible to deceive Hercule Poirot!”

“You’ll come a cropper one of these days,” I observed, rather
disgusted by his vanity.

“Do not be enraged, I beg of you, _mon ami_. I count on you to do
me a service—of your friendship.”

“Of course,” I said eagerly, rather ashamed of my moroseness. “What
is it?”

“The sleeve of my coat that I have taken off—will you brush it?
See you, a little white powder has clung to it. You without doubt
observed me run my finger round the drawer of the dressing-table?”

“No, I didn’t.”

“You should observe my actions, my friend. Thus I obtained the
powder on my finger, and, being a little over-excited, I rubbed it
on my sleeve; an action without method which I deplore—false to
all my principles.”

“But what was the powder?” I asked, not particularly interested in
Poirot’s principles.

“Not the poison of the Borgias,” replied Poirot, with a twinkle.
“I see your imagination mounting. I should say it was French
chalk.”

“French chalk?”

“Yes, cabinet-makers use it to make drawers run smoothly.”

I laughed.

“You old sinner! I thought you were working up to something
exciting.”

“Au revoir, my friend. I save myself. I fly!”

The door shut behind him. With a smile, half of derision, half of
affection, I picked up the coat, and stretched out my hand for the
clothes-brush.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The next morning, hearing nothing from Poirot, I went out for a
stroll, met some old friends, and lunched with them at their hotel.
In the afternoon we went for a spin. A punctured tyre delayed us,
and it was past eight when I got back to the _Grand Metropolitan_.

The first sight that met my eyes was Poirot, looking even more
diminutive than usual, sandwiched between the Opalsens, beaming in
a state of placid satisfaction.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried, and sprang to meet me. “Embrace
me, my friend; all has marched to a marvel!”

Luckily, the embrace was merely figurative—not a thing one is
always sure of with Poirot.

“Do you mean——” I began.

“Just wonderful, I call it!” said Mrs. Opalsen, smiling all over
her fat face. “Didn’t I tell you, Ed, that if he couldn’t get back
my pearls nobody would?”

“You did, my dear, you did. And you were right.”

I looked helplessly at Poirot, and he answered the glance.

“My friend Hastings is, as you say in England, all at the seaside.
Seat yourself, and I will recount to you all the affair that has
so happily ended.”

“Ended?”

“But yes. They are arrested.”

“Who are arrested?”

“The chambermaid and the valet, _parbleu_! You did not suspect?
Not with my parting hint about the French chalk?”

“You said cabinet-makers used it.”

“Certainly they do—to make drawers slide easily. Somebody wanted
that drawer to slide in and out without any noise. Who could that
be? Obviously, only the chambermaid. The plan was so ingenious that
it did not at once leap to the eye—not even to the eye of Hercule
Poirot.

“Listen, this was how it was done. The valet was in the empty room
next door, waiting. The French maid leaves the room. Quick as a
flash the chambermaid whips open the drawer, takes out the
jewel-case, and, slipping back the bolt, passes it through the
door. The valet opens it at his leisure with the duplicate key with
which he has provided himself, extracts the necklace, and waits
his time. Célestine leaves the room again, and—pst!—in a flash the
case is passed back again and replaced in the drawer.

“Madame arrives, the theft is discovered. The chambermaid demands
to be searched, with a good deal of righteous indignation, and
leaves the room without a stain on her character. The imitation
necklace with which they have provided themselves has been concealed
in the French girl’s bed that morning by the chambermaid—a master
stroke, _ça!_”

“But what did you go to London for?”

“You remember the card?”

“Certainly. It puzzled me—and puzzles me still. I thought——”

I hesitated delicately, glancing at Mr. Opalsen.

Poirot laughed heartily.

“_Une blague!_ For the benefit of the valet. The card was one with
a specially prepared surface—for finger-prints. I went straight
to Scotland Yard, asked for our old friend Inspector Japp, and laid
the facts before him. As I had suspected, the finger-prints proved
to be those of two well-known jewel thieves who have been ‘wanted’
for some time. Japp came down with me, the thieves were arrested,
and the necklace was discovered in the valet’s possession. A clever
pair, but they failed in _method_. Have I not told you, Hastings,
at least thirty-six times, that without method——”

“At least thirty-six thousand times!” I interrupted. “But where
did their ‘method’ break down?”

“_Mon ami_, it is a good plan to take a place as chambermaid or
valet—but you must not shirk your work. They left an empty room
undusted; and therefore, when the man put down the jewel-case on
the little table near the communicating door, it left a square
mark——”

“I remember,” I cried.

“Before, I was undecided. Then—I _knew_!” There was a moment’s
silence.

“And I’ve got my pearls,” said Mrs. Opalsen as a sort of Greek
chorus.

“Well,” I said, “I’d better have some dinner.” Poirot accompanied
me.

“This ought to mean kudos for you,” I observed.

“_Pas du tout_,” replied Poirot tranquilly. “Japp and the local
inspector will divide the credit between them. But”—he tapped his
pocket—“I have a cheque here, from Mr. Opalsen, and, how say you,
my friend? This week-end has not gone according to plan. Shall we
return here next week-end—at my expense this time?”




  VIII


  The Kidnapped Prime Minister


Now that war and the problems of war are things of the past, I
think I may safely venture to reveal to the world the part which
my friend Poirot played in a moment of national crisis. The secret
has been well guarded. Not a whisper of it reached the Press. But,
now that the need for secrecy has gone by, I feel it is only just
that England should know the debt it owes to my quaint little
friend, whose marvellous brain so ably averted a great catastrophe.

One evening after dinner—I will not particularize the date; it
suffices to say that it was at the time when “Peace by negotiation”
was the parrot-cry of England’s enemies—my friend and I were
sitting in his rooms. After being invalided out of the Army I had
been given a recruiting job, and it had become my custom to drop
in on Poirot in the evenings after dinner and talk with him of any
cases of interest that he might have on hand.

I was attempting to discuss with him the sensational news of that
day—no less than an attempted assassination of Mr. David MacAdam,
England’s Prime Minister. The account in the papers had evidently
been carefully censored. No details were given, save that the Prime
Minister had had a marvellous escape, the bullet just grazing his
cheek.

I considered that our police must have been shamefully careless
for such an outrage to be possible. I could well understand that
the German agents in England would be willing to risk much for such
an achievement. “Fighting Mac,” as his own party had nicknamed him,
had strenuously and unequivocally combated the Pacifist influence
which was becoming so prevalent.

He was more than England’s Prime Minister—he _was_ England; and
to have removed him from his sphere of influence would have been
a crushing and paralysing blow to Britain.

Poirot was busy mopping a grey suit with a minute sponge. Never
was there a dandy such as Hercule Poirot. Neatness and order were
his passion. Now, with the odour of benzine filling the air, he
was quite unable to give me his full attention.

“In a little minute I am with you, my friend. I have all but
finished. The spot of grease—he is not good—I remove him—so!” He
waved his sponge.

I smiled as I lit another cigarette.

“Anything interesting on?” I inquired, after a minute or two.

“I assist a—how do you call it?—‘charlady’ to find her husband. A
difficult affair, needing the tact. For I have a little idea that
when he is found he will not be pleased. What would you? For my
part, I sympathize with him. He was a man of discrimination to lose
himself.”

I laughed.

“At last! The spot of grease, he is gone! I am at your disposal.”

“I was asking you what you thought of this attempt to assassinate
MacAdam?”

“_Enfantillage!_” replied Poirot promptly. “One can hardly take it
seriously. To fire with the rifle—never does it succeed. It is a
device of the past.”

“It was very near succeeding this time,” I reminded him.

Poirot shook his head impatiently. He was about to reply when the
landlady thrust her head round the door and informed him that there
were two gentlemen below who wanted to see him.

“They won’t give their names, sir, but they says as it’s very
important.”

“Let them mount,” said Poirot, carefully folding his grey trousers.

In a few minutes the two visitors were ushered in, and my heart
gave a leap as in the foremost I recognized no less a personage
than Lord Estair, Leader of the House of Commons; whilst his
companion, Mr. Bernard Dodge, was also a member of the War Cabinet,
and, as I knew, a close personal friend of the Prime Minister.

“Monsieur Poirot?” said Lord Estair interrogatively. My friend
bowed. The great man looked at me and hesitated. “My business is
private.”

“You may speak freely before Captain Hastings,” said my friend,
nodding to me to remain. “He has not all the gifts, no! But I
answer for his discretion.”

Lord Estair still hesitated, but Mr. Dodge broke in abruptly:

“Oh, come on—don’t let’s beat about the bush! As far as I can see,
the whole of England will know the hole we’re in soon enough.
Time’s everything.”

“Pray be seated, messieurs,” said Poirot politely. “Will you take
the big chair, _milord_?”

Lord Estair started slightly. “You know me?”

Poirot smiled. “Certainly. I read the little papers with the
pictures. How should I not know you?”

“Monsieur Poirot, I have come to consult you upon a matter of the
most vital urgency. I must ask for absolute secrecy.”

“You have the word of Hercule Poirot—I can say no more!” said my
friend grandiloquently.

“It concerns the Prime Minister. We are in grave trouble.”

“We’re up a tree!” interposed Mr. Dodge.

“The injury is serious, then?” I asked.

“What injury?”

“The bullet wound.”

“Oh, that!” cried Mr. Dodge contemptuously. “That’s old history.”

“As my colleague says,” continued Lord Estair, “that affair is over
and done with. Luckily, it failed. I wished I could say as much
for the second attempt.”

“There has been a second attempt, then?”

“Yes, though not of the same nature. Monsieur Poirot, the Prime
Minister has disappeared.”

“What?”

“He has been kidnapped!”

“Impossible!” I cried, stupefied.

Poirot threw a withering glance at me, which I knew enjoined me to
keep my mouth shut.

“Unfortunately, impossible as it seems, it is only too true,”
continued his lordship.

Poirot looked at Mr. Dodge. “You said just now, monsieur, that time
was everything. What did you mean by that?”

The two men exchanged glances, and then Lord Estair said:

“You have heard, Monsieur Poirot, of the approaching Allied
Conference?”

My friend nodded.

“For obvious reasons, no details have been given of when and where
it is to take place. But, although it has been kept out of the
newspapers, the date is, of course, widely known in diplomatic
circles. The Conference is to be held to-morrow—Thursday—evening
at Versailles. Now you perceive the terrible gravity of the
situation. I will not conceal from you that the Prime Minister’s
presence at the Conference is a vital necessity. The Pacifist
propaganda, started and maintained by the German agents in our
midst, has been very active. It is the universal opinion that the
turning point of the Conference will be the strong personality of
the Prime Minister. His absence may have the most serious
results—possibly a premature and disastrous peace. And we have no
one who can be sent in his place. He alone can represent England.”

Poirot’s face had grown very grave. “Then you regard the kidnapping
of the Prime Minister as a direct attempt to prevent his being
present at the Conference?”

“Most certainly I do. He was actually on his way to France at the
time.”

“And the Conference is to be held?”

“At nine o’clock to-morrow night.”

Poirot drew an enormous watch from his pocket.

“It is now a quarter to nine.”

“Twenty-four hours,” said Mr. Dodge thoughtfully.

“And a quarter,” amended Poirot. “Do not forget the quarter,
monsieur—it may come in useful. Now for the details—the abduction,
did it take place in England or in France?”

“In France. Mr. MacAdam crossed to France this morning. He was to
stay to-night as the guest of the Commander-in-Chief, proceeding
to-morrow to Paris. He was conveyed across the Channel by destroyer.
At Boulogne he was met by a car from General Headquarters and one
of the Commander-in-Chief’s A.D.C.s.”

“_Eh bien_?”

“Well, they started from Boulogne—but they never arrived.”

“What?”

“Monsieur Poirot, it was a bogus car and a bogus A.D.C. The real
car was found in a side road, with the chauffeur and the A.D.C.
neatly gagged and bound.”

“And the bogus car?”

“Is still at large.”

Poirot made a gesture of impatience. “Incredible! Surely it cannot
escape attention for long?”

“So we thought. It seemed merely a question of searching thoroughly.
That part of France is under Military Law. We were convinced that
the car could not go long unnoticed. The French police and our own
Scotland Yard men, and the military are straining every nerve. It
is, as you say, incredible—but nothing has been discovered!”

At that moment a tap came at the door, and a young officer entered
with a heavily sealed envelope which he handed to Lord Estair.

“Just through from France, sir. I brought it on here, as you
directed.”

The Minister tore it open eagerly, and uttered an exclamation. The
officer withdrew.

“Here is news at last! This telegram has just been decoded. They
have found the second car, also the secretary, Daniels, chloroformed,
gagged, and bound, in an abandoned farm near C——. He remembers
nothing, except something being pressed against his mouth and nose
from behind, and struggling to free himself. The police are
satisfied as to the genuineness of his statement.”

“And they have found nothing else?”

“No.”

“Not the Prime Minister’s dead body? Then, there is hope. But it
is strange. Why, after trying to shoot him this morning, are they
now taking so much trouble to keep him alive?”

Dodge shook his head. “One thing’s quite certain. They’re determined
at all costs to prevent his attending the Conference.”

“If it is humanly possible, the Prime Minister shall be there. God
grant it is not too late. Now, messieurs, recount to me
everything—from the beginning. I must know about this shooting
affair as well.”

“Last night, the Prime Minister, accompanied by one of his
secretaries, Captain Daniels——”

“The same who accompanied him to France?”

“Yes. As I was saying, they motored down to Windsor, where the
Prime Minister was granted an Audience. Early this morning, he
returned to town, and it was on the way that the attempted
assassination took place.”

“One moment, if you please. Who is this Captain Daniels? You have
his dossier?”

Lord Estair smiled. “I thought you would ask me that. We do not
know very much of him. He is of no particular family. He has served
in the English Army, and is an extremely able secretary, being an
exceptionally fine linguist. I believe he speaks seven languages.
It is for that reason that the Prime Minister chose him to accompany
him to France.”

“Has he any relatives in England?”

“Two aunts. A Mrs. Everard, who lives at Hampstead, and a Miss
Daniels, who lives near Ascot.”

“Ascot? That is near to Windsor, is it not?”

“That point has not been overlooked. But it has led to nothing.”

“You regard the Capitaine Daniels, then, as above suspicion?”

A shade of bitterness crept into Lord Estair’s voice, as he replied:

“No, Monsieur Poirot. In these days, I should hesitate before I
pronounced _anyone_ above suspicion.”

“_Très bien_. Now I understand, _milord_, that the Prime Minister
would, as a matter of course, be under vigilant police protection,
which ought to render any assault upon him an impossibility?”

Lord Estair bowed his head. “That is so. The Prime Minister’s car
was closely followed by another car containing detectives in plain
clothes. Mr. MacAdam knew nothing of these precautions. He is
personally a most fearless man, and would be inclined to sweep them
away arbitrarily. But, naturally, the police make their own
arrangements. In fact, the Premier’s chauffeur, O’Murphy, is a
C.I.D. man.”

“O’Murphy? That is a name of Ireland, is it not so?”

“Yes, he is an Irishman.”

“From what part of Ireland?”

“County Clare, I believe.”

“_Tiens!_ But proceed, _milord_.”

“The Premier started for London. The car was a closed one. He and
Captain Daniels sat inside. The second car followed as usual. But,
unluckily, for some unknown reason, the Prime Minister’s car
deviated from the main road——”

“At a point where the road curves?” interrupted Poirot.

“Yes—but how did you know?”

“Oh, _c’est évident_! Continue!”

“For some unknown reason,” continued Lord Estair, “the Premier’s
car left the main road. The police car, unaware of the deviation,
continued to keep to the high road. At a short distance down the
unfrequented lane, the Prime Minister’s car was suddenly held up
by a band of masked men. The chauffeur——”

“That brave O’Murphy!” murmured Poirot thoughtfully.

“The chauffeur, momentarily taken aback, jammed on the brakes. The
Prime Minister put his head out of the window. Instantly a shot
rang out—then another. The first one grazed his cheek, the second,
fortunately, went wide. The chauffeur, now realizing the danger,
instantly forged straight ahead, scattering the band of men.”

“A near escape,” I ejaculated, with a shiver.

“Mr. MacAdam refused to make any fuss over the slight wound he had
received. He declared it was only a scratch. He stopped at a local
cottage hospital, where it was dressed and bound up—he did not, of
course, reveal his identity. He then drove, as per schedule,
straight to Charing Cross, where a special train for Dover was
awaiting him, and, after a brief account of what had happened had
been given to the anxious police by Captain Daniels, he duly
departed for France. At Dover, he went on board the waiting
destroyer. At Boulogne, as you know, the bogus car was waiting for
him, carrying the Union Jack, and correct in every detail.”

“That is all you have to tell me?”

“Yes.”

“There is no other circumstance that you have omitted, milord?”

“Well, there is one rather peculiar thing.”

“Yes?”

“The Prime Minister’s car did not return home after leaving the
Prime Minister at Charing Cross. The police were anxious to
interview O’Murphy, so a search was instituted at once. The car
was discovered standing outside a certain unsavoury little
restaurant in Soho, which is well known as a meeting-place of
German agents.”

“And the chauffeur?”

“The chauffeur was nowhere to be found. He, too, had disappeared.”

“So,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “there are two disappearances: the
Prime Minister in France, and O’Murphy in London.”

He looked keenly at Lord Estair, who made a gesture of despair.

“I can only tell you, Monsieur Poirot, that, if anyone had suggested
to me yesterday that O’Murphy was a traitor, I should have laughed
in his face.”

“And to-day?”

“To-day I do not know what to think.”

Poirot nodded gravely. He looked at his turnip of a watch again.

“I understand that I have carte blanche, messieurs—in every way,
I mean? I must be able to go where I choose, and how I choose.”

“Perfectly. There is a special train leaving for Dover in an hour’s
time, with a further contingent from Scotland Yard. You shall be
accompanied by a Military officer and a C.I.D. man, who will hold
themselves at your disposal in every way. Is that satisfactory?”

“Quite. One more question before you leave, messieurs. What made
you come to me? I am unknown, obscure, in this great London of
yours.”

“We sought you out on the express recommendation and wish of a very
great man of your own country.”

“_Comment?_ My old friend the _Préfet_——?”

Lord Estair shook his head.

“One higher than the _Préfet_. One whose word was once law in
Belgium—and shall be again! That England has sworn!”

Poirot’s hand flew swiftly to a dramatic salute. “Amen to that!
Ah, but my Master does not forget. . . . Messieurs, I, Hercule
Poirot, will serve you faithfully. Heaven only send that it will
be in time. But this is dark—dark. . . . I cannot see.”

“Well, Poirot,” I cried impatiently, as the door closed behind the
Ministers, “what do you think?”

My friend was busy packing a minute suitcase, with quick, deft
movements. He shook his head thoughtfully.

“I do not know what to think. My brains desert me.”

“Why, as you said, kidnap him, when a knock on the head would do
as well?” I mused.

“Pardon me, _mon ami_, but I did not quite say that. It is
undoubtedly far more their affair to kidnap him.”

“But why?”

“Because uncertainty creates panic. That is one reason. Were the
Prime Minister dead, it would be a terrible calamity, but the
situation would have to be faced. But now you have paralysis. Will
the Prime Minister reappear, or will he not? Is he dead or alive?
Nobody knows, and until they know nothing definite can be done.
And, as I tell you, uncertainty breeds panic, which is what _les
Boches_ are playing for. Then, again, if the kidnappers are holding
him secretly somewhere, they have the advantage of being able to
make terms with both sides. The German Government is not a liberal
paymaster, as a rule, but no doubt they can be made to disgorge
substantial remittances in such a case as this. Thirdly, they run
no risk of the hangman’s rope. Oh, decidedly, kidnapping is their
affair.”

“Then, if that is so, why should they first try to shoot him?”

Poirot made a gesture of anger. “Ah, that is just what I do not
understand! It is inexplicable—stupid! They have all their
arrangements made (and very good arrangements too!) for the
abduction, and yet they imperil the whole affair by a melodramatic
attack, worthy of a Cinema, and quite as unreal. It is almost
impossible to believe in it, with its band of masked men, not
twenty miles from London!”

“Perhaps they were two quite separate attempts which happened
irrespective of each other,” I suggested.

“Ah, no, that would be too much of a coincidence! Then, further—who
is the traitor? There must have been a traitor—in the first affair,
anyway. But who was it—Daniels or O’Murphy? It must have been one
of the two, or why did the car leave the main road? We cannot
suppose that the Prime Minister connived at his own assassination!
Did O’Murphy take that turning of his own accord, or was it Daniels
who told him to do so?”

“Surely it must have been O’Murphy’s doing.”

“Yes, because if it was Daniels’ the Prime Minister would have
heard the order, and would have asked the reason. But there are
altogether too many ‘whys’ in this affair, and they contradict each
other. If O’Murphy is an honest man, _why_ did he leave the main
road? But if he was a dishonest man, _why_ did he start the car
again when only two shots had been fired—thereby, in all probability,
saving the Prime Minister’s life? And, again, if he was honest,
why did he, immediately on leaving Charing Cross, drive to a
well-known rendezvous of German spies?”

“It looks bad,” I said.

“Let us look at the case with method. What have we for and against
these two men? Take O’Murphy first. Against: that his conduct in
leaving the main road was suspicious; that he is an Irishman from
County Clare; that he has disappeared in a highly suggestive
manner. For: that his promptness in restarting the car saved the
Premier’s life; that he is a Scotland Yard man, and, obviously,
from the post allotted to him, a trusted detective. Now for Daniels.
There is not much against him, except the fact that nothing is
known of his antecedents, and that he speaks too many languages
for a good Englishman! (Pardon me, _mon ami_, but, as linguists,
you are deplorable!) _Now for him_, we have the fact that he was
found gagged, bound, and chloroformed—which does not look as though
he had anything to do with the matter.”

“He might have gagged and bound himself, to divert suspicion.”

Poirot shook his head. “The French police would make no mistake of
that kind. Besides, once he had attained his object, and the Prime
Minister was safely abducted, there would not be much point in his
remaining behind. His accomplices _could_ have gagged and
chloroformed him, of course, but I fail to see what object they
hoped to accomplish by it. He can be of little use to them now,
for, until the circumstances concerning the Prime Minister have
been cleared up, he is bound to be closely watched.”

“Perhaps he hoped to start the police on a false scent?”

“Then why did he not do so? He merely says that something was
pressed over his nose and mouth, and that he remembers nothing
more. There is no false scent there. It sounds remarkably like the
truth.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the clock, “I suppose we’d better start
for the station. You may find more clues in France.”

“Possibly, _mon ami_, but I doubt it. It is still incredible to me
that the Prime Minister has not been discovered in that limited
area, where the difficulty of concealing him must be tremendous.
If the military and the police of two countries have not found him,
how shall I?”

At Charing Cross we were met by Mr. Dodge.

“This is Detective Barnes, of Scotland Yard, and Major Norman. They
will hold themselves entirely at your disposal. Good luck to you.
It’s a bad business, but I’ve not given up hope. Must be off now.”
And the Minister strode rapidly away.

We chatted in a desultory fashion with Major Norman. In the centre
of the little group of men on the platform I recognized a little
ferret-faced fellow talking to a tall, fair man. He was an old
acquaintance of Poirot’s—Detective-Inspector Japp, supposed to be
one of the smartest of Scotland Yard’s officers. He came over and
greeted my friend cheerfully.

“I heard you were on this job too. Smart bit of work. So far
they’ve got away with the goods all right. But I can’t believe they
can keep him hidden long. Our people are going through France with
a toothcomb. So are the French. I can’t help feeling it’s only a
matter of hours now.”

“That is, if he’s still alive,” remarked the tall detective
gloomily.

Japp’s face fell. “Yes. . . . But somehow I’ve got the feeling he’s
alive all right.”

Poirot nodded. “Yes, yes; he’s alive. But can he be found in time?
I, like you, did not believe he could be hidden so long.”

The whistle blew, and we all trooped up into the Pullman car. Then,
with a slow, unwilling jerk, the train drew out of the station.

It was a curious journey. The Scotland Yard men crowded together.
Maps of Northern France were spread out, and eager forefingers
traced the lines of roads and villages. Each man had his own pet
theory. Poirot showed none of his usual loquacity, but sat staring
in front of him, with an expression on his face that reminded me
of a puzzled child. I talked to Norman, whom I found quite an
amusing fellow. On arriving at Dover Poirot’s behaviour moved me
to intense amusement. The little man, as he went on board the boat,
clutched desperately at my arm. The wind was blowing lustily.

“_Mon Dieu!_” he murmured. “This is terrible!”

“Have courage, Poirot,” I cried. “You will succeed. You will find
him. I am sure of it.”

“Ah, _mon ami_, you mistake my emotion. It is this villainous sea
that troubles me! The _mal de mer_—it is horrible suffering!”

“Oh!” I said, rather taken aback.

The first throb of the engines was felt, and Poirot groaned and
closed his eyes.

“Major Norman has a map of Northern France if you would like to
study it?”

Poirot shook his head impatiently.

“But no, but no! Leave me, my friend. See you, to think, the
stomach and the brain must be in harmony. Laverguier has a method
most excellent for averting the _mal de mer_. You breathe in—and
out—slowly, so—turning the head from left to right and counting
six between each breath.”

I left him to his gymnastic endeavours, and went on deck.

As we came slowly into Boulogne Harbour Poirot appeared, neat and
smiling, and announced to me in a whisper that Laverguier’s system
had succeeded “to a marvel!”

Japp’s forefinger was still tracing imaginary routes on his map.
“Nonsense! The car started from Boulogne—here they branched off.
Now, my idea is that they transferred the Prime Minister to another
car. See?”

“Well,” said the tall detective, “I shall make for the seaports.
Ten to one, they’ve smuggled him on board a ship.”

Japp shook his head. “Too obvious. The order went out at once to
close all the ports.”

The day was just breaking as we landed. Major Norman touched Poirot
on the arm. “There’s a military car here waiting for you, sir.”

“Thank you, monsieur. But, for the moment, I do not propose to
leave Boulogne.”

“What?”

“No, we will enter this hotel here, by the quay.”

He suited the action to the word, demanded and was accorded a
private room. We three followed him, puzzled and uncomprehending.

He shot a quick glance at us. “It is not so that the good detective
should act, eh? I perceive your thought. He must be full of energy.
He must rush to and fro. He should prostrate himself on the dusty
road and seek the marks of tyres through a little glass. He must
gather up the cigarette-end, the fallen match? That is your idea,
is it not?”

His eyes challenged us. “But I—Hercule Poirot—tell you that it is
not so! The true clues are within—_here_!” He tapped his forehead.
“See you, I need not have left London. It would have been sufficient
for me to sit quietly in my rooms there. All that matters is the
little grey cells within. Secretly and silently they do their part,
until suddenly I call for a map, and I lay my finger on a
spot—so—and I say: the Prime Minister is _there_! And it is so!
With method and logic one can accomplish anything! This frantic
rushing to France was a mistake—it is playing a child’s game of
hide-and-seek. But now, though it may be too late, I will set to
work the right way, from within. Silence, my friends, I beg of
you.”

And for five long hours the little man sat motionless, blinking
his eyelids like a cat, his green eyes flickering and becoming
steadily greener and greener. The Scotland Yard man was obviously
contemptuous, Major Norman was bored and impatient, and I myself
found the time pass with wearisome slowness.

Finally, I got up, and strolled as noiselessly as I could to the
window. The matter was becoming a farce. I was secretly concerned
for my friend. If he failed, I would have preferred him to fail in
a less ridiculous manner. Out of the window I idly watched the
daily leave boat, belching forth columns of smoke, as she lay
alongside the quay.

Suddenly I was aroused by Poirot’s voice close to my elbow.

“_Mes amis_, let us start!”

I turned. An extraordinary transformation had come over my friend.
His eyes were flickering with excitement, his chest was swelled to
the uttermost.

“I have been an imbecile, my friends! But I see daylight at last.”

Major Norman moved hastily to the door. “I’ll order the car.”

“There is no need. I shall not use it. Thank Heaven the wind has
fallen.”

“Do you mean you are going to walk, sir?”

“No, my young friend. I am no St. Peter. I prefer to cross the sea
by boat.”

“To cross the _sea_?”

“Yes. To work with method, one must begin from the beginning. And
the beginning of this affair was in England. Therefore, we return
to England.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At three o’clock, we stood once more upon Charing Cross platform.
To all our expostulations, Poirot turned a deaf ear, and reiterated
again and again that to start at the beginning was not a waste of
time, but the only way. On the way over, he had conferred with
Norman in a low voice, and the latter had despatched a sheaf of
telegrams from Dover.

Owing to the special passes held by Norman, we got through
everywhere in record time. In London, a large police car was
waiting for us, with some plain-clothes men, one of whom handed a
typewritten sheet of paper to my friend. He answered my inquiring
glance.

“A list of the cottage hospitals within a certain radius west of
London. I wired for it from Dover.”

We were whirled rapidly through the London streets. We were on the
Bath Road. On we went, through Hammersmith, Chiswick and Brentford.
I began to see our objective. Through Windsor and on to Ascot. My
heart gave a leap. Ascot was where Daniels had an aunt living. We
were after _him_, then, not O’Murphy.

We duly stopped at the gate of a trim villa. Poirot jumped out and
rang the bell. I saw a perplexed frown dimming the radiance of his
face. Plainly, he was not satisfied. The bell was answered. He was
ushered inside. In a few moments he reappeared, and climbed into
the car with a short, sharp shake of his head. My hopes began to
die down. It was past four now. Even if he found certain evidence
incriminating Daniels, what would be the good of it, unless he
could wring from some one the exact spot in France where they were
holding the Prime Minister?

Our return progress towards London was an interrupted one. We
deviated from the main road more than once, and occasionally
stopped at a small building, which I had no difficulty in
recognizing as a cottage hospital. Poirot only spent a few minutes
at each, but at every halt his radiant assurance was more and more
restored.

He whispered something to Norman, to which the latter replied:

“Yes, if you turn off to the left, you will find them waiting by
the bridge.”

We turned up a side road, and in the failing light I discerned a
second car, waiting by the side of the road. It contained two men
in plain clothes. Poirot got down and spoke to them, and then we
started off in a northerly direction, the other car following close
behind.

We drove for some time, our objective being obviously one of the
northern suburbs of London. Finally, we drove up to the front door
of a tall house, standing a little back from the road in its own
grounds.

Norman and I were left with the car. Poirot and one of the
detectives went up to the door and rang. A neat parlourmaid opened
it. The detective spoke.

“I am a police officer, and I have a warrant to search this house.”

The girl gave a little scream, and a tall, handsome woman of
middle-age appeared behind her in the hall.

“Shut the door, Edith. They are burglars, I expect.”

But Poirot swiftly inserted his foot in the door, and at the same
moment blew a whistle. Instantly the other detectives ran up, and
poured into the house, shutting the door behind them.

Norman and I spent about five minutes cursing our forced inactivity.
Finally the door reopened, and the men emerged, escorting three
prisoners—a woman and two men. The woman, and one of the men, were
taken to the second car. The other man was placed in our car by
Poirot himself.

“I must go with the others, my friend. But have great care of this
gentleman. You do not know him, no? _Eh bien_, let me present to
you, Monsieur O’Murphy!”

O’Murphy! I _gaped_ at him open-mouthed as we started again. He
was not handcuffed, but I did not fancy he would try to escape. He
sat there staring in front of him as though dazed. Anyway, Norman
and I would be more than a match for him.

To my surprise, we still kept a northerly route. We were not
returning to London, then! I was much puzzled. Suddenly, as the
car slowed down, I recognized that we were close to Hendon
Aerodrome. Immediately I grasped Poirot’s idea. He proposed to
reach France by aeroplane.

It was a sporting idea, but, on the face of it, impracticable. A
telegram would be far quicker. Time was everything. He must leave
the personal glory of rescuing the Prime Minister to others.

As we drew up, Major Norman jumped out, and a plain-clothes man
took his place. He conferred with Poirot for a few minutes, and
then went off briskly.

I, too, jumped out, and caught Poirot by the arm.

“I congratulate you, old fellow! They have told you the hiding-place?
But, look here, you must wire to France at once. You’ll be too late
if you go yourself.”

Poirot looked at me curiously for a minute or two.

“Unfortunately, my friend, there are some things that cannot be
sent by telegram.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At that moment Major Norman returned, accompanied by a young
officer in the uniform of the Flying Corps.

“This is Captain Lyall, who will fly you over to France. He can
start at once.”

“Wrap up warmly, sir,” said the young pilot. “I can lend you a
coat, if you like.”

Poirot was consulting his enormous watch. He murmured to himself:
“Yes, there is time—just time.” Then he looked up, and bowed
politely to the young officer. “I thank you, monsieur. But it is
not I who am your passenger. It is this gentleman here.”

He moved a little aside as he spoke, and a figure came forward out
of the darkness. It was the second male prisoner who had gone in
the other car, and as the light fell on his face, I gave a gasp of
surprise.

_It was the Prime Minister!_


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


“For Heaven’s sake, tell me all about it,” I cried impatiently, as
Poirot, Norman, and I motored back to London. “How in the world
did they manage to smuggle him back to England?”

“There was no need to smuggle him back,” replied Poirot dryly. “The
Prime Minister has never left England. He was kidnapped on his way
from Windsor to London.”

“What?”

“I will make all clear. The Prime Minister was in his car, his
secretary beside him. Suddenly a pad of chloroform is clapped on
his face——”

“But by whom?”

“By the clever linguistic Captain Daniels. As soon as the Prime
Minister is unconscious, Daniels picks up the speaking-tube, and
directs O’Murphy to turn to the right, which the chauffeur, quite
unsuspicious, does. A few yards down that unfrequented road, a
large car is standing, apparently broken down. Its driver signals
to O’Murphy to stop. O’Murphy slows up. The stranger approaches.
Daniels leans out of the window, and, probably with the aid of an
instantaneous anæsthetic, such as ethylchloride, the chloroform
trick is repeated. In a few seconds, the two helpless men are
dragged out and transferred to the other car, and a pair of
substitutes take their places.”

“Impossible!”

“_Pas du tout!_ Have you not seen music-hall turns imitating
celebrities with marvellous accuracy? Nothing is easier than to
personate a public character. The Prime Minister of England is far
easier to understudy than Mr. John Smith of Clapham, say. As for
O’Murphy’s ‘double,’ no one was going to take much notice of him
until after the departure of the Prime Minister, and by then he
would have made himself scarce. He drives straight from Charing
Cross to the meeting-place of his friends. He goes in as O’Murphy,
he emerges as some one quite different. O’Murphy has disappeared,
leaving a conveniently suspicious trail behind him.”

“But the man who personated the Prime Minister was seen by every
one!”

“He was not seen by anyone who knew him privately or intimately.
And Daniels shielded him from contact with anyone as much as
possible. Moreover, his face was bandaged up, and anything unusual
in his manner would be put down to the fact that he was suffering
from shock as a result of the attempt upon his life. Mr. MacAdam
has a weak throat, and always spares his voice as much as possible
before any great speech. The deception was perfectly easy to keep
up as far as France. There it would be impracticable and
impossible—so the Prime Minister disappears. The police of this
country hurry across the Channel, and no one bothers to go into
the details of the first attack. To sustain the illusion that the
abduction has taken place in France, Daniels is gagged and
chloroformed in a convincing manner.”

“And the man who has enacted the part of the Prime Minister?”

“Rids himself of his disguise. He and the bogus chauffeur may be
arrested as suspicious characters, but no one will dream of
suspecting their real part in the drama, and they will eventually
be released for lack of evidence.”

“And the real Prime Minister?”

“He and O’Murphy were driven straight to the house of ‘Mrs.
Everard,’ at Hampstead, Daniels’ so-called ‘aunt.’ In reality, she
is Frau Bertha Ebenthal, and the police have been looking for her
for some time. It is a valuable little present that I have made to
them—to say nothing of Daniels! Ah, it was a clever plan, but he
did not reckon on the cleverness of Hercule Poirot!”

I think my friend might well be excused his moment of vanity.

“When did you first begin to suspect the truth of the matter?”

“When I began to work the right way—from _within_! I could not make
that shooting affair fit in—but when I saw that the net result of
it was that _the Prime Minister went to France with his face bound
up_ I began to comprehend! And when I visited all the cottage
hospitals between Windsor and London, and found that no one
answering to my description had had his face bound up and dressed
that morning, I was sure! After that, it was child’s-play for a
mind like mine!”

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

The following morning, Poirot showed me a telegram he had just
received. It had no place of origin, and was unsigned. It ran:

“In time.”

Later in the day the evening papers published an account of the
Allied Conference. They laid particular stress on the magnificent
ovation accorded to Mr. David MacAdam, whose inspiring speech had
produced a deep and lasting impression.




  IX


  The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim


Poirot and I were expecting our old friend Inspector Japp of
Scotland Yard to tea. We were sitting round the tea-table awaiting
his arrival. Poirot had just finished carefully straightening the
cups and saucers which our landlady was in the habit of throwing,
rather than placing, on the table. He had also breathed heavily on
the metal teapot, and polished it with a silk handkerchief. The
kettle was on the boil, and a small enamel saucepan beside it
contained some thick, sweet chocolate which was more to Poirot’s
palate than what he described as “your English poison.” A sharp
“rat-tat” sounded below, and a few minutes afterwards Japp entered
briskly.

“Hope I’m not late,” he said as he greeted us. “To tell the truth,
I was yarning with Miller, the man who’s in charge of the Davenheim
case.”

I pricked up my ears. For the last three days the papers had been
full of the strange disappearance of Mr. Davenheim, senior partner
of Davenheim and Salmon, the well-known bankers and financiers. On
Saturday last he had walked out of his house, and had never been
seen since. I looked forward to extracting some interesting details
from Japp.

“I should have thought,” I remarked, “that it would be almost
impossible for anyone to ‘disappear’ nowadays.”

Poirot moved a plate of bread and butter the eighth of an inch,
and said sharply:

“Be exact, my friend. What do you mean by ‘disappear’? To which
class of disappearance are you referring?”

“Are disappearances classified and labelled, then?” I laughed.

Japp smiled also. Poirot frowned at us both.

“But certainly they are! They fall into three categories: First,
and most common, the voluntary disappearance. Second, the much
abused ‘loss of memory’ case—rare, but occasionally genuine. Third,
murder, and a more or less successful disposal of the body. Do you
refer to all three as impossible of execution?”

“Very nearly so, I should think. You might lose your own memory,
but some one would be sure to recognize you—especially in the case
of a well-known man like Davenheim. Then ‘bodies’ can’t be made to
vanish into thin air. Sooner or later they turn up, concealed in
lonely places, or in trunks. Murder will out. In the same way, the
absconding clerk, or the domestic defaulter, is bound to be run
down in these days of wireless telegraphy. He can be headed off
from foreign countries; ports and railway stations are watched;
and, as for concealment in this country, his features and appearance
will be known to every one who reads a daily newspaper. He’s up
against civilization.”

“_Mon ami_,” said Poirot, “you make one error. You do not allow
for the fact that a man who had decided to make away with another
man—or with himself in a figurative sense—might be that rare
machine, a man of method. He might bring intelligence, talent, a
careful calculation of detail to the task; and then I do not see
why he should not be successful in baffling the police force.”

“But not _you_, I suppose?” said Japp good-humouredly, winking at
me. “He couldn’t baffle _you_, eh, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot endeavoured, with a marked lack of success, to look modest.
“Me, also! Why not? It is true that I approach such problems with
an exact science, a mathematical precision, which seems, alas, only
too rare in the new generation of detectives!”

Japp grinned more widely.

“I don’t know,” he said. “Miller, the man who’s on this case, is
a smart chap. You may be very sure he won’t overlook a footprint,
or a cigar-ash, or a crumb even. He’s got eyes that see everything.”

“So, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, “has the London sparrow. But all the
same, I should not ask the little brown bird to solve the problem
of Mr. Davenheim.”

“Come now, monsieur, you’re not going to run down the value of
details as clues?”

“By no means. These things are all good in their way. The danger
is they may assume undue importance. Most details are insignificant;
one or two are vital. It is the brain, the little grey cells”—he
tapped his forehead—“on which one must rely. The senses mislead.
One must seek the truth within—not without.”

“You don’t mean to say, Monsieur Poirot, that you would undertake
to solve a case without moving from your chair, do you?”

“That is exactly what I do mean—granted the facts were placed
before me. I regard myself as a consulting specialist.”

Japp slapped his knee. “Hanged if I don’t take you at your word.
Bet you a fiver that you can’t lay your hand—or rather tell me
where to lay my hand—on Mr. Davenheim, dead or alive, before a week
is out.”

Poirot considered. “_Eh bien, mon ami_, I accept. _Le sport_, it
is the passion of you English. Now—the facts.”

“On Saturday last, as is his usual custom, Mr. Davenheim took the
12.40 train from Victoria to Chingside, where his palatial country
place, The Cedars, is situated. After lunch, he strolled round the
grounds, and gave various directions to the gardeners. Everybody
agrees that his manner was absolutely normal and as usual. After
tea he put his head into his wife’s boudoir, saying that he was
going to stroll down to the village and post some letters. He added
that he was expecting a Mr. Lowen, on business. If he should come
before he himself returned, he was to be shown into the study and
asked to wait. Mr. Davenheim then left the house by the front door,
passed leisurely down the drive, and out at the gate, and—was never
seen again. From that hour, he vanished completely.”

“Pretty—very pretty—altogether a charming little problem,” murmured
Poirot. “Proceed, my good friend.”

“About a quarter of an hour later a tall, dark man with a thick
black moustache rang the front-door bell, and explained that he
had an appointment with Mr. Davenheim. He gave the name of Lowen,
and in accordance with the banker’s instructions was shown into
the study. Nearly an hour passed. Mr. Davenheim did not return.
Finally Mr. Lowen rang the bell, and explained that he was unable
to wait any longer, as he must catch his train back to town. Mrs.
Davenheim apologized for her husband’s absence, which seemed
unaccountable, as she knew him to have been expecting the visitor.
Mr. Lowen reiterated his regrets and took his departure.

“Well, as every one knows, Mr. Davenheim did not return. Early on
Sunday morning the police were communicated with, but could make
neither head nor tail of the matter. Mr. Davenheim seemed literally
to have vanished into thin air. He had not been to the post office;
nor had he been seen passing through the village. At the station
they were positive he had not departed by any train. His own motor
had not left the garage. If he had hired a car to meet him in some
lonely spot, it seems almost certain that by this time, in view of
the large reward offered for information, the driver of it would
have come forward to tell what he knew. True, there was a small
race-meeting at Entfield, five miles away, and if he had walked to
that station he might have passed unnoticed in the crowd. But since
then his photograph and a full description of him have been
circulated in every newspaper, and nobody has been able to give
any news of him. We have, of course, received many letters from
all over England, but each clue, so far, has ended in disappointment.

“On Monday morning a further sensational discovery came to light.
Behind a portière in Mr. Davenheim’s study stands a safe, and that
safe had been broken into and rifled. The windows were fastened
securely on the inside, which seems to put an ordinary burglary
out of court, unless, of course, an accomplice within the house
fastened them again afterwards. On the other hand, Sunday having
intervened, and the household being in a state of chaos, it is
likely that the burglary was committed on the Saturday, and remained
undetected until Monday.”

“_Précisément_,” said Poirot dryly. “Well, is he arrested, _ce
pauvre M. Lowen_?”

Japp grinned. “Not yet. But he’s under pretty close supervision.”

Poirot nodded. “What was taken from the safe? Have you any idea?”

“We’ve been going into that with the junior partner of the firm
and Mrs. Davenheim. Apparently there was a considerable amount in
bearer bonds, and a very large sum in notes, owing to some large
transaction having been just carried through. There was also a
small fortune in jewellery. All Mrs. Davenheim’s jewels were kept
in the safe. The purchasing of them had become a passion with her
husband of late years, and hardly a month passed that he did not
make her a present of some rare and costly gem.”

“Altogether a good haul,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Now, what
about Lowen? Is it known what his business was with Davenheim that
evening?”

“Well, the two men were apparently not on very good terms. Lowen
is a speculator in quite a small way. Nevertheless, he has been
able once or twice to score a _coup_ off Davenheim in the market,
though it seems they seldom or never actually met. It was a matter
concerning some South American shares which led the banker to make
his appointment.”

“Had Davenheim interests in South America, then?”

“I believe so. Mrs. Davenheim happened to mention that he spent
all last autumn in Buenos Ayres.”

“Any trouble in his home life? Were the husband and wife on good
terms?”

“I should say his domestic life was quite peaceful and uneventful.
Mrs. Davenheim is a pleasant, rather unintelligent woman. Quite a
nonentity, I think.”

“Then we must not look for the solution of the mystery there. Had
he any enemies?”

“He had plenty of financial rivals, and no doubt there are many
people whom he has got the better of who bear him no particular
good-will. But there was no one likely to make away with him—and,
if they had, where is the body?”

“Exactly. As Hastings says, bodies have a habit of coming to light
with fatal persistency.”

“By the way, one of the gardeners says he saw a figure going round
to the side of the house toward the rose-garden. The long French
window of the study opens on to the rose-garden, and Mr. Davenheim
frequently entered and left the house that way. But the man was a
good way off, at work on some cucumber frames, and cannot even say
whether it was the figure of his master or not. Also, he cannot
fix the time with any accuracy. It must have been before six, as
the gardeners cease work at that time.”

“And Mr. Davenheim left the house?”

“About half-past five or thereabouts.”

“What lies beyond the rose-garden?”

“A lake.”

“With a boathouse?”

“Yes, a couple of punts are kept there. I suppose you’re thinking
of suicide, Monsieur Poirot? Well, I don’t mind telling you that
Miller’s going down to-morrow expressly to see that piece of water
dragged. That’s the kind of man he is!”

Poirot smiled faintly, and turned to me. “Hastings, I pray you,
hand me that copy of the _Daily Megaphone_. If I remember rightly,
there is an unusually clear photograph there of the missing man.”

I rose, and found the sheet required. Poirot studied the features
attentively.

“H’m!” he murmured. “Wears his hair rather long and wavy, full
moustache and pointed beard, bushy eyebrows. Eyes dark?”

“Yes.”

“Hair and beard turning grey?”

The detective nodded. “Well, Monsieur Poirot, what have you got to
say to it all? Clear as daylight, eh?”

“On the contrary, most obscure.”

The Scotland Yard man looked pleased.

“Which gives me great hopes of solving it,” finished Poirot
placidly.

“Eh?”

“I find it a good sign when a case is obscure. If a thing is clear
as daylight—_eh bien_, mistrust it! Some one has made it so.”

Japp shook his head almost pityingly. “Well, each to their fancy.
But it’s not a bad thing to see your way clear ahead.”

“I do not see,” murmured Poirot. “I shut my eyes—and think.”

Japp sighed. “Well, you’ve got a clear week to think in.”

“And you will bring me any fresh developments that arise—the result
of the labours of the hard-working and lynx-eyed Inspector Miller,
for instance?”

“Certainly. That’s in the bargain.”

“Seems a shame, doesn’t it?” said Japp to me as I accompanied him
to the door. “Like robbing a child!”

I could not help agreeing with a smile. I was still smiling as I
re-entered the room.

“_Eh bien!_” said Poirot immediately. “You make fun of Papa Poirot,
is it not so?” He shook his finger at me. “You do not trust his
grey cells? Ah, do not be confused! Let us discuss this little
problem—incomplete as yet, I admit, but already showing one or two
points of interest.”

“The lake!” I said significantly.

“And even more than the lake, the boathouse!”

I looked sidewise at Poirot. He was smiling in his most inscrutable
fashion. I felt that, for the moment, it would be quite useless to
question him further.

We heard nothing of Japp until the following evening, when he
walked in about nine o’clock. I saw at once by his expression that
he was bursting with news of some kind.

“_Eh bien_, my friend,” remarked Poirot. “All goes well? But do
not tell me that you have discovered the body of Mr. Davenheim in
your lake, because I shall not believe you.”

“We haven’t found the body, but we did find his _clothes_—the
identical clothes he was wearing that day. What do you say to
that?”

“Any other clothes missing from the house?”

“No, his valet is quite positive on that point. The rest of his
wardrobe is intact. There’s more. We’ve arrested Lowen. One of the
maids, whose business it is to fasten the bedroom windows, declares
that she saw Lowen coming _towards_ the study through the
rose-garden about a quarter past six. That would be about ten
minutes before he left the house.”

“What does he himself say to that?”

“Denied first of all that he had ever left the study. But the maid
was positive, and he pretended afterwards that he had forgotten
just stepping out of the window to examine an unusual species of
rose. Rather a weak story! And there’s fresh evidence against him
come to light. Mr. Davenheim always wore a thick gold ring set with
a solitaire diamond on the little finger of his right hand. Well,
that ring was pawned in London on Saturday night by a man called
Billy Kellett! He’s already known to the police—did three months
last autumn for lifting an old gentleman’s watch. It seems he tried
to pawn the ring at no less than five different places, succeeded
at the last one, got gloriously drunk on the proceeds, assaulted
a policeman, and was run in in consequence. I went to Bow Street
with Miller and saw him. He’s sober enough now, and I don’t mind
admitting we pretty well frightened the life out of him, hinting
he might be charged with murder. This is his yarn, and a very queer
one it is.

“He was at Entfield races on Saturday, though I dare say scarfpins
was his line of business, rather than betting. Anyway, he had a
bad day, and was down on his luck. He was tramping along the road
to Chingside, and sat down in a ditch to rest just before he got
into the village. A few minutes later he noticed a man coming along
the road to the village, ‘dark-complexioned gent, with a big
moustache, one of them city toffs,’ is his description of the man.

“Kellett was half concealed from the road by a heap of stones. Just
before he got abreast of him, the man looked quickly up and down
the road, and seeing it apparently deserted he took a small object
from his pocket and threw it over the hedge. Then he went on
towards the station. Now, the object he had thrown over the hedge
had fallen with a slight ‘chink’ which aroused the curiosity of
the human derelict in the ditch. He investigated and, after a short
search, discovered the ring! That is Kellett’s story. It’s only
fair to say that Lowen denies it utterly, and of course the word
of a man like Kellett can’t be relied upon in the slightest. It’s
within the bounds of possibility that he met Davenheim in the lane
and robbed and murdered him.”

Poirot shook his head.

“Very improbable, _mon ami_. He had no means of disposing of the
body. It would have been found by now. Secondly, the open way in
which he pawned the ring makes it unlikely that he did murder to
get it. Thirdly, your sneak-thief is rarely a murderer. Fourthly,
as he has been in prison since Saturday, it would be too much of
a coincidence that he is able to give so accurate a description of
Lowen.”

Japp nodded. “I don’t say you’re not right. But all the same, you
won’t get a jury to take much note of a jailbird’s evidence. What
seems odd to me is that Lowen couldn’t find a cleverer way of
disposing of the ring.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “Well, after all, if it were found
in the neighbourhood, it might be argued that Davenheim himself
had dropped it.”

“But why remove it from the body at all?” I cried.

“There might be a reason for that,” said Japp. “Do you know that
just beyond the lake, a little gate leads out on to the hill, and
not three minutes’ walk brings you to—what do you think?—a _lime
kiln_.”

“Good heavens!” I cried. “You mean that the lime which destroyed
the body would be powerless to affect the metal of the ring?”

“Exactly.”

“It seems to me,” I said, “that that explains everything. What a
horrible crime!”

By common consent we both turned and looked at Poirot. He seemed
lost in reflection, his brow knitted, as though with some supreme
mental effort. I felt that at last his keen intellect was asserting
itself. What would his first words be? We were not long left in
doubt. With a sigh, the tension of his attitude relaxed, and
turning to Japp, he asked:

“Have you any idea, my friend, whether Mr. and Mrs. Davenheim
occupied the same bedroom?”

The question seemed so ludicrously inappropriate that for a moment
we both stared in silence. Then Japp burst into a laugh. “Good
Lord, Monsieur Poirot, I thought you were coming out with something
startling. As to your question, I’m sure I don’t know.”

“You could find out?” asked Poirot with curious persistence.

“Oh, certainly—if you _really_ want to know.”

“_Merci, mon ami_. I should be obliged if you would make a point
of it.”

Japp stared at him a few minutes longer, but Poirot seemed to have
forgotten us both. The detective shook his head sadly at me, and
murmuring, “Poor old fellow! War’s been too much for him!” gently
withdrew from the room.

As Poirot still seemed sunk in a daydream, I took a sheet of paper,
and amused myself by scribbling notes upon it. My friend’s voice
aroused me. He had come out of his reverie, and was looking brisk
and alert.

“_Que faites-vous là, mon ami?_”

“I was jotting down what occurred to me as the main points of
interest in this affair.”

“You become methodical—at last!” said Poirot approvingly.

I concealed my pleasure. “Shall I read them to you?”

“By all means.”

I cleared my throat.

“‘One: All the evidence points to Lowen having been the man who
forced the safe.

“‘Two: He had a grudge against Davenheim.

“‘Three: He lied in his first statement that he had never left the
study.

“‘Four: If you accept Billy Kellett’s story as true, Lowen is
unmistakably implicated.’”

I paused. “Well?” I asked, for I felt that I had put my finger on
all the vital facts.

Poirot looked at me pityingly, shaking his head very gently. “_Mon
pauvre ami!_ But it is that you have not the gift! The important
detail, you appreciate him never! Also, your reasoning is false.”

“How?”

“Let me take your four points.

“One: Mr. Lowen could not possibly know that he would have the
chance to open the safe. He came for a business interview. He could
not know beforehand that Mr. Davenheim would be absent posting a
letter, and that he would consequently be alone in the study!”

“He might have seized his opportunity,” I suggested.

“And the tools? City gentlemen do not carry round housebreaker’s
tools on the off chance! And one could not cut into that safe with
a penknife, _bien entendu_!”

“Well, what about Number Two?”

“You say Lowen had a grudge against Mr. Davenheim. What you mean
is that he had once or twice got the better of him. And presumably
those transactions were entered into with the view of benefiting
himself. In any case you do not as a rule bear a grudge against a
man you have got the better of—it is more likely to be the other
way about. Whatever grudge there might have been would have been
on Mr. Davenheim’s side.”

“Well, you can’t deny that he lied about never having left the
study?”

“No. But he may have been frightened. Remember, the missing man’s
clothes had just been discovered in the lake. Of course, as usual,
he would have done better to speak the truth.”

“And the fourth point?”

“I grant you that. If Kellett’s story is true, Lowen is undeniably
implicated. That is what makes the affair so very interesting.”

“Then I did appreciate _one_ vital fact?”

“Perhaps—but you have entirely overlooked the two most important
points, the ones which undoubtedly hold the clue to the whole
matter.”

“And pray, what are they?”

“One, the passion which has grown upon Mr. Davenheim in the last
few years for buying jewellery. Two, his trip to Buenos Ayres last
autumn.”

“Poirot, you are joking!”

“I am most serious. Ah, sacred thunder, but I hope Japp will not
forget my little commission.”

But the detective, entering into the spirit of the joke, had
remembered it so well that a telegram was handed to Poirot about
eleven o’clock the next day. At his request I opened it and read
it out:

“‘Husband and wife have occupied separate rooms since last winter.’”

“Aha!” cried Poirot. “And now we are in mid June! All is solved!”

I stared at him.

“You have no moneys in the bank of Davenheim and Salmon, _mon
ami_?”

“No,” I said, wondering. “Why?”

“Because I should advise you to withdraw it—before it is too
late.”

“Why, what do you expect?”

“I expect a big smash in a few days—perhaps sooner. Which reminds
me, we will return the compliment of a _dépêche_ to Japp. A pencil,
I pray you, and a form. _Voilà!_ ‘Advise you to withdraw any money
deposited with firm in question.’ That will intrigue him, the good
Japp! His eyes will open wide—wide! He will not comprehend in the
slightest—until to-morrow, or the next day!”

I remained sceptical, but the morrow forced me to render tribute
to my friend’s remarkable powers. In every paper was a huge headline
telling of the sensational failure of the Davenheim bank. The
disappearance of the famous financier took on a totally different
aspect in the light of the revelation of the financial affairs of
the bank.

Before we were half-way through breakfast, the door flew open and
Japp rushed in. In his left hand was a paper; in his right was
Poirot’s telegram, which he banged down on the table in front of
my friend.

“How did you know, Monsieur Poirot? How the blazes could you know?”

Poirot smiled placidly at him. “Ah, _mon ami_, after your wire, it
was a certainty! From the commencement, see you, it struck me that
the safe burglary was somewhat remarkable. Jewels, ready money,
bearer bonds—all so conveniently arranged for—whom? Well, the good
Monsieur Davenheim was of those who ‘look after Number One’ as your
saying goes! It seemed almost certain that it was arranged
for—himself! Then his passion of late years for buying jewellery!
How simple! The funds he embezzled, he converted into jewels, very
likely replacing them in turn with paste duplicates, and so he put
away in a safe place, under another name, a considerable fortune
to be enjoyed all in good time when every one has been thrown off
the track. His arrangements completed, he makes an appointment with
Mr. Lowen (who has been imprudent enough in the past to cross the
great man once or twice), drills a hole in the safe, leaves orders
that the guest is to be shown into the study, and walks out of the
house—where?” Poirot stopped, and stretched out his hand for
another boiled egg. He frowned. “It is really insupportable,” he
murmured, “that every hen lays an egg of a different size! What
symmetry can there be on the breakfast table? At least they should
sort them in dozens at the shop!”

“Never mind the eggs,” said Japp impatiently. “Let ’em lay ’em
square if they like. Tell us where our customer went to when he
left The Cedars—that is, if you know!”

“_Eh bien_, he went to his hiding-place. Ah, this Monsieur
Davenheim, there may be some malformation in his grey cells, but
they are of the first quality!”

“Do you know where he is hiding?”

“Certainly! It is most ingenious.”

“For the Lord’s sake, tell us, then!”

Poirot gently collected every fragment of shell from his plate,
placed them in the egg-cup, and reversed the empty egg-shell on
top of them. This little operation concluded, he smiled on the neat
effect, and then beamed affectionately on us both.

“Come, my friends, you are men of intelligence. Ask yourselves the
question which I asked myself. ‘If I were this man, where should
_I_ hide?’ Hastings, what do you say?”

“Well,” I said, “I’m rather inclined to think I’d not do a bolt at
all. I’d stay in London—in the heart of things, travel by tubes
and buses; ten to one I’d never be recognized. There’s safety in
a crowd.”

Poirot turned inquiringly to Japp.

“I don’t agree. Get clear away at once—that’s the only chance. I
would have had plenty of time to prepare things beforehand. I’d
have a yacht waiting, with steam up, and I’d be off to one of the
most out-of-the-way corners of the world before the hue and cry
began!”

We both looked at Poirot. “What do _you_ say, monsieur?”

For a moment he remained silent. Then a very curious smile flitted
across his face.

“My friends, if _I_ were hiding from the police, do you know
_where_ I should hide? _In a prison!_”

“_What?_”

“You are seeking Monsieur Davenheim in order to put him in prison,
so you never dream of looking to see if he may not be already
there!”

“What do you mean?”

“You tell me Madame Davenheim is not a very intelligent woman.
Nevertheless I think that if you took her to Bow Street and
confronted her with the man Billy Kellett, she would recognize him!
In spite of the fact that he has shaved his beard and moustache
and those bushy eyebrows, and has cropped his hair close. A woman
nearly always knows her husband, though the rest of the world may
be deceived!”

“Billy Kellett? But he’s known to the police!”

“Did I not tell you Davenheim was a clever man? He prepared his
alibi long beforehand. He was not in Buenos Ayres last autumn—he
was creating the character of Billy Kellett, ‘doing three months,’
so that the police should have no suspicions when the time came.
He was playing, remember, for a large fortune, as well as liberty.
It was worth while doing the thing thoroughly. Only——”

“Yes?”

“_Eh bien_, afterwards he had to wear a false beard and wig, had
to _make up as himself_ again, and to sleep with a false beard is
not easy—it invites detection! He cannot risk continuing to share
the chamber of madame his wife. You found out for me that for the
last six months, or ever since his supposed return from Buenos
Ayres, he and Mrs. Davenheim occupied separate rooms. Then I was
sure! Everything fitted in. The gardener who fancied he saw his
master going round to the side of the house was quite right. He
went to the boathouse, donned his ‘tramp’ clothes, which you may
be sure had been safely hidden from the eyes of his valet, dropped
the others in the lake, and proceeded to carry out his plan by
pawning the ring in an obvious manner, and then assaulting a
policeman, getting himself safely into the haven of Bow Street,
where nobody would ever dream of looking for him!”

“It’s impossible,” murmured Japp.

“Ask Madame,” said my friend, smiling.

The next day a registered letter lay beside Poirot’s plate. He
opened it, and a five-pound note fluttered out. My friend’s brow
puckered.

“_Ah, sacré!_ But what shall I do with it? I have much remorse!
_Ce pauvre Japp_! Ah, an idea! We will have a little dinner, we
three! That consoles me. It was really too easy. I am ashamed. I,
who would not rob a child—_mille tonnerres! Mon ami_, what have
you, that you laugh so heartily?”




  X


  The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman


Poirot and I had many friends and acquaintances of an informal
nature. Amongst these was to be numbered Dr. Hawker, a near
neighbour of ours, and a member of the medical profession. It was
the genial doctor’s habit to drop in sometimes of an evening and
have a chat with Poirot, of whose genius he was an ardent admirer.
The doctor himself, frank and unsuspicious to the last degree,
admired the talents so far removed from his own.

On one particular evening in early June, he arrived about half-past
eight and settled down to a comfortable discussion on the cheery
topic of the prevalence of arsenical poisoning in crimes. It must
have been about a quarter of an hour later when the door of our
sitting-room flew open, and a distracted female precipitated
herself into the room.

“Oh, doctor, you’re wanted! Such a terrible voice. It gave me a
turn, it did indeed.”

I recognized in our new visitor Dr. Hawker’s housekeeper, Miss
Rider. The doctor was a bachelor, and lived in a gloomy old house
a few streets away. The usually placid Miss Rider was now in a
state bordering on incoherence.

“What terrible voice? Who is it, and what’s the trouble?”

“It was the telephone, doctor. I answered it—and a voice spoke.
‘Help,’ it said. ‘Doctor—help. They’ve killed me!’ Then it sort of
tailed away. ‘Who’s speaking?’ I said. ‘Who’s speaking?’ Then I
got a reply, just a whisper, it seemed, ‘Foscatine’—something like
that—‘Regent’s Court.’”

The doctor uttered an exclamation.

“Count Foscatini. He has a flat in Regent’s Court. I must go at
once. What can have happened?”

“A patient of yours?” asked Poirot.

“I attended him for some slight ailment a few weeks ago. An Italian,
but he speaks English perfectly. Well, I must wish you good night,
Monsieur Poirot, unless——” He hesitated.

“I perceive the thought in your mind,” said Poirot, smiling. “I
shall be delighted to accompany you. Hastings, run down and get
hold of a taxi.”

Taxis always make themselves sought for when one is particularly
pressed for time, but I captured one at last, and we were soon
bowling along in the direction of Regent’s Park. Regent’s Court
was a new block of flats, situated just off St. John’s Wood Road.
They had only recently been built, and contained the latest service
devices.

There was no one in the hall. The doctor pressed the lift-bell
impatiently, and when the lift arrived questioned the uniformed
attendant sharply.

“Flat II. Count Foscatini. There’s been an accident there, I
understand.”

The man stared at him.

“First I’ve heard of it. Mr. Graves—that’s Count Foscatini’s
man—went out about half an hour ago, and he said nothing.”

“Is the Count alone in the flat?”

“No, sir, he’s got two gentlemen dining with him.”

“What are they like?” I asked eagerly.

We were in the lift now, ascending rapidly to the second floor, on
which Flat II was situated.

“I didn’t see them myself, sir, but I understand that they were
foreign gentlemen.”

He pulled back the iron door, and we stepped out on the landing.
No. II was opposite to us. The doctor rang the bell. There was no
reply, and we could hear no sound from within. The doctor rang
again and again; we could hear the bell trilling within, but no
sign of life rewarded us.

“This is getting serious,” muttered the doctor. He turned to the
lift attendant.

“Is there any pass-key to this door?”

“There is one in the porter’s office downstairs.”

“Get it, then, and, look here, I think you’d better send for the
police.”

Poirot approved with a nod of the head.

The man returned shortly; with him came the manager.

“Will you tell me, gentlemen, what is the meaning of all this?”

“Certainly. I received a telephone message from Count Foscatini
stating that he had been attacked and was dying. You can understand
that we must lose no time—if we are not already too late.”

The manager produced the key without more ado, and we all entered
the flat.

We passed first into a small square lounge hall. A door on the
right of it was half open. The manager indicated it with a nod.

“The dining-room.”

Dr. Hawker led the way. We followed close on his heels. As we
entered the room I gave a gasp. The round table in the centre bore
the remains of a meal; three chairs were pushed back, as though
their occupants had just risen. In the corner, to the right of the
fire-place, was a big writing-table, and sitting at it was a man—or
what had been a man. His right hand still grasped the base of the
telephone, but he had fallen forward, struck down by a terrific
blow on the head from behind. The weapon was not far to seek. A
marble statuette stood where it had been hurriedly put down, the
base of it stained with blood.

The doctor’s examination did not take a minute. “Stone dead. Must
have been almost instantaneous. I wonder he even managed to
telephone. It will be better not to move him until the police
arrive.”

On the manager’s suggestion we searched the flat, but the result
was a foregone conclusion. It was not likely that the murderers
would be concealed there when all they had to do was to walk out.

We came back to the dining-room. Poirot had not accompanied us in
our tour. I found him studying the centre table with close
attention. I joined him. It was a well-polished round mahogany
table. A bowl of roses decorated the centre, and white lace mats
reposed on the gleaming surface. There was a dish of fruit, but
the three dessert plates were untouched. There were three
coffee-cups with remains of coffee in them—two black, one with
milk. All three men had taken port, and the decanter, half-full,
stood before the centre plate. One of the men had smoked a cigar,
the other two cigarettes. A tortoiseshell-and-silver box, holding
cigars and cigarettes, stood open upon the table.

I enumerated all these facts to myself, but I was forced to admit
that they did not shed any brilliant light on the situation. I
wondered what Poirot saw in them to make him so intent. I asked
him.

“_Mon ami_,” he replied, “you miss the point. I am looking for
something that I do _not_ see.”

“What is that?”

“A mistake—even a little mistake—on the part of the murderer.”

He stepped swiftly to the small adjoining kitchen, looked in, and
shook his head.

“Monsieur,” he said to the manager, “explain to me, I pray, your
system of serving meals here.”

The manager stepped to a small hatch in the wall.

“This is the service lift,” he explained. “It runs to the kitchens
at the top of the building. You order through this telephone, and
the dishes are sent down in the lift, one course at a time. The
dirty plates and dishes are sent up in the same manner. No domestic
worries, you understand, and at the same time you avoid the wearying
publicity of always dining in a restaurant.”

Poirot nodded.

“Then the plates and dishes that were used to-night are on high in
the kitchen. You permit that I mount there?”

“Oh, certainly, if you like! Roberts, the lift man, will take you
up and introduce you; but I’m afraid you won’t find anything that’s
of any use. They’re handling hundreds of plates and dishes, and
they’ll be all lumped together.”

Poirot remained firm, however, and together we visited the kitchens
and questioned the man who had taken the order from Flat II.

“The order was given from the _à la carte menu_—for three,” he
explained. “Soup julienne, filet de sole normande, tournedos of
beef, and a rice soufflé. What time? Just about eight o’clock, I
should say. No, I’m afraid the plates and dishes have been all
washed up by now. Unfortunate. You were thinking of finger-prints,
I suppose?”

“Not exactly,” said Poirot, with an enigmatical smile. “I am more
interested in Count Foscatini’s appetite. Did he partake of every
dish?”

“Yes; but of course I can’t say how much of each he ate. The plates
were all soiled, and the dishes empty—that is to say, with the
exception of the rice soufflé. There was a fair amount of that
left.”

“Ah!” said Poirot, and seemed satisfied with the fact.

As we descended to the flat again he remarked in a low tone:

“We have decidedly to do with a man of method.”

“Do you mean the murderer, or Count Foscatini?”

“The latter was undoubtedly an orderly gentleman. After imploring
help and announcing his approaching demise, he carefully hung up
the telephone receiver.”

I stared at Poirot. His words now and his recent inquiries gave me
the glimmering of an idea.

“You suspect poison?” I breathed. “The blow on the head was a
blind.”

Poirot merely smiled.

We re-entered the flat to find the local inspector of police had
arrived with two constables. He was inclined to resent our
appearance, but Poirot calmed him with the mention of our Scotland
Yard friend, Inspector Japp, and we were accorded a grudging
permission to remain. It was a lucky thing we were, for we had not
been back five minutes before an agitated middle-aged man came
rushing into the room with every appearance of grief and agitation.

This was Graves, valet-butler to the late Count Foscatini. The
story he had to tell was a sensational one.

On the previous morning, two gentlemen had called to see his
master. They were Italians, and the elder of the two, a man of
about forty, gave his name as Signor Ascanio. The younger was a
well-dressed lad of about twenty-four.

Count Foscatini was evidently prepared for their visit and
immediately sent Graves out upon some trivial errand. Here the man
paused and hesitated in his story. In the end, however, he admitted
that, curious as to the purport of the interview, he had not obeyed
immediately, but had lingered about endeavouring to hear something
of what was going on.

The conversation was carried on in so low a tone that he was not
as successful as he had hoped; but he gathered enough to make it
clear that some kind of monetary proposition was being discussed,
and that the basis of it was a threat. The discussion was anything
but amicable. In the end, Count Foscatini raised his voice slightly,
and the listener heard these words clearly:

“I have no time to argue further now, gentlemen. If you will dine
with me to-morrow night at eight o’clock, we will resume the
discussion.”

Afraid of being discovered listening, Graves had then hurried out
to do his master’s errand. This evening the two men had arrived
punctually at eight. During dinner they had talked of indifferent
matters—politics, the weather, and the theatrical world. When
Graves had placed the port upon the table and brought in the coffee
his master told him that he might have the evening off.

“Was that a usual proceeding of his when he had guests?” asked the
inspector.

“No, sir; it wasn’t. That’s what made me think it must be some
business of a very unusual kind that he was going to discuss with
these gentlemen.”

That finished Graves’s story. He had gone out about 8.30, and,
meeting a friend, had accompanied him to the Metropolitan Music
Hall in Edgware Road.

Nobody had seen the two men leave, but the time of the murder was
fixed clearly enough at 8.47. A small clock on the writing-table
had been swept off by Foscatini’s arm, and had stopped at that
hour, which agreed with Miss Rider’s telephone summons.

The police surgeon had made his examination of the body, and it
was now lying on the couch. I saw the face for the first time—the
olive complexion, the long nose, the luxuriant black moustache,
and the full red lips drawn back from the dazzlingly white teeth.
Not altogether a pleasant face.

“Well,” said the inspector, refastening his notebook. “The case
seems clear enough. The only difficulty will be to lay our hands
on this Signor Ascanio. I suppose his address is not in the dead
man’s pocket-book by any chance?”

As Poirot had said, the late Foscatini was an orderly man. Neatly
written in small, precise handwriting was the inscription, “Signor
Paolo Ascanio, Grosvenor Hotel.”

The inspector busied himself with the telephone, then turned to us
with a grin.

“Just in time. Our fine gentleman was off to catch the boat train
to the Continong. Well, gentlemen, that’s about all we can do here.
It’s a bad business, but straightforward enough. One of these
Italian vendetta things, as likely as not.”

Thus airily dismissed, we found our way downstairs. Dr. Hawker was
full of excitement.

“Like the beginning of a novel, eh? Real exciting stuff. Wouldn’t
believe it if you read about it.”

Poirot did not speak. He was very thoughtful. All the evening he
had hardly opened his lips.

“What says the master detective, eh?” asked Hawker, clapping him
on the back. “Nothing to work your grey cells over this time.”

“You think not?”

“What could there be?”

“Well, for example, there is the window.”

“The window? But it was fastened. Nobody could have got out or in
that way. I noticed it specially.”

“And why were you able to notice it?”

The doctor looked puzzled. Poirot hastened to explain.

“It is to the curtains I refer. They were not drawn. A little odd,
that. And then there was the coffee. It was very black coffee.”

“Well, what of it?”

“Very black,” repeated Poirot. “In conjunction with that let us
remember that very little of the rice soufflé was eaten, and we
get—what?”

“Moonshine,” laughed the doctor. “You’re pulling my leg.”

“Never do I pull the leg. Hastings here knows that I am perfectly
serious.”

“I don’t know what you are getting at, all the same,” I confessed.
“You don’t suspect the manservant, do you? He might have been in
with the gang, and put some dope in the coffee. I suppose they’ll
test his alibi?”

“Without doubt, my friend; but it is the alibi of Signor Ascanio
that interests me.”

“You think he has an alibi?”

“That is just what worries me. I have no doubt that we shall soon
be enlightened on that point.”

The _Daily Newsmonger_ enabled us to become conversant with
succeeding events.

Signor Ascanio was arrested and charged with the murder of Count
Foscatini. When arrested, he denied knowing the Count, and declared
he had never been near Regent’s Court either on the evening of the
crime or on the previous morning. The younger man had disappeared
entirely. Signor Ascanio had arrived alone at the Grosvenor Hotel
from the Continent two days before the murder. All efforts to trace
the second man failed.

Ascanio, however, was not sent for trial. No less a personage than
the Italian Ambassador himself came forward and testified at the
police-court proceedings that Ascanio had been with him at the
Embassy from eight till nine that evening. The prisoner was
discharged. Naturally, a lot of people thought that the crime was
a political one, and was being deliberately hushed up.

Poirot had taken a keen interest in all these points. Nevertheless,
I was somewhat surprised when he suddenly informed me one morning
that he was expecting a visitor at eleven o’clock, and that that
visitor was none other than Ascanio himself.

“He wishes to consult you?”

“_Du tout_, Hastings. I wish to consult him.”

“What about?”

“The Regent’s Court murder.”

“You are going to prove that he did it?”

“A man cannot be tried twice for murder, Hastings. Endeavour to
have the common sense. Ah, that is our friend’s ring.”

A few minutes later Signor Ascanio was ushered in—a small, thin
man with a secretive and furtive glance in his eyes. He remained
standing, darting suspicious glances from one to the other of us.

“Monsieur Poirot?”

My little friend tapped himself gently on the chest.

“Be seated, signor. You received my note. I am determined to get
to the bottom of this mystery. In some small measure you can aid
me. Let us commence. You—in company with a friend—visited the late
Count Foscatini on the morning of Tuesday the 9th——”

The Italian made an angry gesture.

“I did nothing of the sort. I have sworn in court——”

“_Précisément_—and I have a little idea that you have sworn
falsely.”

“You threaten me? Bah! I have nothing to fear from you. I have been
acquitted.”

“Exactly; and as I am not an imbecile, it is not with the gallows
I threaten you—but with publicity. Publicity! I see that you do
not like the word. I had an idea that you would not. My little
ideas, you know, they are very valuable to me. Come, signor, your
only chance is to be frank with me. I do not ask to know whose
indiscretions brought you to England. I know this much, you came
for the especial purpose of seeing Count Foscatini.”

“He was not a count,” growled the Italian.

“I have already noted the fact that his name does not appear in
the _Almanach de Gotha_. Never mind, the title of count is often
useful in the profession of blackmailing.”

“I suppose I might as well be frank. You seem to know a good deal.”

“I have employed my grey cells to some advantage. Come, Signor
Ascanio, you visited the dead man on the Tuesday morning—that is
so, is it not?”

“Yes; but I never went there on the following evening. There was
no need. I will tell you all. Certain information concerning a man
of great position in Italy had come into this scoundrel’s
possession. He demanded a big sum of money in return for the
papers. I came over to England to arrange the matter. I called upon
him by appointment that morning. One of the young secretaries of
the Embassy was with me. The Count was more reasonable than I had
hoped, although even then the sum of money I paid him was a huge
one.”

“Pardon, how was it paid?”

“In Italian notes of comparatively small denomination. I paid over
the money then and there. He handed me the incriminating papers.
I never saw him again.”

“Why did you not say all this when you were arrested?”

“In my delicate position I was forced to deny any association with
the man.”

“And how do you account for the events of the evening, then?”

“I can only think that some one must have deliberately impersonated
me. I understand that no money was found in the flat.”

Poirot looked at him and shook his head.

“Strange,” he murmured. “We all have the little grey cells. And so
few of us know how to use them. Good morning, Signor Ascanio. I
believe your story. It is very much as I had imagined. But I had
to make sure.”

After bowing his guest out, Poirot returned to his arm-chair and
smiled at me.

“Let us hear M. le Capitaine Hastings on the case?”

“Well, I suppose Ascanio is right—somebody impersonated him.”

“Never, never will you use the brains the good God has given you.
Recall to yourself some words I uttered after leaving the flat that
night. I referred to the window-curtains not being drawn. We are
in the month of June. It is still light at eight o’clock. The light
is failing by half-past. _Ça vous dit quelque chose?_ I perceive
a struggling impression that you will arrive some day. Now let us
continue. The coffee was, as I said, very black. Count Foscatini’s
teeth were magnificently white. Coffee stains the teeth. We reason
from that that Count Foscatini did not drink any coffee. Yet there
was coffee in all three cups. Why should anyone pretend Count
Foscatini had drunk coffee when he had not done so?”

I shook my head, utterly bewildered.

“Come, I will help you. What evidence have we that Ascanio and his
friend, or two men posing as them, ever came to the flat that
night? Nobody saw them go in; nobody saw them go out. We have the
evidence of one man and of a host of inanimate objects.”

“You mean?”

“I mean knives and forks and plates and empty dishes. Ah, but it
was a clever idea! Graves is a thief and a scoundrel, but what a
man of method! He overhears a portion of the conversation in the
morning, enough to realize that Ascanio will be in awkward position
to defend himself. The following evening, about eight o’clock, he
tells his master he is wanted at the telephone. Foscatini sits
down, stretches out his hand to the telephone, and from behind
Graves strikes him down with the marble figure. Then quickly to
the service telephone—dinner for three! It comes, he lays the
table, dirties the plates, knives, and forks, etc. But he has to
get rid of the food too. Not only is he a man of brain; he has a
resolute and capacious stomach! But after eating three tournedos,
the rice soufflé is too much for him! He even smokes a cigar and
two cigarettes to carry out the illusion. Ah, but it was
magnificently thorough! Then, having moved on the hands of the
clock to 8.47, he smashes it and stops it. The one thing he does
not do is to draw the curtains. But if there had been a real dinner
party the curtains would have been drawn as soon as the light began
to fail. Then he hurries out, mentioning the guests to the lift
man in passing. He hurries to a telephone box, and as near as
possible to 8.47 rings up the doctor with his master’s dying cry.
So successful is his idea that no one ever inquires if a call was
put through from Flat II at that time.”

“Except Hercule Poirot, I suppose?” I said sarcastically.

“Not even Hercule Poirot,” said my friend, with a smile. “I am
about to inquire now. I had to prove my point to you first. But
you will see, I shall be right; and then Japp, to whom I have
already given a hint, will be able to arrest the respectable
Graves. I wonder how much of the money he has spent.”

Poirot _was_ right. He always is, confound him!




  XI


  The Case of the Missing Will


The problem presented to us by Miss Violet Marsh made rather a
pleasant change from our usual routine work. Poirot had received
a brisk and business-like note from the lady asking for an
appointment, and he had replied asking her to call upon him at
eleven o’clock the following day.

She arrived punctually—a tall, handsome young woman, plainly but
neatly dressed, with an assured and business-like manner. Clearly
a young woman who meant to get on in the world. I am not a great
admirer of the so-called New Woman myself, and, in spite of her
good looks, I was not particularly prepossessed in her favour.

“My business is of a somewhat unusual nature, Monsieur Poirot,”
she began, after she had accepted a chair. “I had better begin at
the beginning and tell you the whole story.”

“If you please, mademoiselle.”

“I am an orphan. My father was one of two brothers, sons of a small
yeoman farmer in Devonshire. The farm was a poor one, and the elder
brother, Andrew, emigrated to Australia, where he did very well
indeed, and by means of successful speculation in land became a
very rich man. The younger brother, Roger (my father), had no
leanings towards the agricultural life. He managed to educate
himself a little, and obtained a post as a clerk with a small firm.
He married slightly above him; my mother was the daughter of a poor
artist. My father died when I was six years old. When I was
fourteen, my mother followed him to the grave. My only living
relation then was my Uncle Andrew, who had recently returned from
Australia and bought a small place, Crabtree Manor, in his native
county. He was exceedingly kind to his brother’s orphan child, took
me to live with him, and treated me in every way as though I was
his own daughter.

“Crabtree Manor, in spite of its name, is really only an old
farmhouse. Farming was in my uncle’s blood, and he was intensely
interested in various modern farming experiments. Although kindness
itself to me, he had certain peculiar and deeply-rooted ideas as
to the up-bringing of women. Himself a man of little or no
education, though possessing remarkable shrewdness, he placed
little value on what he called ‘book knowledge.’ He was especially
opposed to the education of women. In his opinion, girls should
learn practical housework and dairy-work, be useful about the home,
and have as little to do with book learning as possible. He proposed
to bring me up on these lines, to my bitter disappointment and
annoyance. I rebelled frankly. I knew that I possessed a good
brain, and had absolutely no talent for domestic duties. My uncle
and I had many bitter arguments on the subject, for, though much
attached to each other, we were both self-willed. I was lucky
enough to win a scholarship, and up to a certain point was
successful in getting my own way. The crisis arose when I resolved
to go to Girton. I had a little money of my own, left me by my
mother, and I was quite determined to make the best use of the
gifts God had given me. I had one long, final argument with my
uncle. He put the facts plainly before me. He had no other
relations, and he had intended me to be his sole heiress. As I have
told you, he was a very rich man. If I persisted in these
‘new-fangled notions’ of mine, however, I need look for nothing
from him. I remained polite, but firm. I should always be deeply
attached to him, I told him, but I must lead my own life. We parted
on that note. ‘You fancy your brains, my girl,’ were his last
words. ‘I’ve no book learning, but, for all that, I’ll pit mine
against yours any day. We’ll see what we shall see.’

“That was nine years ago. I have stayed with him for a week-end
occasionally, and our relations were perfectly amicable, though
his views remained unaltered. He never referred to my having
matriculated, nor to my B.Sc. For the last three years his health
had been failing, and a month ago he died.

“I am now coming to the point of my visit. My uncle left a most
extraordinary will. By its terms, Crabtree Manor and its contents
are to be at my disposal for a year from his death—‘during which
time my clever niece may prove her wits,’ the actual words run. At
the end of that period, ‘my wits having proved better than hers,’
the house and all my uncle’s large fortune pass to various
charitable institutions.”

“That is a little hard on you, mademoiselle, seeing that you were
Mr. Marsh’s only blood relation.”

“I do not look on it in that way. Uncle Andrew warned me fairly,
and I chose my own path. Since I would not fall in with his wishes,
he was at perfect liberty to leave his money to whom he pleased.”

“Was the will drawn up by a lawyer?”

“No; it was written on a printed will-form and witnessed by the
man and his wife who live in the house and do for my uncle.”

“There might be a possibility of upsetting such a will?”

“I would not even attempt to do such a thing.”

“You regard it, then, as a sporting challenge on the part of your
uncle?”

“That is exactly how I look upon it.”

“It bears that interpretation, certainly,” said Poirot thoughtfully.
“Somewhere in this rambling old manor-house your uncle has concealed
either a sum of money in notes or possibly a second will, and has
given you a year in which to exercise your ingenuity to find it.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot; and I am paying you the compliment of
assuming that your ingenuity will be greater than mine.”

“Eh, eh! but that is very charming of you. My grey cells are at
your disposal. You have made no search yourself?”

“Only a cursory one; but I have too much respect for my uncle’s
undoubted abilities to fancy that the task will be an easy one.”

“Have you the will or a copy of it with you?”

Miss Marsh handed a document across the table. Poirot ran through
it, nodding to himself.

“Made three years ago. Dated March 25; and the time is given
also—11 a.m.—that is very suggestive. It narrows the field of
search. Assuredly it is another will we have to seek for. A will
made even half-an-hour later would upset this. _Eh bien_,
mademoiselle, it is a problem charming and ingenious that you have
presented to me here. I shall have all the pleasure in the world
in solving it for you. Granted that your uncle was a man of ability,
his grey cells cannot have been of the quality of Hercule Poirot’s!”

(Really, Poirot’s vanity is blatant!)

“Fortunately, I have nothing of moment on hand at the minute.
Hastings and I will go down to Crabtree Manor to-night. The man
and wife who attended on your uncle are still there, I presume?”

“Yes, their name is Baker.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The following morning saw us started on the hunt proper. We had
arrived late the night before. Mr. and Mrs. Baker, having received
a telegram from Miss Marsh, were expecting us. They were a pleasant
couple, the man gnarled and pink-cheeked, like a shrivelled pippin,
and his wife a woman of vast proportions and true Devonshire calm.

Tired with our journey and the eight-mile drive from the station,
we had retired at once to bed after a supper of roast chicken,
apple pie, and Devonshire cream. We had now disposed of an excellent
breakfast, and were sitting in a small panelled room which had been
the late Mr. Marsh’s study and living-room. A roll-top desk stuffed
with papers, all neatly docketed, stood against the wall, and a
big leather armchair showed plainly that it had been its owner’s
constant resting-place. A big chintz-covered settee ran along the
opposite wall, and the deep low window seats were covered with the
same faded chintz of an old-fashioned pattern.

“_Eh bien, mon ami_,” said Poirot, lighting one of his tiny
cigarettes, “we must map out our plan of campaign. Already I have
made a rough survey of the house, but I am of opinion that any clue
will be found in this room. We shall have to go through the
documents in the desk with meticulous care. Naturally, I do not
expect to find the will amongst them; but it is likely that some
apparently innocent paper may conceal the clue to its hiding-place.
But first we must have a little information. Ring the bell, I pray
of you.”

I did so. While we were waiting for it to be answered, Poirot
walked up and down, looking about him approvingly.

“A man of method this Mr. Marsh. See how neatly the packets of
papers are docketed; then the key to each drawer has its ivory
label—so has the key of the china cabinet on the wall; and see
with what precision the china within is arranged. It rejoices the
heart. Nothing here offends the eye——”

He came to an abrupt pause, as his eye was caught by the key of
the desk itself, to which a dirty envelope was affixed. Poirot
frowned at it and withdrew it from the lock. On it were scrawled
the words: “Key of Roll Top Desk,” in a crabbed handwriting, quite
unlike the neat superscriptions on the other keys.

“An alien note,” said Poirot, frowning. “I could swear that here
we have no longer the personality of Mr. Marsh. But who else has
been in the house? Only Miss Marsh, and she, if I mistake not, is
also a young lady of method and order.”

Baker came in answer to the bell.

“Will you fetch madame your wife, and answer a few questions?”

Baker departed, and in a few moments returned with Mrs. Baker,
wiping her hands on her apron and beaming all over her face.

In a few clear words Poirot set forth the object of his mission.
The Bakers were immediately sympathetic.

“Us don’t want to see Miss Violet done out of what’s hers,” declared
the woman. “Cruel hard ’twould be for hospitals to get it all.”

Poirot proceeded with his questions. Yes, Mr. and Mrs. Baker
remembered perfectly witnessing the will. Baker had previously been
sent into the neighbouring town to get two printed will-forms.

“Two?” said Poirot sharply.

“Yes, sir, for safety like, I suppose, in case he should spoil
one—and sure enough, so he did do. Us had signed one——”

“What time of day was that?”

Baker scratched his head, but his wife was quicker.

“Why, to be sure, I’d just put the milk on for the cocoa at eleven.
Don’t ee remember? It had all boiled over on the stove when us got
back to kitchen.”

“And afterwards?”

“’Twould be about an hour later. Us had to go in again. ‘I’ve made
a mistake,’ says old master, ‘had to tear the whole thing up. I’ll
trouble you to sign again,’ and us did. And afterwards master give
us a tidy sum of money each. ‘I’ve left you nothing in my will,’
says he, ‘but each year I live you’ll have this to be a nest-egg
when I’m gone’; and sure enough, so he did.”

Poirot reflected.

“After you had signed the second time, what did Mr. Marsh do? Do
you know?”

“Went out to the village to pay tradesmen’s books.”

That did not seem very promising. Poirot tried another tack. He
held out the key of the desk.

“Is that your master’s writing?”

I may have imagined it, but I fancied that a moment or two elapsed
before Baker replied: “Yes, sir, it is.”

“He’s lying,” I thought. “But why?”

“Has your master let the house?—have there been any strangers in
it during the last three years?”

“No, sir.”

“No visitors?”

“Only Miss Violet.”

“No strangers of any kind been inside this room?”

“No, sir.”

“You forget the workmen, Jim,” his wife reminded him.

“Workmen?” Poirot wheeled round on her. “What workmen?”

The woman explained that about two years and a half ago workmen
had been in the house to do certain repairs. She was quite vague
as to what the repairs were. Her view seemed to be that the whole
thing was a fad of her master’s and quite unnecessary. Part of the
time the workmen had been in the study; but what they had done
there she could not say, as her master had not let either of them
into the room whilst the work was in progress. Unfortunately, they
could not remember the name of the firm employed, beyond the fact
that it was a Plymouth one.

“We progress, Hastings,” said Poirot, rubbing his hands as the
Bakers left the room. “Clearly he made a second will and then had
workmen from Plymouth in to make a suitable hiding-place. Instead
of wasting time taking up the floor and tapping the walls, we will
go to Plymouth.”

With a little trouble, we were able to get the information we
wanted. After one or two essays, we found the firm employed by Mr.
Marsh.

Their employees had all been with them many years, and it was easy
to find the two men who had worked under Mr. Marsh’s orders. They
remembered the job perfectly. Amongst various other minor jobs,
they had taken up one of the bricks of the old-fashioned fireplace,
made a cavity beneath, and so cut the brick that it was impossible
to see the join. By pressing on the second brick from the end, the
whole thing was raised. It had been quite a complicated piece of
work, and the old gentleman had been very fussy about it. Our
informant was a man called Coghan, a big, gaunt man with a grizzled
moustache. He seemed an intelligent fellow.

We returned to Crabtree Manor in high spirits, and, locking the
study door, proceeded to put our newly acquired knowledge into
effect. It was impossible to see any sign on the bricks, but when
we pressed in the manner indicated, a deep cavity was at once
disclosed.

Eagerly Poirot plunged in his hand. Suddenly his face fell from
complacent elation to consternation. All he held was a charred
fragment of stiff paper. But for it, the cavity was empty.

“_Sacré!_” cried Poirot angrily. “Some one has been before us.”

We examined the scrap of paper anxiously. Clearly it was a fragment
of what we sought. A portion of Baker’s signature remained, but no
indication of what the terms of the will had been.

Poirot sat back on his heels. His expression would have been
comical if we had not been so overcome.

“I understand it not,” he growled. “Who destroyed this? And what
was their object?”

“The Bakers?” I suggested.

“_Pourquoi?_ Neither will makes any provision for them, and they
are more likely to be kept on with Miss Marsh than if the place
became the property of a hospital. How could it be to anyone’s
advantage to destroy the will? The hospitals benefit—yes; but one
cannot suspect institutions.”

“Perhaps the old man changed his mind and destroyed it himself,”
I suggested.

Poirot rose to his feet, dusting his knees with his usual care.

“That may be,” he admitted. “One of your more sensible observations,
Hastings. Well, we can do no more here. We have done all that
mortal man can do. We have successfully pitted our wits against
the late Andrew Marsh’s; but, unfortunately, his niece is no better
off for our success.”

By driving to the station at once, we were just able to catch a
train to London, though not the principal express. Poirot was sad
and dissatisfied. For my part, I was tired and dozed in a corner.
Suddenly, as we were just moving out of Taunton, Poirot uttered a
piercing squeal.

“_Vite_, Hastings! Awake and jump! But jump I say!”

Before I knew where I was we were standing on the platform,
bareheaded and minus our valises, whilst the train disappeared into
the night. I was furious. But Poirot paid no attention.

“Imbecile that I have been!” he cried. “Triple imbecile! Not again
will I vaunt my little grey cells!”

“That’s a good job at any rate,” I said grumpily. “But what is this
all about?”

As usual, when following out his own ideas, Poirot paid absolutely
no attention to me.

“The tradesmen’s books—I have left them entirely out of account!
Yes, but where? Where? Never mind, I cannot be mistaken. We must
return at once.”

Easier said than done. We managed to get a slow train to Exeter,
and there Poirot hired a car. We arrived back at Crabtree Manor in
the small hours of the morning. I pass over the bewilderment of
the Bakers when we had at last aroused them. Paying no attention
to anybody, Poirot strode at once to the study.

“I have been, not a triple imbecile, but thirty-six times one, my
friend,” he deigned to remark. “Now, behold!”

Going straight to the desk, he drew out the key, and detached the
envelope from it. I stared at him stupidly. How could he possibly
hope to find a big will-form in that tiny envelope? With great care
he cut open the envelope, laying it out flat. Then he lighted the
fire and held the plain inside surface of the envelope to the
flame. In a few minutes faint characters began to appear.

“Look, _mon ami_!” cried Poirot in triumph.

I looked. There were just a few lines of faint writing stating
briefly that he left everything to his niece, Violet Marsh. It was
dated March 25, 12.30 p.m., and witnessed by Albert Pike,
confectioner, and Jessie Pike, married woman.

“But is it legal?” I gasped.

“As far as I know, there is no law against writing your will in a
blend of disappearing and sympathetic ink. The intention of the
testator is clear, and the beneficiary is his only living relation.
But the cleverness of him! He foresaw every step that a searcher
would take—that I, miserable imbecile, took. He gets two will-forms,
makes the servants sign twice, then sallies out with his will
written on the inside of a dirty envelope and a fountain-pen
containing his little ink mixture. On some excuse he gets the
confectioner and his wife to sign their names under his own
signature, then he ties it to the key of his desk and chuckles to
himself. If his niece sees through his little ruse, she will have
justified her choice of life and elaborate education, and be
thoroughly welcome to his money.”

“She didn’t see through it, did she?” I said slowly. “It seems
rather unfair. The old man really won.”

“But no, Hastings. It is _your_ wits that go astray. Miss Marsh
proved the astuteness of her wits and the value of the higher
education for women by at once putting the matter in _my_ hands.
Always employ the expert. She has amply proved her right to the
money.”

I wonder—I very much wonder—what old Andrew Marsh would have
thought!


  THE END











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POIROT INVESTIGATES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

